* 1805544
* P2C2: Dry or Wet in East Asia During Heinrich Events? New Perspectives from Multiproxy Cave Records and Coupled Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Michael Griffiths, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 297,943.00

This project aims to disentangle large-scale Asian monsoon circulation from
local hydroclimate variability during North Atlantic cooling events of the last
glacial cycle (i.e., Heinrich events) using a suite of speleothems from the
middle reaches of the Yangtze River in central-eastern China.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides support for a postdoctoral research
fellow and extensive undergraduate research experience for students at William
Paterson University as a primarily undergraduate teaching university with a
diverse student body (Hispanic Serving Institution designated by USDOE),
including many first generation to attend college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupled
General Circulation Model (CGCM) simulations suggest that East Asia is likely to
get wetter with climatic warming, yet there is still much uncertainty in these
projections due in large part to the lack of agreement among model simulations.
Reducing these model biases is one of the more pertinent and challenging aspects
of modern climate science as a means to provide strategies to meet the future
needs in food, water, energy, and biological
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is a lack a consistent
understanding of precisely how sensitive local rainfall variability in central
China is to regional perturbations in the Asian monsoon because knowledge of the
monsoon in central East Asia principally relies upon oxygen-isotope records
which, according to new research, may not necessarily reflect local
hydroclimate. Therefore, this project aims to build a more complete picture of
local rainfall variability in central-eastern China by addressing the following
questions: (1) Can speleothem proxies, such as trace elements (Magnesium,
Strontium, Barium) be used to deconvolve regional atmospheric circulation from
local hydrology in East Asia. If so, (2) what do these alterative proxies inform
us about local hydroclimate in central-eastern China and what are the mechanisms
to explain the proxy-inferred changes. (3) How well do the proxy reconstructions
match the paleo-simulations from coupled general circulation models (CGCMs).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the project include: (1)
reconstruct local hydrology in central-eastern China during Heinrich events 1-6
utilizing speleothem trace elements and isotope ratios from a suite of well-
dated speleothems from four caves located in the middle reaches of the Yangtze
River; (2) delineate the mechanisms for the hydrologic patterns observed in the
proxies using the Community Earth System Model CGCM simulations; and (3) conduct
model-proxy syntheses in space and time by directly comparing speleothem
pseudoproxy time series--constructed using climate model output coupled with
Proxy System Models (PSMs)--with measured isotope
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the above objectives the researchers
aim to test the following hypotheses: (1) Despite a weakened Indian monsoon,
central China was wetter during Heinrich events thereby challenging the
longstanding paradigm that the East Asian Monsoon (EASM) became weaker during
North Atlantic (NA) cooling; (2) The higher rainfall in central-eastern China
can best be explained by a seasonally-lagged onset of the mei-yu stage of
monsoon evolution. A later onset of mei-yu to midsummer during NA cooling would
have resulted in a shorter midsummer stage, leaving south-central China wet at
the expense of dry conditions to the north; (3) Vegetation demise and subsequent
higher dust emissions from the Sahara/Sahel regions during Heinrich events,
affected the position of the ITCZ and thus amplified the response outlined in
hypothesis (2); (4) Comparison of speleothem pseudoproxy time series (generated
from PSMs) with measured records from East Asia will help to identify the
dominant controls on speleothem delta 18-Oxygen. It may also allow a more robust
assessment of model skill and help to better evaluate any model-proxy biases
through abrupt climate change events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.