* 1805753
* A bottom-up framework for the nanoscale origins of ice formation and adhesion on structured surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Tolou Shokuhfar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2023
* USD 371,242.00

Icing is frequently encountered in nature and has adverse consequences on many
human activities. Of particular importance is ice formation on rough surfaces,
which are also chemically inhomogeneous. Surface roughness and composition
drastically influence icing behavior, and consequently, ice adhesion, which is
important for ice removal. By developing a better understanding of ice formation
on realistic surfaces, appropriate steps can be taken to avert icing in
situations where lives are threatened or when machines encounter trouble
operating in freezing temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
work is to produce science-based guidelines for optimal anti-icing performance
(maximum freezing delays and minimal ice adhesion). Using spectroscopic tools in
conjunction with liquid-cell scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
and in-situ cryo-cooling, the research examines icing on surfaces having
nanoscale roughness and compositions from wettable to non-wettable. The
methodology employs graphene liquid cells (GLCs) with encapsulated nanoparticles
of varying wettabilities and sizes. The GLCs allow electron microscope (nm-scale
resolution) dynamic observations of encapsulated nanoparticle suspensions in
water, and with precise temperature control, they become vacuum-tight vessels
for interrogating icing kinetics in real time. Ice formation is controlled by
modulating the GLC sample temperature under various cooling scenarios. Parallel
in-situ nanoscale spectroscopic methods quantify the ice/water mass ratio and
structure around the nanoparticles during and after freezing, as a function of
particle size, wettability and confinement in the atomically-thin-walled
graphene cell. The macroscopic experiments, on the other hand, use surfaces with
chemistry and characteristic length texture similar to the nanoscopic
experiments, to determine macro freezing delays and ice adhesion strength. By
correlating the macroscale ice properties with the nanoscale kinetic parameters,
the project produces guidelines for optimal anti-icing performance or easy ice
removal. The research, by generating high-quality experimental data for a
spatial regime of multiphase transport that has been inaccessible by existing
instrumentation, also opens new horizons for validating and advancing models
simulating nanometer-scale multiphase systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.