* 1805015
* Reaction/Transport Behavior in the Synthesis of Functionally-Encoded Nanowires via the Geode Process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Victor Breedveld, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The proposed project will investigate the chemical reactions and transport of
chemical species involved in the synthesis of semiconductor nanowires on the
interior surface of hollow, porous-walled microspheres. The use of these
microspheres as nanowire growth substrates -- the "Geode process" -- promises to
be a new platform for the scalable manufacturing of functional semiconductor
nanowires for a range of applications (e.g., thermoelectrics, optical coatings,
large-area electronics, etc.). In the Geode process, hollow microspheres provide
efficient gas transport and a large internal surface area for nanowire growth
while preventing agglomeration and protecting the delicate liquid droplet that
choreographs nanowire growth. The overarching objective of the proposed research
is to gain a fundamental understanding of the underlying kinetics and transport
phenomena to enable precise control of nanowire synthesis. The proposed
collaboration between researchers from Georgia Tech and ALD NanoSolutions, Inc.,
has the potential of producing transformative results and enabling future
commercial exploitation of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel
experimental methodology will be employed. The specific objectives of the work
are three-fold: (1) study the growth rate in steady state experiments as
function of reaction conditions to quantify any mass and heat transfer
limitations and optimize microsphere structure to mitigate adverse impacts on
nanowire quality; (2) perform transient experiments that focus on detailed
quantification of dopant concentration profiles in the nanowires when precursor
gas mixtures are modulated; and (3) preliminarily quantify transport properties
in a pilot-scale fluidized bed reactor to bridge the gap between lab-scale
synthesis and scalable reactor technology. In addition to training graduate
students the research team plans to engage in societal and educational outreach
via the Nanovation podcast, by including material related to nanomaterials in
their undergraduate courses, and by developing a new hands-on fluidized bed
activity for classroom use and K-12 outreach. These activities will highlight
the potential of large scale nanomanufacturing and fluidized bed reactor
technology specifically for advanced materials and device
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.