* 1805183
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Analysis of Transport and Degradation in Electrochemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Fuller, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,597.00

As society transitions towards greater renewable energy production and electric
modes of transportation, electrochemical systems for energy conversion and
storage are poised to play an ever-greater role. In order for these systems to
be economical, durability is the key driver; and mathematical models are needed
to help determine the key factors that impact system durability. To be accurate,
processes must be described close to the molecular level and with fine temporal
resolution. Yet, the electrochemical devices can be physically large and have
lifetimes that may extend for years. Through this research, predicting the long-
term behavior of these systems is accomplished by developing novel methodologies
and modeling techniques that bridge the temporal and spatial scales. This
project uses as an example, the study of a proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel
cell and looks at the performance of the cathode. The cathode is a key component
of the fuel cell that contributes to its degradation in performance over time.
The modeling tools that will be developed in this project will allow the study
of both the chemical reactions and physical material changes in the electrode
and how to mitigate their impacts. This collaborative research project also
contributes to the education and training of both graduate and undergraduate
students within a multidisciplinary research environment. The computational
models and data will be made available to the scientific community through an
open-source topology, thus promoting rapid progress of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this work is to develop
methodologies to bridge disparate time and length scales to allow
computationally efficient simulations of the long-term degradation behavior of
electrochemical energy systems based on detailed physical models. The work
builds upon new data that have been collected showing the evolution of
microstructure in electrodes subject to ageing in proton exchange membrane fuel
cells as an exemplar electrochemical energy system. Mesoscale modeling
approaches are developed to simulate electrochemical reaction coupled species
and charge transport and two-phase flow. A generalized spatio-temporal scale-
bridging framework will be created to allow efficient simulation of the
mesoscale underpinnings and to align with the microstructural data of the
degradation. This framework has the potential to transform the way that these
energy systems are designed and operated. The research broadly targets this
challenge by developing novel methodologies and scale-bridging modeling
techniques to predict long-term behavior of electrochemical energy
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.