* 1805276
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Paleo-Perspectives of Streamflow Variability for Southeastern Interstate Rivers
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Grant Harley, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 54,545.00

This project seeks to improve the paleoclimate record and the broader scientific
understanding of past and future hydrologic variability in the South Atlantic
Gulf Basin (AGB) and Southeastern (SE) United States by carrying out a three-
year research program to investigate pre-instrumental streamflow and associated
climate variability in this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle goals of
the research program are to develop quantitative, multi-century, tree-ring
reconstructions and to assess the risk of future streamflow in the SE and AGB.
The specific aims of this project are to 1) develop streamflow reconstructions
for eight major, coastal, interstate rivers; 2) conduct inter-basin comparisons
to identify spatial and temporal patterns of common and disparate streamflow
variability across the region; 3) provide novel insights on how the dynamical
modes of climate variability (e.g., El Nino-Southern Oscillation, the North
Atlantic Sub-tropical High, and Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation) force
regional expressions of climate change, hydrological variability, extreme
drought and pluvial events, and potential regime shifts over the past 500-1,000
years and 4) characterize the risk of future streamflow and extreme events in
these watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide insight into
not only the long-term variability of streamflow, but will also shed light on
the associated physical, social, economic and ecological impacts this
variability has on coastal watersheds in the AGB and SE US. Improved
understanding of streamflow variability will directly benefit the development of
water policy in SE, by informing a variety of socially and economically relevant
areas related to water withdrawals, streamflow forecasts, drought and flood
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work on the Suwannee River (Florida)
provides a successful example of how streamflow in the Southeast can be
reconstructed over multiple centuries with high variance explained (R2=0.68) and
robust validation statistics (RE, 0.71; CE, 0.81), in addition to providing
novel insight into the controls of past hydroclimate to characterize and manage
the risk of future streamflow in the AGB and SE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include the potential for enhanced understanding of
both the history of hydroclimate variability (especially extreme low flow
events) and the role of regional and large-scale climate forcing mechanisms that
drive streamflow variability. This project seeks to provide information useful
for applied risk management around hydrologic extremes in the South Atlantic
Gulf Basin (AGB) and Southeastern (SE) United States region. Understanding the
timing and magnitude of past events and having accurate future forecasting is
crucial for public and private stakeholders to prepare for the future and
increase resiliency. In addition, by characterizing past, present and future
streamflow and the risk of extreme events in the AGB and SE watersheds, this
research will advance knowledge of how to protect and sustain riparian zones,
coastal watersheds and surrounding lands now and into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.