* 1805126
* Designing Deep Eutectic Solvents for Sustainable Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Clare McCabe, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 308,040.00

In the last two decades, new classes of designer liquids have emerged whose
properties can be tuned through changes to the molecular level interactions. The
first of these, ionic liquids (ILs), which have negligible emissions and/or
significantly lower energy requirements than traditional methods, have received
considerable attention for use as environmentally friendly solvents. However,
production of ILs can be costly, hindering large-scale application. More
recently, IL analogues, termed deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have emerged, that
show similar physical and chemical properties to ILs but are much cheaper to
produce, as they are constituted from natural and renewable non-toxic
bioresources. DESs have great potential as environmentally friendly solvent
alternatives that can be custom designed for specific separations and have
already found application in important areas such as catalysis, polymer
synthesis, gas separation and biomass treatment. A key challenge for designing
these new systems lies in the fact that a near infinite number of DESs can be
created. The proposed research focuses on developing a predictive methodology
for designing optimal DESs for specific separations processes, that can be then
leveraged to transform the chemical separations industry. Success of the
proposal is likely to lead to a high throughput screening of environmentally
friendly solvents for various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep eutectic
solvents are liquids of Lewis or Bronsted acids and bases that consist of a
solid hydrogen bond donor (HBD; e.g., glycerol) and a solid hydrogen bond
acceptor (HBA; frequently a salt with a higher melting point than an IL) that
form a eutectic mixture through molecular association. While IL mixtures have
fixed molar ratios dictated by their charges, DESs can be formed at different
molar ratios of HBD and HBA, allowing effectively infinite combinations. DESs
therefore offer a tremendous opportunity toward designing more sustainable
solvents for separations; however, the time and cost of synthesis of such an
impossibly large number of DESs creates a scientific challenge. As such, a
predictive design methodology based upon the structure and interactions between
the HBD, HBA and solutes, is crucial to optimize DESs for specific applications.
The proposal seeks to address the question of DES design by developing molecular
models based on group contribution statistical association fluid theory-variable
range (GC-SAFT-VR). The proposed research focuses on identifying the level of
theory suitable for a given eutectic solvent, determining the optimal
parameterization process that leads to predictive, transferable parameters, and
validating the models. To achieve these goals information from ab initio
calculations and molecular simulations will be used to elucidate the underlying
molecular interactions in DESs; derive and apply new developments in liquid
state theory to describe the combined effects of dispersion, excluded volume,
electrostatic interactions, charge delocalization, hydrogen bonding and polarity
in DESs; and apply these new developments to experimental DES systems within a
group-contribution framework based on the statistical associating fluid theory.
Python libraries developed for the proposed research will be distributed as
open-source software. A graduate student will be trained in advanced molecular-
based equations of state and several undergraduate students will work on the
project. New materials will also be developed for training activities and
outreach to local area schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.