* 1805004
* Collaborative Research: Rank and Duality in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Roger Howe, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2021
* USD 48,725.00

This project concerns representation theory. Symmetry is a familiar concept in
elementary geometry -- many of the most important figures (lines, circles,
squares) are symmetrical. It is less widely appreciated that symmetry has been
found to be fundamental for understanding the world. Both the theory of
relativity and quantum mechanics, two major developments in physics during the
20th century, rely heavily on ideas of symmetry. Linear algebra is another
mathematical development of the late 19th and 20th centuries that is now heavily
used throughout science. Representation theory is the study of how symmetry can
be combined with linear algebra. This project deals with correspondences, called
eta correspondences, between systems of symmetries of different objects. The
first phase of this project is to show that there are eta correspondences for
some of the most important finite systems of symmetries, and how to describe
these correspondences. Subsequent phases of the project will extend eta
correspondences to more cases, refine the concepts used to describe them, and
use them to apply representation theory to a broad range of questions in pure
and applied mathematics.

In more detail, this project introduces an innovative approach to the study of
representations of classical groups over finite and local fields, an approach
that seems beneficial for harmonic analysis. An effective theory of "size" for
representations will be developed, including a precise definition and a method
to analyze representations of a given size. The motivation in the finite setting
comes from the fact that many questions about finite groups (e.g., random walks,
word maps, Cayley graphs, etc.) can be approached using harmonic analysis. More
precisely, what intervenes in such problems are the character ratios (character
divided by dimension) of the irreducible representations (irreps) of the
relevant group G. In general, it is not feasible to compute the character ratios
exactly, but for applications it often suffices to show that the character
ratios are small for most representations. Since in many cases the dimension of
the representation is what makes the character ratio small, the first phase is
to understand the dimensions of irreps and, especially, those with dimensions
that are much smaller than average, since they most likely to make the dominant
contributions to any sum of character ratios. The investigators have a theory
that is applicable to all classical groups and, perhaps, even to all reductive
groups over finite and local fields. They propose several different notions of
rank of a representation, and they suspect that, although different in nature,
these notions are equivalent. Having these notions in hand gives a lot of
information on the dimensions of the irreps of G. In addition, the investigators
discovered a systematic construction, called the eta correspondence, between
large naturally defined families of irreps of G of a given rank, and (all, or
most of) the irreps of a smaller group H. There is reason to believe that this
construction is exhaustive, and the project pursues a proof of this conjecture.
The eta correspondence gives strong control over character ratios for the
representations it constructs, and a formal treatment of this relation will form
the second phase of the project. A significant discovery so far is that although
the dimensions of irreps of a given rank vary considerably, the character ratios
of these irreps are nearly equal. Thus, for purposes of harmonic analysis,
representations of a fixed rank form a natural family to study. Finally, in the
third phase of the project, the investigators will apply bounds on character
ratios and dimensions to several open problems in group theory and its
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.