* 1805358
* Building Better Bio-Beads: Engineering Modulation of pH and Metabolite Diffusive Flux in Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Roll, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 331,379.00

Chlorinated organic solvents are the most common pollutants in groundwater in
the U.S. Pollution of water supplies by these compounds represent a significant
risk to public health, as several are known carcinogens that can result in
exposure through drinking water. While engineers have developed treatment
technology that uses the ability of microbes to consume these pollutants as
food, the process can result in the production of harmful acids that eventually
halts activity. The proposed research will shield these beneficial microbes in
protective capsules called biobeads. These capsules will allow the beneficial
microbes to continue to consume chlorinated organic solvents while producing
clean water. These biobeads can be used with different microbes to address many
environmental problems, with applications in many other fields including drug
delivery, pharmaceuticals, food processing, and wastewater treatment. This
project will augment undergraduate learning opportunities by incorporating the
research into traditional undergraduate laboratory courses. If successful, this
project will help protect the Nation's water security and ensure safe drinking
water availability to the U.S. public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chlorinated organic
solvents like tri- and per-chloroethene (TCE and PCE) are the most common
pollutants in groundwater in the U.S. Pollution of water supplies by these
compounds represent a significant risk to public health, as several are known
carcinogens that can result in exposure through drinking water. While compounds
like PCE can be destroyed through low cost, anaerobic reductive dichlorination,
this process can lower pH, resulting in the accumulation of more soluble,
volatile, and hazardous degradation products. Microorganisms resist pH change
through a variety of internal means, including proton efflux and control of
membrane permeability to restrict transport. Unfortunately, these pH control
methods come at the cost of metabolic energy and optimal growth of the
microorganism. The objective of this proposal is to address the current
deficiency of pH control in bioremediation of chlorinated solvents by leveraging
existing fundamental concepts from biological microencapsulation, hybrid
organic-inorganic material science, and mass transport theory. The research will
involve building a biobead with the goal of self-regulated pH control. The
biobead environment will be designed to emulate and improve on pH and transport
control mechanisms naturally employed by microorganisms. The ultimate goal of
biobead encapsulation is to extend the range of active metabolism for the
encapsulated organism in non-ideal external pH gradients. This biobead design
will be accomplished through incorporation of bioinspired mechanisms into a
layered capsule design via addition of buffer groups to control internal pH,
adjustment of electrostatic structural charges to restrict charged species
transport, and deployment of catalytic layers designed to efflux or react with
protons driven by external photic stimuli. The research will be leveraged by the
combinatorial power of hundreds of first-year undergraduate student scientists
engaged in relevant, active learning to provide valuable data to achieve project
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.