* 1805406
* GOALI: Effect of Hydroxylamine on the Structure and Function of Nitrifying Biofilms
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Robert Nerenberg, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2021
* USD 369,492.00

Wastewater treatment is needed for environmental protection, but most treatment
processes are very energy intensive. A recently developed biological treatment
process, called partial nitritation-anammox (PNA), can save energy. However, it
is difficult to use in most treatment processes because it requires the
suppression of some bacteria commonly found in wastewater. This research
explores a new type of reactor configuration, along with the addition of the
chemical hydroylamine, that may allow PNA to be effectively used for wastewater
treatment. The research involves a collaboration with SUEZ, an industrial
partner. It will train undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a post-
doctoral researcher, and will include outreach to a community college with a new
program in vertical farms.

A collaborative study between the University of Notre Dame and SUEZ, a leader in
membrane technologies, is proposed for a novel biofilm-based treatment
technology that allows control of the internal physical and chemical environment
in the biofilm. This method enables partial nitritation in existing wastewater
treatment plants, a critical bottleneck in the energy-efficient PNA process.
Furthermore, this biofilm environment control could enable other critical
functions not currently possible in wastewater treatment, potentially serving as
a disruptive technology. A key part of the new treatment process is the supply
of chemicals to biofilms. In particular, this project will investigate how the
supply of hydroxylamine, an intermediate of ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB)
that can stimulate AOB growth and suppress nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (NOB) will
alter the effectiveness of the PNA process. Researchers will first characterize
the effects of hydroxylamine on the growth kinetics of AOB and NOB. Then the
effects of hydroxylamine spikes on the structure and function of nitrifying
biofilms will be explored using micro sensors, molecular tools, and imaging. An
advanced biofilm model will be used to predict the best strategies for PNA.
Finally, pilot-scale studies will be carried out to determine the process
effectiveness in the field and to gather data and recommendations for scale-up
and potential commercialization. This is the first research to study the effects
of hydroxylamine on the microbial community structure of nitrifying biofilms. By
determining the kinetics of AOB and NOB during and following exposure to
hydroxylamine, this work will provide insights into fundamental inhibition
mechanisms. This information will also provide a foundation for predicting the
behavior of biofilms intermittently exposed to hydroxylamine. By studying mixed-
culture biofilms with microsensors and molecular tools, the research could
reveal potential niches for novel bacteria. The modeling and biofilm experiments
will help engineer more effective water treatment processes. Workshops,
lectures, and seminars at the University of Notre Dame and SUEZ will disseminate
knowledge on biofilm research and process development to undergraduate,
graduate, and Ivy Tech Community College students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.