* 1805550
* Sustainable System for Mineral Beneficiation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jon Kellar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2022
* USD 432,908.00

Ores are rocks or sediments that are the source of valuable metals and minerals.
Ores must be processed to recover metals and minerals, and many metals are first
concentrated in mineral form, before being chemically converted to metallic
form. Extraction and concentration of minerals from ores consumes an immense
amount of water. For instance, 1.27 million tons of copper were produced from US
mines in 2017, and this required roughly half a billion tons of water. Although
metal recycling is on the rise, it has not offset the continued increase of
metal use with time. Most domestic ore deposits are found in arid regions of the
country (Utah, Arizona, New Mexico and Nevada), and high water demand for
mineral extraction exacerbates water supply concerns for urban centers. To
address the high water demand, this project will develop engineered microspheres
with surface chemistry tailored to adhere to dry mineral particles in order to
reduce the water consumption of mineral extraction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will focus on exploiting the strength of adhesion between chemically
modified glass microspheres relative to polystyrene controls. Glass is
representative of silicate minerals, which are the most ubiquitous type of
minerals found in ore bodies. The glass microspheres will be chemically modified
to create superhydrophobic or superhydrophilic surfaces that adhere to small
mineral particles. Mineral adherence to the model glass microspheres, as a
function of particle size, will be tested and modeled via a combination of drop
tests, spectroscopy, and image analysis. Adhesive surface energy will be
quantified using van Oss-Good-Chaudhury and Hansen solubility parameter
approaches. The adhesion results will be used to develop and validate a
predictive, computational model to enable process design and optimize relevant
process parameters. Successful completion of the project will enable more
sustainable recovery of minerals with less water consumption and reduced
environmental impact. The research will be incorporated into undergraduate
design projects, and graduate courses on modeling, and will support the hands-on
research training of two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.