* 1805889
* Theory and Experiments for Distributed Roughness Effects in Laminar Boundary Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Edward White, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Identifying and modeling how distributed surface roughness affects laminar
boundary layers is an important challenge in fundamental fluid mechanics. Its
technological relevance relates to the role surface roughness plays in
predicting aircraft skin friction, wind-turbine power production, and the
performance of similar aerodynamic systems. Although aerodynamic roughness has
been studied for nearly a century, a good understanding of its role has not yet
been achieved. One reason may be that most studies have started from isolated
roughness elements and attempted to build understanding from single elements to
multiple elements. This research will pursue an alternative approach that
addresses an entire field of distributed roughness using an analysis technique
known as triple-deck asymptotics. The analytical results will be compared to
wind-tunnel measurements of roughness fields to be manufactured using 3D
printing. Additionally, the project will provide unique educational experiences
for South Texas high-school students with STEM interests. These experiences will
focus on the critical skills of dimensional analysis and scaling, key
engineering concepts that underly the usefulness of both wind-tunnel testing,
and triple-deck asymptotic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a whole-
field approach, this project will pursue three research objectives. First, a
theoretical model based on triple-deck asymptotic analysis will be implemented.
This model will accommodate distributed roughness in both linear and nonlinear
amplitude ranges. This technique is not widely used in an era of easy access to
supercomputer-class numerical solutions. However, asymptotic analysis is ideally
suited to studying distributed roughness because parameter studies are needed to
characterize many roughness fields. Second, wind-tunnel measurements will be
made over manufactured roughness specimens designed to validate key aspects of
the theoretical predictions. Third, the validated model will be used to perform
a parameter study that explores a wide range of roughness configurations and
advances a new understanding of distributed roughness. Combining asymptotic
analysis with validation experiments and then using the validated tool to
perform wide-ranging parameter studies will significantly advance understanding
of the roughness problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.