* 1805963
* Thermally Chargeable Supercapacitor: Utilizing Thermally-Driven Ion Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Choongho Yu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,585.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a novel simultaneous energy
harvesting and storage system that utilizes typically wasted low-grade heat such
as human body heat so that wearable and portable electronics can be powered
without electrical charging from an external power outlet. This project
investigates the key mechanisms for controlling ion transport under temperature
gradients so as to simultaneously harvest and store electrical energy. The
essence of this study is to understand how ions transport under temperature
gradients, which has broader impacts on other fields including biotechnology,
microfluidics, and fuel cells for controlling reactions and flow directions.
Simplified core knowledge for educating students and general audience through
lab experience and broadcasting could provide inspiration for other related
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the key mechanisms in
remarkably increasing thermopower is directly tied to the generated voltage to a
level that actual wearable electronics can be operated. In particular, this
project investigates plasticizer-dependent thermally-induced ion transport in
solid-state ionic conductors. The plasticizer not only loosens the mobile ions
from the counter ions tethered to the long backbone of the polymer, but also
significantly affects ion transport under temperature gradients. Nevertheless
these aspects have barely been studied and understood. This project mainly
studies the thermal diffusion direction of ions and plasticizers, the role of
plasticizers in promoting the thermal diffusion of ions, and the capacitance
effect from the plasticizers. Based on the knowledge gained through the
fundamental studies, optimally designed thermally chargeable supercapacitors are
to be developed and tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.