* 1805307
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and manipulating the solvent microenvironment for selective, catalytic amination of renewable oxygenates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andreas Heyden, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The initial steps of biomass refining involve breakdown of the raw material to a
biocrude oil containing a mixture of building block chemicals. The building
block chemicals can be further refined to higher value products, often in the
liquid phase, with the aid of a solvent and a solid catalyst. This project will
investigate the transformation of one of those building block chemicals,
3-hydroxybutryolactone (3HBA), to several higher-value chemicals. Theoretical
analysis and experimental methods will be combined to understand how the solvent
influences the performance of the catalyst in promoting conversion of 3HBA to
the desired products. Results of the study can be applied more generally to
other bio-based chemicals to support a growing bio-refining industry relevant
for the transition to renewable chemical production. The project will contribute
to a highly trained workforce of experts in biomass processing, while also
adding to U.S. technical prominence in biomanufacturing of chemicals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of heterogeneous catalysis research is to
identify active sites and to understand how they interact with reactants,
products, and the bulk environment to facilitate chemical transformations. While
most catalyst studies focus on catalyst discovery, it is often the bulk reaction
environment that benefits most from redesign. The focus on solvation effects in
heterogeneous catalysis has recently expanded with the trend toward liquid-
phase, catalytic processing of biomass. Motivated by this shift, the project
focuses on developing the scientific foundations needed for the rational design
of solvent systems for catalytically processing renewable oxygenates.
Specifically, the proposed research aims at understanding how the nature of the
solvent microenvironment impacts activity and selectivity of ruthenium (Ru)
catalysts during reductive amination of 3-HBA to form
2-amino-3-hydroxytetrahydrofuran and 3-aminotetrahydrofuran. The proposed
combination of computational and experimental research is structured around (1)
state-of-the-art density functional theory calculations, (2) machine learning
tools for accelerating complex reaction network investigation, (3) microkinetic
reactor modeling under various experimental reaction conditions, (4) vapor phase
catalyst evaluation and kinetic isotope effect studies, (5) catalyst evaluations
in condensed phases of water, ethanol, 1,4-dioxane, and cyclohexane, and (6)
systematic correlation of experimental data with computational models through
Bayesian statistical analysis. An iterative research loop is proposed, with
experimental observations leading to hypotheses that motivate new computations,
while computational models will rationalize experimental findings and guide new
investigations. The research program includes undergraduate outreach, and
research results will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate electives
and the core chemical engineering curriculum at both Syracuse University and the
University of South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.