* 1805490
* P2C2: Diagnosing the Dynamics of Past and Future North American Megadroughts
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Jason Smerdon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2023
* USD 371,596.00

This project aims to explore the cause and occurrence of multi-decadal droughts,
broadly characterized as megadroughts. Megadroughts have the potential to
critically affect society through disruptions involving agricultural production,
food security, municipal water supplies, and ecosystem services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The possibility that they may occur in the future is
suggested by two lines of evidence: (1) they have occurred in North America
during the past 2,000 years and several megadroughts even clustered together in
time during the early Middle Ages; and (2) climate model simulations suggest
that increasing global temperatures will progressively increase the likelihood
of a megadrought in this century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the awareness of
megadrought recurrence, the causes of these droughts are inadequately understood
because of a lack of long-term information about climate dynamics that is
physically consistent with reconstructions of past megadroughts. This project
seeks to address this apparent shortcoming by producing a novel data-
assimilation-based reconstruction of global hydroclimate that also includes a
reconstruction of dynamical variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
dynamical characterizations of past megadroughts will be used to test prominent
hypotheses about the causes of megadroughts in the American Southwest, the
Central Plains, and Mesoamerica thereby helping diagnose their causes in a
physically consistent and self-contained framework. Theories will be tested that
hypothesize involvement by Pacific and Atlantic sea surface temperatures, shifts
in the Intertropical Convergence Zone and midlatitude storm tracks, and
exogenous forcing. The potential dynamic causes and forcing of megadrought
clustering during the early Medieval period will also be evaluated. The
megadrought dynamical characterizations will subsequently be used to benchmark
climate and to estimate the potential risk of megadroughts in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include greater
understanding of megadroughts and their potential societal impact, support of an
early career scientist, and involvement of undergraduates in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.