* 1805990
* Antibiotic Resistance Genes in the Soil-Plant Ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Daniel Snow, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) make bacteria resistant to antibiotics, and
disease-causing pathogens possessing ARGs can make antibiotic treatment of
infectious deceases less effective in treating pathogens, and hence, threaten
public health. Soil is a major environmental reservoir of ARGs, and edible crops
grown in ARG-containing soils have the potential to serve as a carrier of ARGs
to humans and livestock that feed on the crops. After being introduced to the
soil in croplands, some ARG-carrying bacteria will reside in the surface soil,
and may transfer to plant surfaces where they may be taken up by the plant. This
project aims to address the knowledge gap on how ARGs are distributed in soil
following the land application of fertilizer, and whether bacteria carrying ARGs
survive in and on plants. This research can help determine the significance of
plants as a vector for the transport of ARGs to humans. This knowledge can guide
the development of management practices to prevent or minimize the uptake of
ARGs to edible plants, thus protecting the Nation's food supply for the benefit
of public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal for this project is to improve
our understanding of the mechanisms that govern the fate and transport of
antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil-plant ecosystems under field
conditions. Three research objectives are established for the project: 1)
characterize genetic resistance genes (resistome) in surface and rhizosphere
soils following manure application and determine the correlation of the
resistome with root exudates and antibiotics; 2) identify the source and measure
the diversity of the resistome in the endophytic and epiphytic microbial
communities in and on plants; 3) elucidate the metabolic adaptations that ARG-
carrying bacteria use to survive in and on plants. Shotgun metagenomics will be
used to study the resistome of the microbial communities in soil and plant
samples, and quantitative proteomics will be used to study the protein
expression of ARG-carrying bacteria living on and in plants. The research team
will disseminate research findings directly to farmers and crop producers
through agricultural extension education materials. The project education plan
will focus on enriching student learning experiences with interdisciplinary
knowledge of engineering, agriculture, and environmental science. Undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to the project, and a
new course module will be developed to show students the behaviors of ARGs in
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.