* 1805152
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of biocides associated with hydraulic fracturing on aquatic microbial communities.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Terry Hazen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 80,000.00

Hydraulic fracturing (HF), commonly called "fracking", is a method for recovery
of oil and gas using high pressure water, sand, and chemicals to fracture rocks,
releasing oil and gas. This process transformed the U.S. energy industry, but
more research is needed to study the environmental impacts of HF. This project
at Juniata College, in collaboration with researchers at Michigan Technological
University and the University of Tennessee Knoxville, will focus on the
environmental impacts of biocides, some of the most commonly used chemicals in
HF. Biocides are designed to kill microbes and are used in HF to protect
equipment from microbial corrosion and to preserve the quality of oil and gas.
However, once exposed to biocides, naturally-occurring microorganisms can become
resistant to these chemicals. Because of this link between biocide resistance
and the ability of microbes to become resistant to medications, it is important
to clarify the impact of industrial biocides associated with HF on the
environment, and the processes leading to biocide resistance. If successful,
this research will lead to better strategies to identify and mitigate the
potential effects of biocides on the environment and public health, protecting
the Nation's water security while enabling the use of an important source of raw
energy materials.

The goal of this study is to better understand the environmental impacts of HF
and how the use of industrial biocides in HF operations may contribute to
development of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in aquatic microbial communities.
Previous work demonstrated altered microbial community compositions in streams
impacted by HF operations as well as increased tolerance to biocides in streams
impacted by HF. Several streams in Pennsylvania were selected for this study
based on their reception of HF wastewater due to spills or close proximity to
active HF wells. Another set of streams with no active HF operations were
selected as control settings. The initial objective of this work will be to
study links between the observed changes in high HF active streams and potential
releases of HF wastewater. Chemical tracers, isotopic signatures, biocide
concentrations, and biocide breakdown products will be measured in HF-impacted
streams and compared to both HF wastewater and control streams. The microbial
community composition and functions within these 3 general aquatic ecosystems
will also be studied using high-throughput sequencing to elucidate the impact of
HF operations on biogeochemical cycling and assess the potential for microbes to
be used as sensitive bio-indicators of HF impacts. In addition to investigating
the impact of HF operations on streams and the consequences of AMR, studies will
be performed to investigate the biological mechanism for resistance to various
industrial biocides using biocide resistant strains isolated from HF wastewater
and HF-impacted streams. Transcriptomics will be employed to assess the
microbial response to industrial biocides. The levels of biocide-resistant
strains and AMR genes will be determined in these environments over multiple
years to investigate the long-term impact of HF activities on the development
and persistence of strains resistant to antimicrobials. This project will
provide insights into links between HF activity, biocide resistance, and the
pathways controlling the fate of biocides in these settings. If successful, this
research could serve as the foundation for the development of future molecular
diagnostic tools for detecting biocide contamination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.