* 1805398
* Intruder dynamics in fluid saturated granular medium
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Arshad Kudrolli, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 334,841.00

Media composed of solid grains and fluids occur in geology, oil recovery, and
chemical and food processing industries. The motion of an intruder in these
situations, for example, the burrowing or locomotion of an octopus through the
sea bed, is currently difficult to predict. This is true whether the intruder is
a large, rigid object that is denser than the solid grains or an active object
such as a robot or worm. This research will develop a set of models that predict
the detailed motion of intruders as a function of their physical properties and
those of the medium. In addition, experiments will be performed with three-
dimensional imaging techniques that allow simultaneous measurement of the
intruder motion and the motion of the surrounding grains and fluid. The
experiments and models will focus first on spherical intruders, and then extend
to rods and multi-link robot intruders. Design rules for these robots, which
might be used to probe marine sediments, will be developed by studying the
motion of freshwater worms. Ultimately, the results will be applied to efficient
processing of wet granular materials in industry and the development of robots
that can move through complex environments. The project will provide research
experience for students at various stages of their educational careers in a
collaborative environment focused on STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intruder motion
in dry granular materials has been studied to understand non-ergodic behavior in
dynamical systems and segregation mechanisms. However, an understanding of
intruder dynamics in fluid saturated granular medium, important to an even wider
range of natural and industrial systems, is largely underdeveloped. Rheological
descriptions of the medium developed recently as a function of dimensionless
inertial and viscous numbers from granular and suspensions research will be
combined with low-Reynolds number hydrodynamic resistive force theory to
describe the motion of the intruder in multi-phase particulate systems. Closely
coupled fluorescence-tagged internal imaging techniques will be further
developed and used to measure the rearrangements of the granular and fluid phase
at the single-grain level. Detailed measurement of the shape and orientation
dependent drag of the intruder combined with the connection of the observed drag
to the micromechanics of the medium will enable the development of a fundamental
rheology model of active and passive intruder dynamics through wet granular
medium. The project activities will also support a range of educational
activities including enabling undergraduate and graduate laboratory research
experience, and outreach activities targeting school students and members of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.