* 1805631
* Understanding Mechanisms of Membrane Biofouling in Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactors Using Polymer Surface Dissection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Prathap Parameswaran, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 353,039.00

Anaerobic membrane bioreactors (AnMBRs) can be used as a low-energy approach to
wastewater treatment to produce renewable energy and high-quality water for
reuse. However, these bioreactors are limited by membrane fouling caused in part
by the attachment of bacteria in wastewater that leads to formation of biofilms
at the membrane surface. This fouling accounts for 50% of the AnMBR energy use.
The goal of this project is to discover and characterize the key bacteria that
initiate biofilm formation on AnMBR membrane surfaces, learn how these bacteria
modify the membrane during the fouling process, and identify the physical
characteristics of the membrane that make it prone to biofouling. The knowledge
gained from these studies will inform the design of improved membranes and
membrane treatment strategies that will progress AnMBRs toward economical and
sustainable use in wastewater treatment facilities, agro-based industries, and
confined animal feeding operations. The project will use the Kansas Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation and the Developing Scholars Program to
recruit and retain minority students from rural community colleges in Kansas for
summer and year-long internships at Kansas State University, preparing them for
careers in sustainable environmental research and technology. If successful,
this project will help advance water treatment technologies to protect the
Nation's water supply and energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to discover microorganisms that initiate biofouling on
membranes in anaerobic membrane bioreactors (AnMBRs) and to characterize their
molecular fouling strategies. While much effort has focused on developing
chemical and physical treatment methods to alleviate biofouling, a poor
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that drive biofilm formation limit
long-term strategies to mitigate fouling over these membrane surfaces. The
central hypothesis is that early-stage biofouling is driven by a sub-group of
AnMBR community members that locally modify the membrane surface through
secretion of exopolysaccharides and soluble microbial products. To test this
hypothesis, the use of a novel, non-destructive method that uses biocompatible
polymeric materials to remove live cells from the membrane surface, termed
polymer surface dissection (PSD), will be investigated. The PSD method will
enable precise sectioning of early colonizers from the membrane surface in a
spatially controlled manner for cell cultivation and microbial identification.
This will be coupled with physicochemical analyses of the corresponding fouling
sites on the membrane surface using scanning electron microscopy and energy
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The PSD approach will be used to characterize
fouling in a laboratory setting using synthetic wastewater. These findings will
be compared with data from a pilot-scale AnMBR reactor system to understand the
effect of realistic environmental variables on membrane biofouling. The
knowledge gained from these studies will inform rational AnMBR operation and
treatment strategies that inhibit specific organisms, and will lead to the
development of improved anti-fouling membrane materials. Beyond these bench and
pilot scale systems, the PSD method can also be used to uncover microbial
assembly mechanisms in other wastewater treatment systems where biofouling is a
limiting issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.