* 1805075
* Characterizing the reactivity and industrial ecology of pseudowollastonite to enable highperformance building materials from waste streams
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Andres Clarens, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 308,000.00

Ordinary Portland cement is a critical building material with a large
environmental footprint. Preliminary work carried out by the investigator's
group suggests that an alternative material, pseudowollastonite (PWOL), which is
a high temperature polymorph of calcium silicate (CaSiO3), can form a variety of
platey mineral products during hydration and carbonation. It appears that these
products resemble the mineral phases that give ancient Roman cement much of its
strength and its remarkable ability to gain strength over time even in
environments that would rapidly degrade modern cements. Also, there is reason to
anticipate that substituting one or more of these products for Portland cement
may lead to a decreased environmental footprint. However, a large number of
questions exist as to which combination of reactions and chemical conditions
result in the formation of these phases. This project will develop both the
physicochemical understanding needed to deploy PWOL-based cements and the
systems-level life cycle and techno-economic potential of deploying these types
of materials in an economically competitive and sustainable manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is divided into four research tasks-- Task 1.
Characterize the chemical kinetics of PWOL carbonation and hydration under a
range of natural water and atmospheric conditions. Task 2. Evaluate the chemical
stability of the resulting mineral phases. Task 3. Measure the mechanical
strength of PWOL cements. Task 4. Understand the Industrial Ecology of PWOL
cements. This work will include fundamental advances in the understanding of
aqueous carbonation of PWOL at high temperatures. Preliminary experiments
suggest that PWOL reacts very differently with CO2, H2O, and Na+ than
wollastonite, which is already being actively developed as a carbon neutral
cement alternative. The products of PWOL reactions will be tested for their
chemical stability and mechanical strength under a range of representative
conditions. In parallel, the industrial ecology of PWOL-based cements will be
studied to evaluate both the economic opportunity and environmental implications
of this cement substitute. PWOL is relatively uncommon in nature but abundant in
industrial waste streams such as cement kiln dust. It is also possible that it
could be synthesized using other waste streams using less energy than it takes
to make ordinary Portland cement. The curing of these materials, which require
heat, moisture andCO2, could occur in the presence of a flue gas stream, and so
a geospatial analysis will be carried out to understand where in the United
States these waste streams are in close proximity. Efforts to develop carbon
capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) technologies, like the one proposed
here, are motivated in part by the goal of reducing net emissions of greenhouse
gas. Quantifying those emissions can be challenging, especially for innovative
technologies. To support greater transparency in pursuing CCUS activities, this
project will develop guidelines and an open-source tool for evaluating the life
cycle performance of CCUS projects in the concrete alternatives space. Such an
effort can serve as a model for other CCUS applications areas to help promote
transparency and rapid assessment of early-stage CCUS
ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.