* 1805029
* Collaborative Research: P2C2 -- Connecting Common Era climate and sea level variability along the Eastern North American coastline
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Christopher Little, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 197,986.00

Sea level along the eastern North American coastline is rising faster than
global sea level and is expected to accelerate dramatically over the 21st
century. The uncertainty and societal impact of this acceleration underscores
the need for an improved understanding of relationships between regional sea
level and climate. High-resolution sea level proxies spanning the past ~2,000
years (the "Common Era") reveal century-scale, decimeter-amplitude (up to
~20-cm), variability along the east coast associated with changes in dynamic sea
level (DSL). These changes offer a unique benchmark for climate models, and the
closest observational analog for climate-driven sea level change expected in the
21st century. This project will employ statistical and dynamical models to
improve the scientific understanding of Common Era sea level changes along the
east coast and their relationship with climate. The research team will leverage
this knowledge to inform projections of 21st century DSL change and the ability
of current-generation climate models to capture those changes, in turn informing
coastal resilience efforts along the high-risk eastern North American coast. The
project will provide funding and opportunities for an early career scientist and
a graduate student to develop a diverse set of skills and collaborators in
paleoclimate, climate modeling, and weather and climate risk
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will confront the sparsity of
the proxy record and the limitations of current-generation paleoclimate
simulations by testing hypotheses about the drivers of sea level variability
using a broad statistically- and dynamically-based modeling strategy. Project
tasks include: (1) a rigorous assessment of the robustness of regional DSL
reconstructions generated with a hierarchical spatio-temporal statistical
framework; (2) leveraging the statistical framework to assess linkages between
DSL and other climate indices (e.g., North Atlantic Oscillation, Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation, sea surface temperature and salinity,
Intertropical Convergence Zone position); and (3) conducting and analyzing
coupled climate model simulations. Climate model simulations will be forced by
proxy-derived surface fluxes and validated by a synthesis of complementary
climate reconstructions. The simulations will reveal the dynamical mechanisms
underlying correlations found in reconstructions and demonstrate whether
relationships observed in the instrumental record persist over multidecadal-to-
centennial timescales. The research is expected to lead to a more complete
interpretation of Common Era sea level and climate
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.