* 1805506
* Interactions of shapeable boundaries with flowing fluids:Experiments and mathematical modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 319,980.00

Many processes in nature, industry and everyday life involve the coupled motions
of fluids and compliant objects or boundaries. Understanding these complex
interactions is challenging but important if these effects are to be exploited
or controlled in engineering, industrial and technological applications. The
proposed projects identify key problems from the natural and applied sciences
yet to be studied as fluid-structure interactions and which stand to benefit
from laboratory experiments and mathematical modeling. Focus areas include solid
boundaries that change shape due to fluidic erosion and dissolution, as well as
liquid interfaces and films reshaped by flows. The proposed work focuses on the
fundamental interactions to be revealed by experiments and reproduced in models.
These studies will provide insight into the processes that shape natural
landforms and how such effects can be used in chemical, pharmaceutical and
manufacturing applications. The program will also train and educate
undergraduate and graduate students towards careers in the mathematical sciences
and engineering, and it will further national math and science education
initiatives through the engagement of New York City high school students from
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental flow-boundary
interaction mechanisms will be studied through experiments on the evolution of
erodible boundaries by internal flows, the dissolution of surfaces due to self-
generated convective flows, and the flow-driven deformation and inflation of
films and interfaces. These settings are chosen to closely link with
mathematical models to be developed based on the relevant fluid dynamics (e.g.
boundary-layer and free-streamline theories) coupled to boundary evolution
equations (e.g. shear-stress erosion laws, Fick's law of diffusion, and the
Young-Laplace law). Experiments and models will inform one another to understand
the role of boundary-flow feedback processes in dictating the shape dynamics,
with emphasis placed on characterizing the singular geometries (e.g. corners,
spikes, surface patterning) and singular events (e.g. bifurcations, geometric
shocks, rupture) that play critical roles in these processes. How these results
extend to more complex geometries (e.g. erodible/dissolvable flow networks) and
in more complex situations (e.g. shape evolution coupled to free motion in a
fluid) will also be explored. A broader goal is to extend the reach of fluid-
structure interactions by expanding the scope of problems viewed in this way and
by providing new techniques. Broader scientific impacts pertain to better
understanding flow-driven erosion, corrosion, melting and dissolution in the
context of geomorphological, chemical and industrial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.