* 1805958
* Inactivation of Legionella pneumophila harbored by amoebae using a nano-enabled alternative technology: Application and outreach to the Colonias in Texas
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Navid Saleh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 333,903.00

Legionnaires' disease is a deadly form of pneumonia caused by the bacterial
pathogen Legionella pneumophila. Several outbreaks of this waterborne disease
have occurred in the U.S. since 1976, and new cases have been growing at a high
rate. Exposure occurs when contaminated water droplets are inhaled (e.g., during
showering) or aspirated. L. pneumophila can be harbored by free-living single-
celled organisms (amoebae), which can shield L. pneumophila from traditional
disinfection like a 'Trojan horse', thereby increasing risk for the spread of
Legionnaires' disease. This project aims to develop a low-cost disinfection
technology that can harness low-energy microwave radiation to inactivate L.
pneumophila in drinking water. The work includes a major outreach program with
the Texas colonias, or self-built communities, which are home to 400,000 low-
income people, many of whom lack access to high quality drinking water.
Successful development of this technology has the potential to ensure safe
drinking water for the colonias and the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the proposed irradiation-based technology is to generate interfacial heat and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) to inactivate L. pneumophila harbored by amoebae.
Amoebae will be lysed via interfacial heating, and the released L. pneumophila
will be inactivated by heat and ROS. The proposed research will deploy
fundamental nanoscience to develop a point-of-use (POU) and community-scale
water treatment technology. The specific technical objectives of the proposed
research plan are to (i) synthesize, characterize, and test MW-harnessing
nanomaterials, (ii) understand the mechanisms of microbial inactivation by this
MW-based nanotechnology, and (iii) engineer two devices containing immobilized
nanomaterials to effectively inactivate L. pneumophila harbored by amoebae. The
research will capitalize on the scientific advantages of novel MW spectral
conversion to provide safe drinking water to low-income residents of the Texas
colonias and beyond. Outreach activities will occur in elementary schools and
colonias located in three school districts (two in El Paso County and one in
Hidalgo County, both of which have high concentrations of colonias). Hands-on
educational activities related to the research will be conducted in the schools,
and water sampling and household surveys will be conducted in the colonias to
gather information on water quality, water use, water-related health issues, and
socioeconomic conditions. The outreach is unique because the information it
yields will be utilized in the device design, thereby enabling the development
of a socially-embedded technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.