* 1805139
* Combining metabolic engineering and synthetic biology to engineer natural product synthesis in oleaginous yeast
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Philip Farabaugh, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,259.00

Plants produce chemicals with medicinal properties. Isolating plant natural
products (PNPs) from native sources is difficult due to low concentrations.
Chemical synthesis is often not economical because of the structural complexity
of PNPs. This project will modify yeast to produce a PNP with anti-cancer
properties. This molecule represents a class of PNPs with therapeutic value. If
yeast can produce high concentrations of PNPs, these drugs could become more
affordable. Outreach activities are also planned. Research opportunities will be
offered to minority undergraduates. Teaching demonstrations and science fair
presentations will be made in Baltimore and the DC area. The goal of these
efforts will be to recruit female high school students and underrepresented
minorities to pursue STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve the cost-
competitiveness of PNP production, the project will address cofactor balance
(ATP, NADPH, CoASH et al) and maximize the carbon flow and electron reduction
efficiency towards the target pathway. This interdisciplinary approach combines
genetic engineering, gene regulation, adaptive lab evolution, tolerance
phenotyping, metabolic profiling, and cellular compartmentalization engineering.
Biochemical and genetic strategies will abolish HMG-CoA pathway negative
feedback control, improve metabolite trafficking, and overexpress plant P450
enzymes. These efforts should improve pathway efficiency and diversify the
chemical structure of PNPs. Our strategy will target pathway yield and the total
cost of manufacturing. The goal is to build a cost-competitive cyclic
triterpenoids biomanufacturing platform with significantly reduced manufacturing
cost. This project will provide a testbed for engineering Y. lipolytica and
expanding nature's capacity to produce complex PNPs with pharmaceutical values
for clinical trials and treating emerging diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.