* 1805570
* GOALI: Understanding and Resolving the Compositional and Structural Defects in High-Energy Lithium-Ion Battery Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Zhiyong Xu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2022
* USD 314,251.00

With the increased demand of renewable energy, its production, transportation
and storage must be environmentally benign and sustainable. Lithium-ion
batteries (LIBs) have been widely used in electric vehicles and renewable
electricity grids due to their high energy density. However, LIBs reach their
lifetime after a few years of service due to performance degradation. From an
economic point of view, reuse of the battery metals used (e.g., lithium, cobalt,
nickel) can significantly reduce their cost because a large portion of the cost
is in the cathode electrode material (30-40%). From an environmental point of
view, the organic solvent and metal wastes generated from disposal of used
batteries require treatment and final storage. For economic and environmental
benefits, it is desired to recycle, reuse and re-manufacture LIBs for
sustainable energy storage. Through a close collaboration with the industrial
partner MeecoTech, this GOALI award focuses on fundamental understanding and
resolving the compositional and structural defects in high energy LIB cathodes
during operation and the impacts of regeneration processes. Such knowledge can
be used to develop an energy-efficient, non-destructive process towards a
sustainable LIB re-use process technology. This project will also integrate
graduate, undergraduate and pre-college education and training by providing
facilities, tools, practical examples, hands-on laboratory experiences and
industrial internships. A strong engagement in enhancing STEM diversity will
also be made through broad-based outreach activities in the San Diego
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to establish a
systematic understanding of the formation mechanisms of the compositional and
structural defects in a variety of high-energy cathode materials during cell
operation, as well as understanding of their evolution during non-destructive
regeneration processes. Towards this goal, the specific objectives of the
project include: (1) to characterize the compositional and structural formations
during LIB cycling using model cathode materials; (2) to characterize and
understand the compositional and structural evolution of degraded LIB cathodes
during non-destructive regeneration; and (3) to fabricate new cells and fully
characterize the electrochemical properties of regenerated electrode active
particles based on the efficient non-destructive method. The results will
provide fundamental knowledge of the correlation between their
composition/structure defects and redox properties and stability. Such knowledge
can not only be applied as the basis to further develop a general technology to
allow an environmental benign, low-cost, and robust non-destructive strategy for
effective regeneration of used LIB but also provide guidelines for better design
of LIB active particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.