* 1805447
* RUI: Treating Phantom Limb Pain with Electrically Induced Somatosensation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Katharine Polasek, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2024
* USD 282,446.00

Phantom limb pain occurs in a majority of people with amputated limbs, including
over half of people with upper extremity, e.g., arm or hand, amputations. This
pain results from the loss of understandable input from the missing limb, which
presumably causes changes along the neural pathway. Currently, individuals
experiencing this pain use pharmacological (drug) treatments with varying
success and sometimes significant negative side effects. There are no treatment
options clinically available that attempt to directly address the neural changes
in an attempt to treat the painful sensations. This study will evaluate non-
invasive electrical stimulation of a tapping sensation as a method to reduce
phantom limb pain. In addition, the patterns of electrical activity in the brain
will be analyzed to assess changes to the neural pathway. Given the current
opioid crisis, the development of treatment options that do not require drugs
would be a momentous advance for people suffering from phantom limb pain and
potentially others with neurological disorders in the future. This project will
also contribute to the training of a diverse group of undergraduate students who
will obtain valuable research experiences and to the development of outreach
activities that will engage and excite pre-college students about biomedical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
research is to develop electrical stimulation as a method to promote
neuroplasticity for recovery after neurological injury or illness. The objective
of this project is to analyze cortical activity during non-invasive surface
electrical stimulation of the peripheral nerve in order to assess whether
cortical plasticity can be induced. The initial target population will be people
with an amputated limb for whom inducing neuroplasticity may alleviate phantom
limb pain. The central hypothesis of this approach is that neuroplasticity in
the somatosensory cortex can be facilitated using targeted, non-invasive
activation of sensation logically paired with visual input and that this
neuroplasticity will reduce or eliminate phantom limb pain. The rationale for
performing this work is based on the expectation that knowledge of how the
central nervous system responds to electrical stimulation will help develop
customized therapies for phantom limb pain and other neurological disorders. A
non-invasive stimulation method to evoke sensation in the phantom limb of people
with amputations has already been developed by the project team. In the next
phase of work conducted during this project, the cortical activity in response
to physical and electrically induced somatosensation will be characterized. It
is expected that peripheral nerve activation of sensation will evoke cortical
activation similar to physical touch. Building on an initial exploratory trial
in able-bodied subjects, subjects with amputations will be given a therapy
consisting of simultaneous electrical activation of a tapping sensation and
visual feedback of that tapping on their prostheses. The therapy will occur
multiple times per week over twelve weeks and the effects of this long-term
activation on cortical activity and severity of phantom limb pain will be
evaluated. In addition, a multichannel stimulation system that can be easily
calibrated to generate realistic sensation across all individuals will be
developed to reduce the barriers to a home-based
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.