* 1805129
* Quantifying adsorption-diffusion-reaction of biomass-derived molecules at solid-liquid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 319,482.00

Distributed manufacturing of chemical building blocks from renewable feedstocks
as an alternative to non-renewable fossil resources is an important long-term
goal in building a sustainable domestic chemical industry. Transformations and
separations of functionalized molecules, such as those derived from
depolymerization of lignocellulosic biomass, can be accomplished using porous
solids that selectively adsorb and convert them under mild conditions
(relatively low temperatures). Such processes are usually conducted in the
presence of semi-aqueous solvent systems, which themselves exert strong effects
on partitioning, dynamics, and reactivity, significantly altering the
effectiveness of heterogeneous catalysts in biomass conversion. The proposed
research project aims at developing a fundamental understanding of molecular
behavior at solid/liquid interfaces, which is essential for the rational
development of durable heterogeneous catalysts and benign solvent systems for
processing renewable feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
understanding the nature of the co-adsorption of solvent and solvent molecules
in selected microporous and mesoporous materials, in order to generate
fundamental knowledge about the role of adsorption in controlling rates and
directing selectivity. The objective is to describe and quantify the extent of
molecular partitioning at solid-liquid interfaces in conjunction with pore
confinement; explore the origins of selective adsorption and consequences for
mobility of adsorbed molecules; and combine this information to create new
insight into solvent effects in catalytic reactions involving selected
oxygenated organic compounds. Thermodynamic measurements of enthalpies of
adsorption/absorption in porous materials will be obtained from conventional
adsorption equilibrium measurements in combination with isothermal titration
calorimetry. The molecular nature of the interactions will be probed using both
ex-situ and in-situ solid state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to distinguish
between adsorbed/absorbed and free molecules, and to measure their relative
proportions and rates of exchange. Density Functional Theory (DFT) and Molecular
Dynamics (MD) simulations will be employed to interpret trends in partitioning
and adsorption. Reaction kinetics will be recorded in situ and linked to
interfacial composition and dynamic behavior. The effect of catalyst pore size
and framework topology, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, the presence, identity,
and density of extra-framework cations, will be explored. A graduate student
researcher will be trained in the characterization of solid-liquid interfaces
and will learn to make connections between thermodynamic and kinetic
measurements. Undergraduate students from under-represented groups will receive
mentoring and participate directly in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.