* 1805741
* Process Engineering Models to Physical Input-Output Tables (PIOTs): A Novel Approach to Reproducible, Transparent and Fast Regional PIOT Development Via Collaborative PIOTHub
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 326,974.00

Only 30% of waste generated in the US was recycled in 2013 and globally only 14%
of plastics are recycled today. Realization of the environmental consequences of
waste disposal and the economic cost of lost resources has mobilized global
efforts to close material loops by recycling and recovery. This system is termed
the "Circular Economy". However, to build a robust and resilient circular
economy, it is necessary to identify hidden vulnerabilities that can occur due
to increased mutual interdependence of sectors in the economy with increasing
use of waste as feedstock. To achieve this goal, a full physical map of current
industrial interactions must be known, which can be captured by Physical Input-
Output Tables (PIOTs) that account for inter-industry interactions in physical
units. But, PIOTs are rarely developed, with only very few PIOTs developed
across the world since 1990s. This is attributed both to lack of data and a
standardized approach for building PIOTs. Thus, the physical structure of
existing economy cannot be mapped. The aim of this research is to address this
critical missing piece of transitioning to a robust circular economy. The
overall goal is to develop and establish a "Process to PIOT (P2P)" approach that
integrates process engineering based models with an Input-Output framework for
generating PIOTs for a regional economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific tasks of
this project are: 1) Establish a new P2P approach for developing PIOTs; 2)
Compare PIOTs developed against exisiting Monetary Input-Output Tables (MIOT)
for validation; 3) Develop an Open source database of Process Models that can be
adapted for developing PIOTs along with an open platform for collaborative PIOT
development. This project is targeted to enable transition to a robust circular
economy by developing and standardizing a Process to PIOT (P2P) approach that
utilizes the strength of process modeling to develop regional PIOTs.
Establishing the P2P approach will provide a standardized approach for fast,
reproducible and transparent PIOT development in any region of choice. A key
feature of the approach is to utilize the strength of process engineering models
in a modular approach to build PIOTs, and combining with an interregional trade
model for improved accuracy in capturing inter-sectoral flows in a region. This
research will provide an open-source collaborative platform for developing PIOTs
on a regional scale (PIOTHub) using Purdue's HubZero platform. The collaborative
platform will allow multiple researchers to develop PIOTs for many regions and
enhance collaboration to solve sustainable resource and consumption challenges.
Further, the process engineering approach will allow interested industries to
use the platform for making strategic decisions in forming alliances that will
be economically and environmentally beneficial without the concern of disclosing
proprietary information. This is critical for industry engagement into spurring
regional environmental sustainability. Undergraduate and graduate education
modules developed as case studies in this project will be disseminated for
teaching the concepts of the circular economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.