* 1805901
* Antibiotic resistance gene propagation: in situ rates and networks of horizontal gene transfer in wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Caroline Masiello, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,993.00

A major challenge to combating the global health crisis of antibacterial
resistance is that antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) can be shared among
bacteria through a process called horizontal gene transfer (HGT). ARGs are
present in wastewater, and there is little understanding of ARG health impacts
potentially conveyed by recycling wastewater. Little is known regarding the
conditions that result in HGT of ARGs from environmental bacteria such as those
used to treat wastewater and pathogenic bacteria found in clinical infections.
The goals of this project are to decipher how pathogens acquire ARGs from
environmental bacteria present in water and wastewater systems and to understand
how ARGs are propagated in water and wastewater microbial communities. This
research will develop biosensors to monitor HGT of ARGs to understand how simple
operational parameters in a wastewater treatment plant impact the reduction or
proliferation of ARGs. If successful, the results of this project will identify
methods of antibiotic resistance transfer in the environment and identify ways
to halt this transfer during water treatment processes, protecting public health
and the Nation's water supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the controls
over horizontal gene transfer (HGT) in microbial communities found in the
environment would impart an unprecedented ability to manage the growing threat
of antibiotic resistance. While a variety of technologies are available for
obtaining static snapshots of bacteria that have acquired antibiotic resistance
genes (ARGs) through HGT, these existing approaches do not provide dynamic
information on the pathways and rates of gene flow within complex communities
that experience a changing environment. These approaches also cannot easily
differentiate between living and dead bacteria. Two emerging tools will be
leveraged to obtain this information: (1) gas-reporting biosensors that report
on in situ conjugation events; and (2) a high-throughput, culture-independent
method for determining the host-range of ARGs in a mixed community. These tools
will be applied in bioreactors treating domestic wastewater to better understand
how operational controls impact ARG propagation rates and host range. The
objectives of this research are to (1) develop biosensors that report on HGT in
situ by coupling the synthesis of an enzyme that produces a rare volatile gas to
broad-range plasmid transfer; (2) use these tools in bench-scale wastewater
bioreactors to monitor HGT rates across a community under various reactor
conditions; and (3) characterize the host range of the engineered plasmids and
of a suite of environmentally-relevant ARGs under different bioreactor
operational conditions. The results of this research will advance the knowledge
of the mechanisms that govern HGT of ARGs in wastewater treatment and water
reuse systems that will inform management strategies to protect human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.