* 1805159
* Mechanism for Lithium Dendrite Formation in Solid State Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Chunsheng Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2023
* USD 340,000.00

The need to store energy from intermittent renewable energy sources and the
ongoing electrification of light-duty vehicle transportation increase the demand
for high energy density batteries that have acceptable durability and cost. The
utilization of lithium (Li) metal as the battery anode holds great potential to
significantly improve the energy density. However, thus far, use of this anode
material has been unsuccessful with the conventional liquid electrolytes because
of compromised durability and safety issues arising from Li dendrite growth that
shorts the battery. Solid electrolytes have been considered as the ideal
solution to prevent dendrite growth because of their high mechanical strength.
However, recent reports indicate formation of lithium dendrites in Li7La3Zr2O12
(LLZO) solid electrolytes by mechanisms that remain inconclusive. This
fundamental research project aims to elucidate the origin of lithium dendrite
formation in LLZO solid electrolytes. The scientific insights will be used to
design solid electrolytes that result in rechargeable Li batteries with improved
energy and power densities and improved lifetime. The interdisciplinary nature
of this research will provide training opportunities for researchers at all
levels including postdoctoral researcher, graduate and undergraduate students in
the fields of electrochemistry, materials sciences and energy. Additional
outreach activities include mentoring undergraduates through the Chem-E Car and
GEMSTONE programs at the University of Maryland College Park.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this fundamental engineering
science project is to identify the mechanisms of lithium dendrite formation in
LLZO solid electrolytes, and to use these insights to design new solid
electrolytes for dendrite-free Li plating at large current densities. The
dynamic evolution of depth distribution of Li dendrites in LLZO will be studied
using an in-situ neutron depth profile (NDP) technique. A precise three-
dimensional lithium distribution in LLZO will be reconstructed using focused ion
beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM). A computational study using first-
principle calculation at the atomic scale and electro-chemo-mechanical modeling
at the continuum level will be implemented to understand the distribution of
lithium dendrites in LLZO. Combining the advantages of NDP (in situ, non-
destructive, lithium selective, statistical), FIB-SEM (high-resolution, chemical
analysis), and the computation studies at both atomic-level and continuum level,
unprecedented information will be obtained on the mechanism of lithium dendrite
formation in LLZO. Novel approaches to improve the dendrite suppression
capability of LLZO will also be tested based on the new understandings. The
fundamental knowledge gained from this project will promote the development of
safe, high-energy all-solid-state Li batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.