* 1805998
* Femtosecond laser surgery in the ablation cooling regime for improved depth and speed
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Adela Ben-Yakar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project will study the physical effects of ultra-fast lasers operating in
the 'ablation-cool' regime, where the short laser pulses operate at a very high
pulse rep-rate so that the pulses occur before the heat is dissipated in the
tissue. This can overcome the difficulties that result from laser-cutting tissue
at the normal low rep-rates. The advantages include enhanced efficiency of
cutting, improved removal-rates of products material, use of lower powers, and
allowing deeper penetration depths. This will have a pronounced impact on the
operation in systems where fine-tuning of accuracy of surgery, deep tissue
penetration, and product removal are critical, such as vocal cords lesions or
spine surgeries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes a burst-
mode femtosecond laser system that would deliver pulses at nearly 1.5 GHz rate
leading to high energy deposited into the target area. The investigators
hypothesize that such a burst mode GHz train of pulses would result in a deeper
sub-surface ablation. The PIs further predict that such a pulse train will lead
to an order-of-magnitude increase in ablation rates compared to conventional kHz
repetition rate femtosecond lasers, in addition to avoiding thermal side
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.