* 1805763
* Conference on Algebras, Representations, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Efim Zelmanov, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2019
* USD 16,000.00

The conference "Algebras, Representations, and Applications" will be held at
Universidad Nacional San Antonio Abad de Cusco in Peru from August 27 to August
31, 2018. This conference is a satellite conference for the 2018 International
Congress of Mathematicians that will bring together mathematicians from all over
the world. This award will provide support for US-based participants with
priority given to participants from under-represented groups and early-career
researchers. The conference lectures will be in a colloquium style in order to
make the material accessible to post-doctoral scholars and graduate students.
There will also be short communication sessions consisting of 30-minute talks
delivered by early-carrier mathematicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
representation theory of Lie algebras and related algebraic structures has
become a comprehensive and mainstream research area in mathematics. In
particular, new categorical and geometric constructions have taken the lead not
only within Lie theory, but also in other areas of mathematics and physics such
as combinatorics, group theory, number theory, integrable systems, partial
differential equations, topology and conformal field theory. Recent developments
in representation theory using D-modules, Koszul duality, Hodge theory, and
higher category are strengthening these interactions further. The conference
will cover a wide range of these developments and their applications. The aim of
the conference is to bring together leading specialists to discuss the major
achievements of the last decade in algebras and representation theory, as well
as problems and fundamental conjectures that continue to abound the area.
Further details can be found at the conference website
https://sites.google.com/view/icm2018satellitecusco/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.