* 1805847
* Viscous constraints on zooplankton approach and interaction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Rob Stoll, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 338,068.00

Organisms that swim in water need to approach suspended particles for a variety
of life processes, such as feeding, mating, fertilization, and finding favorable
habitats. This research focuses on plankton, which despite their small size play
an outsize role in ocean ecology due to their numerical abundance. For example,
phytoplankton provide the base of the food web by converting sunlight into
organic matter, which is transferred further up to the food chain, primarily by
zooplankton which eat the phytoplankton. Hydrodynamics at the micro- to
millimeter scales of zooplankton is dominated by viscosity, and severely
constrains their ability to approach other particles. Attempts to approach
smaller food particles are made difficult by viscous flows that tend to push the
food particle away. However, zooplankton also approach similar size particles
during mating, as well as larger particles during egg fertilization or when
exploring new habitats. The goal of the research is to understand what general
constraints viscous hydrodynamics place on the approach of plankton to suspended
particles and how those constraints determine biological form and function. The
results will increase our understanding of how plankton eat, reproduce, and
spread to new habitats. The project will also enhance engineering education
through graduate and undergraduate research training, and an outreach program
will communicate our research results to local high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the way that viscous hydrodynamics constrains
propulsion and the form of swimming mechanisms of microorganisms is well
appreciated, this research extends our understanding of the implications of
viscous hydrodynamics to include constraints on approach which is as or more
important than swimming for many life processes. To deduce how hydrodynamic
constraints on approach determine biological form and behavior, the research
uses numerical studies, flow visualization, and dynamically scaled experiments
to investigate a range of swimmer geometries, propulsion methods, target
particle sizes, and approach strategies to identify which enable close approach
in the presence of viscous constraints. The results will be used to analyze
observations of approach of various types of organisms reported in the
literature to understand when viscous constraints determine the biological form
of those organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.