* 1806138
* Combinatorial Design and Structure-Property Relationships of Antifouling Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2023
* USD 340,866.00

Biofouling is a long-standing problem in many scientific and technological
applications, thus development and understanding of highly bioinert and
biocompatible antifouling materials are crucial for many fundamental and
practical applications. The current materials design strategy often encounters
the difficulties of inconsistent datasets and heuristically cost- and time-
extensive optimization procedures. This work aims to propose a potential
transforming strategy, combining mathematical modeling, molecular simulations,
and experiments, to setup a simple yet robust polymer and coating system to
collect a reliable benchmarking dataset for better assessing the component-
structure-property-performance relationship of antifouling polymer coatings, and
then to use this reliable source to develop a computational predictive model for
the structural-based design of next-generation antifouling materials. This
proposed research will contribute new knowledge related to new antifouling
design and manufacture, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
national prosperity. Educational and outreach activities will focus on
strategies to enhance recruitment and retention of all-level students
particularly from underrepresented groups and to help them to learn
interdisciplinary knowledge and skills from polymer physics/chemistry, lab-on-
chip design, and ergonomic engineering, thus promoting the next-generation of
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this proposal is to develop a novel, cheminformatics-based strategy
combining computational and experimental techniques to design new distinctive
antifouling polymers by understanding and engineering the interfacial
interactions between antifouling polymers and fouling species at different
spatial and time scales. A synergistic large-data-driven computational approach
will be developed to study interfacial interactions between proteins and polymer
brushes at atomic level, and then to correlate interfacial interactions with
their structure-property relationships and antifouling potentials. Then, a
series of polymer brushes, as selected by computational design, with well-
controlled surface properties, will be synthesized and tested for their
combinatory effects of polymer chemistries and brush topological parameters on
their antifouling performance. Finally, a QSAR model will be developed to better
reconcile all quantitative computational and experimental data from the
benchmarking dataset to describe a relationship among monomer structures,
polymer architectures, structural-dependent physical/chemical/biological
properties, and antifouling performance. The obtained antifouling materials can
also serve as a basis for exploration of other bioactive properties for
controlled nanoparticle synthesis, tissue engineering, and biocompatible surface
modification. The design strategies will have potential to be applied to the
development of other polymer materials, such as antibacterial materials, self-
assembling materials, and hydrogel materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.