* 1806210
* Environmental Photochemistry at the Air-Ice Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Davide Donadio, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 600,021.00

Professors Cort Anastasio and Davide Donadio of the University of California at
Davis are funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division
of Chemistry to study chemical reactions that take place on the surfaces of ice
and snow. Snow contains a variety of chemical contaminants, some of which are
toxic. It was originally thought that contaminants in deposited snow are
preserved, bit recent work shows that these chemicals can be degraded by
sunlight. These photochemical reactions can remove toxic contaminants from the
snow. However, they can also make toxic products, some of which are released to
the air. Unfortunately, understanding of these processes is limited, in part
because there are few studies. But there is also a discrepancy in the existing
studies: some report that sunlight reactions are faster in snow than in water,
while other studies find no difference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an
understanding about how conditions (e.g., snow, ice) impact photochemistry are
being investigated. As well, an understanding about the mechanisms responsible
for making snow photochemistry faster are being considered. These goals are
being pursued with a combination of laboratory experiments and modeling of
chemical contaminants on snow. This project includes outreach to the public,
highlighting the impact of chemistry on everyday life. It also includes
activities at K-12 schools, and the training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.