* 1806759
* Physics Beyond Standard Model with the CMS Pixel Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sudhir Malik, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2021
* USD 441,089.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been a successful theory, agreeing
with decades of experimental observations involving weak, electromagnetic, and
strong interactions. The discovery of the Higgs boson at the LHC was further
confirmation of this success. However, the Standard Model remains an incomplete
theory. This research focuses on probing the nature of the Universe at the
smallest scales and its basic symmetries with the goal of understanding the
stability of mass, the quantum nature of dark matter, and the relation of
gravity to subatomic forces and extra spatial dimensions. This program is
centered on the CMS experiment currently running at the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. The precise measurements of the properties
of the Higgs boson at the LHC could give insight into the nature of mass and the
nature of electroweak symmetry breaking. The LHC might unveil lighter mass
candidates for Supersymmetry, a theory that naturally explains electroweak
symmetry breaking. The precise measurement of 'missing energy' could unveil
signatures of many undiscovered particles, some of which could be candidates for
Dark Matter. Missing energy could also account for the graviton escaping in
extra-dimensions or for other exotic particles.

The primary focus of this research is to exploit the capabilities of the newly
installed CMS pixel detector to pursue searches for Supersymmetry. This new
detector has an extra barrel and endcap layers, a reduced material profile, a
new readout chip to minimize data losses due to high pile-up of LHC events, and
an optimized detector layout for 4-pixel-hit coverage over the full CMS
pseudorapidity range. These improvements translate to higher tracking
efficiencies, lower fake-track rates, lower dead-time/data-loss, an extended
lifetime of the detector, all leading to better muon identification, b-quark
tagging, photon/electron identification, tau reconstruction, improved "particle
flow" analysis, and missing energy reconstruction. An improved signal selection
efficiency due to improved b-tagging and better missing energy estimation is
central to this analysis program to discover Supersymmetry. This effort will
also include activities in design and development of additional pixel detector
upgrades while maintaining support of Pixel Detector Operations. This challenge
of building, commissioning, and maintaining a state-of-the-art silicon detector
provides workforce development opportunities in physics and engineering. The
data analyses techniques and related algorithms, hardware instrumentation, grid
computing, and big data science opportunities carried out in this award give
students valuable experience and knowledge enabling them to pursue successful
careers in academia or the private sector. The Quarknet outreach activities
further foster collaboration with high school teachers, strengthening teaching
and learning around the schools in Puerto Rico and motivating students to pursue
STEM disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.