* 1806207
* Mergers, Stars, and Disks: Dense Matter Phenomena in Numerical Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Matthew Duez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

A great deal can be learned about the extremes of strong gravity, about denser-
than-nuclei matter, and even about the origin of heavy elements by studying the
collisions of neutron stars with each other or with black holes. One such merger
of two neutron stars has recently been observed in gravitational waves and
across the electromagnetic spectrum. Astronomers now know that such events
happen and that they release tremendous amounts of radiation and material, but
exactly how this release happens in a merger aftermath remains unclear.
Numerical simulations that include general relativity are the only way to
predict how merger processes unfold, but these simulations are made incredibly
difficult by the presence of turbulence, which creates fluid flow and magnetic
field features across a wide range of length scales. Small-scale flows do drive
changes in the merger remnant at large scales and so cannot be ignored. Although
computer simulations cannot yet directly capture all of this dynamics, a great
deal can be learned with current computing capabilities by parameterized
exploration of unresolved small-scale effects and post-merger initial states.
This project will pursue these strategies to shed light on how these exotic and
violent events produce their outflows and radiation. Carrying out these
simulations will involve training both graduate and undergraduate students on
techniques of computer modeling in relativistic astrophysics. The resulting
gravitational wave and nuclear debris data will be made available to all
astronomers working to detect and characterize these events.

The Washington State University will study three core problems of numerical
relativity--inspiraling binaries, differentially rotating neutron stars, and
hyperaccreting black holes--using the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC), a high-
accuracy numerical relativity code that includes magnetohydrodynamics, nuclear
microphysics, and neutrino transport. Inspiral simulations will study equation
of state effects on gravitational waves, and improvements to evolution
algorithms and smooth, causal equation of state parameterizations will be
explored. Post-merger dynamics of NSNS systems will be modeled, focusing on the
case of a hypermassive neutron star remnant. Simulations will track the secular
evolution to collapse under the influence of neutrino radiation, large-scale
magnetic fields, and subgrid-scale turbulence. Finally, neutrino effects around
black hole-torus systems will be analyzed using neutrino transport methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.