* 1806420
* RAPID: Testing for hurricane-induced natural selection that reverses the direction of morphological adaptation in Anolis lizards
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Jonathan Losos, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* John Long
* 11/30/2021
* USD 75,691.00

Hurricanes are extreme weather events that are predicted to increase in
frequency and magnitude because of increasing global temperatures. These intense
storms may result in strong natural selection for organisms living in vulnerable
populations in the path of the hurricane. The goal of this research is to
determine whether hurricanes are a source of natural selection acting on the
morphology of lizards, favoring lizards with longer limbs to better cling to
vegetation during high winds. To test this hypothesis, this work will study
anole lizard populations that experienced hurricane-force winds during Hurricane
Irma. It will determine whether lizard morphology differed before and after the
hurricane and if this results in an evolutionary response in the next
generation. This research will help to establish whether extreme weather events
like hurricanes can be a source of evolutionary change. It is critically
important to understand the consequences of extreme events to better manage and
predict patterns of persistence for vulnerable populations and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to determine
whether hurricane-force winds are a source of natural selection on the
morphology of Anolis lizards. During normal periods, selection favors shorter
limbs to enhance locomotion on narrow vegetation. Biomechanical studies show
lizards with relatively longer limbs run faster on broad substrates, whereas
lizards with shorter limbs for a given body size move more adeptly on narrow
surfaces. However, during hurricanes, the relevant aspect of performance becomes
clinging,instead of running, and selection should favor longer limbs for better
clinging ability during high winds. Lizards with longer limbs can more easily
wrap them around vegetation, which generates more force when clinging and should
better counteract the forces generated by strong winds during hurricanes.
Immediately after Hurricane Irma, Anolis lizard populations are predicted to
have longer mean limb lengths and higher survival for individual lizards with
longer limbs. During the post-hurricane period, individual lizards with shorter
limbs will survive better because selection will favor morphology better suited
for locomotor performance. By combining mark-recapture and genetic analyses,
this study will evaluate morphological shifts, estimate selection, and determine
the cross-generational response to selection. The goal is to understand whether
hurricanes reverse the direction of selection on the limb length of lizards by
changing patterns of selection on biomechanical function, from selection for
short limbs that are better suited biomechanically for navigation on narrow
surfaces to selection for longer limbs that are better for clinging on the same
substrates under high winds.