* 1806861
* Telecom-Band Rotational Cooling of a Heavy Molecular Ion
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brian Odom, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

This project is for developing a simple and inexpensive technique to use lasers
to control the quantum state of molecular ions held in radiofrequency traps. One
thrust of modern physics research is to gain full quantum control over
increasingly complex objects. Applications of such control include quantum
information processing, quantum-controlled chemistry studies, and improved
searches for dark matter and other physics beyond the Standard Model of
elementary particles and fields. Great success has been achieved in using lasers
to control quantum states of trapped atoms, but it is only recently that laser
techniques to control trapped molecules have become available. In this project
researchers will develop the first use of inexpensive telecom-band lasers to
optically control the quantum states of a new species of molecular ion, singly-
ionized Tellurium Hydride (TeH+). This will develop new technology needed for
fundamental physics studies, and it will train graduate students in atomic,
molecular and optical physics research methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides
having the right structure to allow telecom-band optical control, TeH+ is of
astrophysical interest because Tellurium (Te) serves as a probe for testing
models of heavy element formation in stars and was in fact observed in spectra
from the recent kilonova event jointly detected by LIGO. TeH+ should be one of
the most abundant Te-containing species in space, but its use as a marker first
requires the observation of its spectrum in a laboratory. TeH+ is also an
attractive species for ion trap applications, not only because of the potential
for inexpensive state control, but also because of its intrinsic properties.
Being significantly heavier than most other molecular ions previously
investigated for state control, it would have lower motional heating rates in
quantum information processing applications and smaller second-order Doppler
shifts in precision measurements. Furthermore, TeH+ also has long-lived
vibrational states and a deep vibrational well, making its high vibrational
overtone transitions attractive candidates for optical-frequency probes of time-
variation of the proton-electron mass ratio. In this work, the researchers will
produce TeH+ in a molecular beam and will perform the first experimental
measurements of its spectroscopic properties. They will then demonstrate
rotational optical pumping in various schemes designed to optimize either
simplicity and cost or state preparation efficiency or
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.