* 1806908
* IGE: Preparing Graduate Students for Community Engagement
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anna Courtier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 490,101.00

Graduate education in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
traditionally focuses on preparing students to succeed in research-intensive
careers. Scientists and engineers are generally not taught how to engage with
the community as part of their research. teaching, or other long-term career
goals. Graduate students often do not know how to access training in community
engagement, are unaware of its importance, and/or lack the confidence or
experience to take part. This project, the Public Service Fellows Program, will
test a year-long professional development program as a means to prepare graduate
students to view public service as a responsibility that comes with their
scientific training. It will provide practical experience working with community
partners on science-focused issues and projects. Integrating public service into
STEM graduate student training will improve the practice of future generations
of scientists by teaching the specific skills and mindsets needed for community
engagement. This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) award to the University of Wisconsin-Madison will strengthen ties between
the scientific community and the public by training science and engineering
graduate students to develop meaningful relationships and impactful, mutually
beneficial projects with a wide variety of community partners. Graduate students
from any STEM discipline will be able to incorporate issues of public concern
into their career goals, whether they will pursue careers in academia,
education, outreach, business, or policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model being
tested is a "Learn, Prepare, Implement" sequence where public service fellows
will experience increasing levels of independence, beginning with a grounding in
foundational knowledge and progressing to a science-focused practicum experience
working directly with a community partner. Fellows will be able to design their
experience around one of four tracks: community-engaged teaching, direct
service, policy, and social enterprise. Assessment will focus on two primary
research questions: (1) What are graduate students' motivations to participate
in the Public Service Fellows Program? and (2) How do students' professional
identities change as a result of participation in the Public Service Fellows
Program, and what component(s) of the program are primary contributors to these
changes? The hypotheses are that community engagement will become a more
integrated part of the fellows' professional identities, that graduate students
who participate in the program will have an increased commitment to a community-
engagement, regardless of career path, and that the biggest impact will be due
to the in-depth practicum portion of the Public Service Fellows Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.