* 1806056
* Tremor decomposition: A method for determining which muscles are most responsible for a patient's tremor
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Steven Charles, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 06/30/2022
* USD 337,533.00

Tremor is one of the most common movement deficits. It affects patients
suffering from multiple disorders, including Essential Tremor, Parkinson's
disease, Dystonia, Cerebellar Ataxia (loss of control of bodily movements) and
others. For these patients, tremor makes activities of daily living (eating,
clothing, writing, etc.) difficult or impossible. Although medication and
surgical interventions have significantly reduced patient suffering, they are
only recommended for a subset of patients. And even in these patients,
interventions are only partially effective, leaving many patients without
effective treatment options. Surprisingly, there are few tremor-suppressing
devices available to patients. One might envision, for example, a wearable
upper-limb device (e.g. a brace) designed to suppress tremor. However, a
significant obstacle to developing effective tremor-suppressing devices is that,
currently, there is no way to know where (which muscles/joints) to intervene
because there is no key way of determining which muscles are most responsible
for a patient's tremor. The purpose of this work is to develop a "tremor
decomposition method" that can determine which muscles are most responsible for
a patient's tremor. In contrast to a "composition method" that would analyze
muscle activities to predict a movement at a joint, a "decomposition method"
works in the opposite direction, i.e., analyzes the movement at a joint to
predict what muscles are involved. The method can be applied to all types of
tremor, whether the tremor be pathological (e.g., tremor related to injury or
disease) or physiological (e.g., tremor common in healthy adults). Once the
origin of the tremor (or treatment target) is identified, the method can be
applied to a wide diversity of tremor-suppressing strategies. Finally, tremor is
an interdisciplinary problem, and tremor suppression requires expertise in both
engineering and neuroscience. Thus, research assistants (undergraduate and
graduate students) from both engineering and neuroscience will work together in
teams to complete all aspects of this research, leading to graduates who are
used to working together on interdisciplinary teams to solve problems of impact.
To assist the tremor research community in general, a website will be created
that will provide access to datasets and the computational methods developed,
including the ability to interact with the data to see which muscles contribute
to selected movements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
developing and validating a method, termed "tremor decomposition method," to
determine which muscles are most responsible for a patient's tremor (to enable
targeted tremor suppression in the future). The work builds on the Co-
Investigator's recent discovery of a solution to a problem that is
mathematically similar: surface electromyogram (sEMG) decomposition. Although
sEMG generation and tremor propagation are physically different, they are
mathematically analogous. Thus the first objective is to develop the tremor
decomposition method by applying the method used to solve sEMG decomposition,
i.e., to: 1) model tremor propagation as a mixture of sources filtered by
unknown impulse responses, 2) determine if the uniqueness requirement necessary
to perform decomposition from measurements of the output (joint displacement)
alone is sufficiently satisfied, and 3) adapt, for tremor, two methods (spatial
filtering and blind source separation) that proved successful for sEMG
decomposition. The second objective is to validate the decomposition method
across a range of tremor severities, movement conditions, limb configurations,
and subject characteristics using an existing data set collected from patients
diagnosed with Essential Tremor. The data set includes both input (sEMG) and
output (joint displacement), thus can be used to determine if tremor
decomposition can be performed from joint displacement alone. If not, the method
will be altered using a method similar to that used in the sEMG decomposition
work. The third objective is to apply the decomposition methods to the existing
dataset to determine patterns in tremor origin, i.e., to determine the
feasibility of time-invariant or even patient-generic tremor-suppressing
devices. Although the method is developed in the context of Essential Tremor,
the proposed method applies to all types of tremors and has the potential to
increase the efficacy of almost all peripheral tremor-suppressing
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.