* 1806216
* Collaborative Research: Neuroendocrine Modulation of Circannual Rhythms in Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/13/2017,08/31/2021
* Cory Williams, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 08/31/2021
* USD 637,390.00

Predicting how species might alter their annual timing in response to rapid
environmental change, including changes in climate, is constrained by
insufficient knowledge of the endogenous mechanisms animals use to keep time,
the cues used to adjust timing, and the extent to which programmed seasonal
cycles are physiologically malleable or plastic. This project investigates the
mechanisms that underlie plasticity in the seasonal induction of the
neuroendocrine signals that trigger the termination of hibernation and the onset
of reproduction in ground squirrels. Unlike most mammals, ground squirrels
spontaneously become reproductively competent in constant darkness, without the
stimulus of a changing photoperiod. As such, ground squirrels are an ideal
organism for studies examining non-photoperiodic control of reproductive timing.
Establishing the neuroendocrine mechanisms responsible for transitions between
life-history stages will identify target genes for monitoring adaptive genetic
responses to environmental change. This investigation integrates research and
learning by training graduate students in ecophysiology and neurophysiology,
providing opportunities for undergraduates to participate in laboratory
experiments. The project also includes outreach to Alaska Native and American
Indian high school students and undergraduates for inclusion in research and
aims to increase K-12 students' understanding of and engagement in research by
participating in Teacher Research Experience programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
hibernating mammals, a precise integration must occur between the central
nervous system signaling cascades controlling thermoregulation through the
termination of torpor and the subsequent activation of the reproductive axis;
however, the neuroendocrine modulators that regulate these changes and how they
are integrated are unknown. In seasonally breeding, photoperiodic vertebrates,
the pars tuberalis (PT) of the pituitary plays an essential role in the timing
of annual cycles, as it alters hypothalamic thyroid hormone availability by
secreting thyroid stimulating hormone in a light- or melatonin-sensitive manner,
which acts on neighboring hypothalamic deiodinase expressing cells. The PT
thyrotrophs themselves are now considered strong candidates for circannual timer
cells, driving a thyroid-dependent seasonal physiology. This research tests the
hypothesis that, in the absence of any photic cues, the termination of torpor
and onset of reproduction are triggered by spontaneous changes in hypothalamic
thyroid status driven by activation of thyrotroph cells in the PT. Additionally,
the project tests the hypothesis that plasticity in timing is driven by
temperature-induced changes in hypothalamic deiodinase activity and/or through
effects on downstream targets of the triiodothyronine signaling pathway that
occur independent of the PT.