* 1806260
* Experimental Flavor Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 590,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland. However,
the Standard Model as it currently exists, leaves open many questions about the
universe. These include why matter dominates over anti-matter in the Universe
(CP violation), the values of the masses of the fundamental constituents of
matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings among the quarks,
and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark matter. Most
explanations require the presence of new forces and the development of concepts
that now constitute what we call physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This
award supports research that addresses those questions that dominate BSM
physics. The research will be carried out at the LHC, which is the premier High
Energy Physics particle accelerator in the world and one of the foremost
facilities for answering these BSM questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Cincinnati group is a collaboration member of LHCb, an experiment
designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing b or c quarks at
the LHC. A goal of LHCb is to identify new physics in nature by examining the
properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New physics, or new forces, can
be manifest by particles as yet to be discovered, whose presence would modify
decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of the hadrons containing the b and c
quarks, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed indirectly.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the University of Cincinnati group to further
its study of rare decays of such heavy quark systems. Such decays can provide a
unique window into physics at an energy scale well beyond that accessible by
explicit production of new particles at colliders. The Cincinnati group's
emphasis will be on charm quark physics, in which the group has established
expertise. Any discovery of BSM physics would be a huge step forward in our
understanding of the fundamental physics of the universe. This award will also
facilitate the group's participation in the LHCb detector upgrade, that will
improve the overall ability of the experiment to fully exploit the LHC data
recorded through the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cincinnati group has
a strong companion education and outreach program focused on its QuarkNet Center
and its conduct of Masterclasses. Many students who join the research effort are
introduced to and engaged in the excitement of the science through these
programs and through the group's participation in the University's Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.