* 1806583
* Pinpointing with a Broad Beam: h/m and the Fine Structure Constant
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Holger Mueller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 710,000.00

The fine structure constant characterizes the strength of the electromagnetic
interaction and is ubiquitous in physics. It has been measured using methods
from across physics, whose agreement is a powerful confirmation of the
consistency of theory and experiment. Using well-measured fundamental constants
(the Rydberg constant and atomic mass ratios), the fine structure constant can
be related to the recoil velocity of an atom that has scattered a photon. This
project will use this relationship in order to measure the fine structure
constant with the highest precision ever. This will allow the research team to
test several extensions of the standard model, such as dark matter candidates,
and probe for a substructure of the electron, to test if the electron is indeed
an elementary particle. The measurement of the recoil velocity (which is
inversely proportional to the atomic mass) can also be used as an ultra-precise
realization of the unit of mass and thus a cornerstone of the revised
international system of units.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This experiment is based on
an atom interferometer. It uses a broad laser beam which comes extremely close
to the ideal case of an infinite electromagnetic plane wave. A powerful pulsed
laser will be available for this project, as well as an atomic fountain
accommodating the beam. A new geometry for the atom interferometer will be used,
vertically offset simultaneous conjugate interferometers (OSCIs). This will
cancel the effects of vibrations, gravity, and even the gravity gradient. The
project will measure h/m using a combination of Bragg diffraction and Bloch
oscillations with cesium atoms at an accuracy of 0.02 ppb. From h/m, the fine
structure constant will be determined with a target accuracy of 0.039 ppb,
limited by the accuracy of mAt/me. It is hoped that that improvements in the
cesium or electron mass measurement will reduce the error in the fine structure
constant to 0.02 ppb. Already now, such measurements of the fine structure
constant set stringent limits on several proposed particles. For example, scalar
and pseudoscalar bosons, vector bosons, dark photons, hidden-sector photons, and
axial-vector bosons would all be discoverable. This tests the standard model of
particle physics broadly and deeply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.