* 1806323
* IGE: Advancing and Strengthening Science Identity through Systematic Training (ASSIST)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sue Hum, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,997.00

Developing science leaders from underrepresented minority graduate student
groups such as Latinos, African Americans, and women remains a national
priority. Yet the barriers to success these groups face are often not adequately
addressed by traditional methods of mentoring and professionalization in
science. Minority-serving institutions are uniquely poised to foster diverse
science leaders, but they also require a systematic, integrated, program-wide
approach geared toward nurturing and validating students' identities as
scientists. This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) award to the University of Texas San Antonio cultivates science identity
by integrating holistic mentoring with systematic training in science writing
and public science communication. This program will test an innovative and
potentially transformative model for diversifying science that engages both
faculty and graduate students from the department of Environmental Science and
Ecology in a community-supported, holistic, and systematic approach. The project
will utilize a series of graduate courses, professional workshops, and
community-based activities that seek to foster and validate underrepresented
minority students' science identity. Nationally, these interventions may exist
informally, but they are rarely, if ever, fully integrated into a coherent
graduate STEM program. Developing diverse leaders in science professions is
crucial as scientists navigate interdisciplinary knowledge demands and cultural
challenges in a globalized and media-saturated world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this IGE project is to cultivate a science identity for underrepresented
minority graduate students through the acquisition of a knowledge base
(competence), the ability to perform science practices (performance), and the
acknowledgement by significant others in the field (recognition). The
researchers propose that fostering these identity components and making them
visible in scientific disciplines and public communities can be achieved through
three interrelated interventions: holistic mentoring, writing-to-learn science,
and public science communication. Holistic mentoring, both in and outside the
classroom environment will provide the underlying framework necessary to address
the needs and challenges faced by underrepresented minority students. In
addition, this project hypothesizes that holistic mentoring transforms the
challenges of systematic training in research-based science writing and public
science communication into opportunities to validate students' scientific
competence and leadership skills. The project will use a mixed-methods
assessment approach to analyze not only each intervention but also on the
relationships among all three interventions. Therefore, it seeks to provide an
evidence-based validation of the impact of holistic mentoring and systematic
communications training on cultivating a scientific ethos for underrepresented
minority graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals
of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate
education and to generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.