* 1806796
* Exploring Contacts in a New Era: Spin-Orbit Coupling and Dimension Crossover
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Qi Zhou, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,942.00

The pursuit of universal laws has been a long-term effort in physics. In
classical mechanics, Newton's laws could explain a vast range of phenomena,
including the falling of an apple from a tree and the orbiting of planets around
the sun. In quantum mechanics, however, it is much more difficult to identify
universal physical laws, since it is notably difficult to solve Schrodinger's
equation for quantum systems composed of many interacting particles. This is
unfortunate as the bulk of all systems consist of many interacting particles.
Ultracold atoms provide physicists a promising platform to reveal universal
principles in the quantum world. Due to the fact that the average particle-
particle spacing is much larger than the range of interactions between charge-
neutral atoms, the so-called "contacts" can be used to establish a variety of
potentially powerful universal relations, which are valid regardless of
microscopic parameters of the ultracold atoms themselves. Such universal
relations bring physicists a conceptually novel means to understand and explore
quantum many-body physics. This project will explore the use of "contacts" in
ultracold gases in the hope of identifying new universal relations in many-body
systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental developments offer
physicists unprecedented opportunities to study contacts and universal
relations. Synthetic spin-orbit couplings have been realized in many
experimental groups. These novel couplings fundamentally influence the short-
range asymptotic behavior of many-body wavefunctions and are expected to produce
unexplored universal relations. External trapping potentials can continuously
change the dimension of a quantum system. Traditional results derived for a
given dimension no longer apply in such dimensional crossovers. This project
aims to use spin-orbit coupling and dimensional crossover as unique tools to
explore a new era of contacts. Topics include delivering new universal
relations, engineering unconventional effective Hamiltonians for creating novel
few- and many-body states, and implementing contacts as a new scheme for tracing
quantum many-body phenomena. The outcome of this project will provide new
insights into bridging few- and many-body physics using
contacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.