* 1806429
* 2018 NSBP Annual Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 03/31/2019
* USD 349,994.00

PART 1&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists
is a combined professional scientific meeting and a student development
conference. Open to all, the NSBP conference provides more than 300
undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to participate in research
seminars, research presentations and professional relationship building across
various subfields of physics. In addition to participating in seminars and
sharing their research, participants are provided specific academic and career
advising and strategies for persisting in the field of physics today. The NSBP
conference offers support for women and under-represented minorities in
technical fields; it is one of America's most recognizable annual broadening
participation STEM events. Support for the conference is provided by the
Directorate for the Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Directorate of
Geosciences, and the Directorate of Educational and Human Resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2&lt;br/&gt;The National Society of Black Physicists
(NSBP) and the Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) are collaborating to present
the 2018 Annual Conference of the NSBP. The conference is both a professional
scientific meeting and a student development event whose main goal is to
increase the numbers of under-represented minorities involved in the physics
academic pipeline, as well as the broader US STEM workforce pipeline. Based on
the understanding that socialization among seasoned members of a field and early
career workers increases the chances for younger persons to develop career
identities and success skills, the meeting aims to promote the participation of
African Americans in the physical sciences. The influence of professional
scientific meetings on the outcomes of broadening participation of
underrepresented minorities is of particular interest at the conference. The
conference's unique attendee pool will facilitate the development of student-
professional mentor pairings. An external evaluation of the proposed project
will provide the framework for longitudinal data collection by integrating data
collection methods into the conference communications and planned activities. An
external evaluation will focus on judging the value of the conference in terms
of its ability to achieve the goals related to both broader impacts and
intellectual merit criteria. The intellectual merit of the awarded work rests in
discerning features and practices that are relevant to interactions, both
tangible and intangible, that may contribute to career identity formation,
workforce development and career success in URMs in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.