* 1806079
* Automated Search for Materials for Ammonia Synthesis and Water Splitting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Aaron Holder, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2020
* USD 136,329.00

The use of renewable electricity and solar energy to convert water, carbon
dioxide, and nitrogen into energy-dense fuels and high-valued chemicals can
improve the storage and utilization of intermittent solar and wind energy. This
technology for "solar fuels" has benefits in utilization of renewable energy
sources into value added chemicals used to make industrial products. This
project supports fundamental research of the discovery of advanced catalysts for
a wide range of redox reactions. When conducting new materials discovery, for a
given family of promising material compositions, only a fraction of materials
will have desirable properties for the targeted reaction applications. For many
of these solid-state materials, the chemical equilibria and driving forces for
chemical reactions are unknown. Statistical learning approaches have been
developed which can extract information from large quantities of data to train
highly reliable "artificial intelligence" models for predicting properties of a
new material system. In this project, the principal investigators are using
machine learning approaches applied to experimental data for hundreds of
materials to predict the stabilities, structures, and chemical reactivity of
hundreds of materials. The predicted properties can then be used to identify
candidate materials for catalyzing technologically-important reactions, such as
splitting water into oxygen and hydrogen, converting carbon dioxide into useful
products, or the 'green' synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and water. The
models are being made available on public repositories such as machine learning
computer codes, and through publicly-accessible materials databases. The project
is training high school, undergraduate and graduate students in the application
of state-of-the-art machine learning methods for chemistry, chemical
engineering, and materials science applications. The research is integrated with
education and outreach through the PI's participation in the Broadening
Opportunity through the Leadership and Diversity (BOLD) Center at University of
Colorado, and the incorporation of new concepts in machine learning and
chemistry within the PI's courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply
machine learning approaches for the discovery of new oxide and oxynitride
materials at scale for catalyzing splitting water into oxygen and hydrogen or
the 'green' synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and water. The chemical driving
forces for the reactions involved in splitting water and ammonia synthesis
depend critically on the energy to create an oxygen vacancy in the oxide or
oxynitride material. In this project, The PI is using machine learning
approaches trained on a set of oxygen vacancy formation energies that were
calculated quantum mechanically. This project is complementary and leverages
grant CHE 1800592 that focuses on the development of the machine learning
methods and datasets. The predicted properties can then be used to identify
candidate oxides and oxynitrides for catalyzing splitting water or ammonia
synthesis. This project combines expertise in electronic structure,
thermodynamics, computational materials science, and machine learning to study a
central property of oxides - their oxygen vacancy formation energies, EV. The
data-driven approach takes advantage of results showing that EV depends
systematically on various materials properties, such as the electronic band gap
and the enthalpy of formation of the material. The researchers will apply
machine learning methods to model EV directly, using quantum mechanically
calculated EV data for several hundred materials for training and descriptor
extraction. The resulting descriptors are being used to predict EV for unique
oxide and nitride compositions, and in turn, will enable the computation of
millions of reaction equilibria for the oxidation and reduction reactions for
water splitting and ammonia synthesis mediated by these materials. Despite the
enormous technological and economic importance of advanced oxides and
oxynitrides in a broad range of technologies, much is still unknown about the
detailed behavior that give rise to their chemical properties. Potential
applications of the new techniques and thermochemical databases produced by this
project include thermochemical water splitting using redox materials, ammonia
synthesis by chemical looping, oxidation of materials, the carbothermal
reduction of oxides, oxygen separation membranes, and solid oxide fuel cell
electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.