* 1806129
* Assessment of Hurricane Marias impact and subsequent effects of ecosystem regeneration and heavy metal inputs in an urban coastal wetland
* EHR,HRD
* 12/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Elvira Cuevas, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The Nation Science Foundation-supported Center for Innovation, Research and
Education in Environmental Nanotechnology at the University of Puerto Rico - Rio
Piedras is dedicated to the development of nanomaterials and devices to address
environmental pollution, while developing a diverse science, technology,
engineering and mathematics workforce. The Center's research endeavors include
development of nanomaterials for water purification, soil remediation, and
resource recovery.

Center investigators submitted a Rapid Response (RAPID) proposal to the National
Science Foundation to conduct quick-response research on a natural disaster. The
combined paths of Hurricane Irma on September 6, 2017, and Hurricane Maria on
September 20, 2017, had devastating effects across the entire island of Puerto
Rico. The urban coastal wetland that serves as the Center testbed, source of
substrates for nanostructure development, and substrate for biofuel production,
was severely affected by the hurricane winds, and by massive flooding due to
fresh water flowing from upland sources.

Center research staff at the University of Puerto Rico Rio Piedras will (1)
assess hurricane impact and subsequent wetland regeneration: the substrate
source for nanostructure construction, substrate source for biofuel generation,
and the plant species to be used in combination with nanostructures for nano-
phyto remediation work, and (2) quantify the heavy metal inputs to the testbed
wetland.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Proposed research will contribute to knowledge concerning
the impact of extraordinary natural climatological events, such as a massive
hurricane and the subsequent climatological conditions in the area, impact
regeneration dynamics of an urban coastal wetland system, and its capacity for
heavy metal remediation.

BROADER IMPACT: Proposed work will advance discovery and understanding of how
massive hurricane impacts affect coastal wetlands under a framework of urban and
industrial conditions. Project activities provide hands-on training and
learning, by involving graduate and undergraduate students in research. The
project will broaden the participation of under-represented groups in science
technology, engineering and mathematics fields.