* 1806974
* The Search for Light Dark Matter with DAMIC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Paolo Privitera, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2022
* USD 839,240.00

There is strong cosmological and astrophysical evidence for cold dark matter as
a major constituent of the universe. A compelling explanation is the existence
of hitherto unknown Weakly-Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs), and a world-
wide experimental effort is on-going to test this hypothesis. The nature of Dark
Matter, so far elusive, constitutes one of the most fundamental questions in
science. Its discovery as a yet unknown particle would have profound
implications in our understanding of the universe, and open new directions in
particle physics and cosmology. With this award the DAMIC program will search
for DM candidates beyond the heavy WIMP hypothesis by detecting nuclear and
electronic recoils induced by light DM in charge coupled devices (CCDs). The
DAMIC experiment currently in operation at SNOLAB has demonstrated unique
sensitivity for low-mass DM particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immersive research
experiences, engagement of the local community and innovative partnerships will
bring DM science to formal and informal audiences. Research experiences
developed in collaboration with programs focused on underrepresented groups -
e.g., U. Chicago and Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge - will enhance diversity at the
graduate and undergraduate levels. The local community will be broadly engaged
in Chicago by integrating high school URM students of the Space Explorers
Program and of the STEM Science Inquiry and Research program in a stimulating
research environment, by enhancing the RISE program for URM middle-school
students and by communicating science to older adults via the Life-long Learning
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DAMIC at SNOLAB will stride to the forefront in
the search for low-mass (&lt;5 times the proton mass) WIMPs by the end of 2018.
DAMIC-M will capitalize on the DAMIC experience at SNOLAB and, at the same time,
take a giant leap forward in sensitivity by radically innovating the detector
technology. Its 36 Mpixel CCDs will be the most massive ever built, 20 g each. A
novel concept for signal readout - based on the averaging of repetitive,
uncorrelated measurements of the pixel charge - will result in the high-
resolution detection of single electrons. By counting individual charges in a
detector with extremely low leakage current - a combination unmatched by any
other DM experiment - DAMIC-M will break new ground in the exploration of the
hidden sector, which may be rewarded with serendipitous
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.