* 1806501
* Multiscale Studies of Collective Behavior in a Model Social Bacterium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Joshua Shaevitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 795,132.00

The ability of groups of individuals to form complex and dynamic spatial
patterns is a key aspect of biological phenomena ranging from collective
behavior to multi-cellularity to development. In a cellular context, this often
involves complicated chemical signaling and chemotaxis strategies. However, the
PI has recently discovered that some bacterial species have evolved to take
advantage of an active-matter phase separation that generates patterns without
the need for chemical signaling. This project strives to understand this process
from a physicist's perspective, but is hindered by a lack of tools to physically
probe the mechanical properties and interactions of groups of motile bacteria.
The PI's work with the single-celled bacterium Myxococcus xanthus focuses on the
molecular details of force generation and the interactions of cells at the start
of collective starvation-induced fruiting body formation. In this project, the
PI seeks to explain the process of fruiting body development as an active
dewetting process, linking new theoretical models with cutting-edge experimental
data. The PI's research goals are complemented by an outreach plan that aims to
involve more undergraduate students in biological physics and to engage non-
scientists through public lectures. The PI's goals over the next few years
include (i) expanding the Integrated Science program for first year
undergraduates, (ii) starting a summer school aimed at advanced undergraduates,
and (iii) putting on a series of public lectures in New York City meant to
convey the excitement and innovation of biophysics using examples relevant to
everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three aims below seek to determine the
role of motility and adhesion in driving starvation-based dewetting. The PI's
current models of Myxococcus xanthus aggregation rely on particle jamming in 2D.
While these incredibly simple models capture some of the observed phenomena, the
actual dynamics occur in 3D as the population dewets off the surface without
jamming to form round droplets. This more complicated reality requires more
sophisticated experimental data. The laboratory combines expertise in Myxococcus
xanthus motility, cutting-edge imaging techniques, force microscopy, and
computer vision analyses, making the group uniquely qualified to carry out the
proposed research. Aim 1: To understand the forces that cells generate on each
other and on a substrate, the PI will measure cell-cell and cell-substrate
mechanical interactions using a custom-built optical trapping microscope and
mutant strains that lack specific motor proteins and adhesion molecules. Aim 2:
To probe the motility of cells inside a fruiting body, the group will track
cells in 3D using confocal microscopy to (i) compare the motion over time and
between different locations in the aggregate, and (ii) investigate the formation
of layered structures and flows within the fruiting body. Aim 3: To probe the
macroscopic mechanics involved in fruiting body formation, the group will (i)
measure the development of droplet shape and rheology using confocal imaging and
atomic force microscopy, and (ii) probe the forces generated on the substrate
using traction force microscopy. At each step, data from the three aims will be
used to test, and be tested by, the active-dewetting theories being developed by
the group's collaborators. This project lies firmly within the goals of the
Physics of Living Systems program at the NSF by using physical measurements and
analyses to understand the dynamics of living cells across spatial
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.