* 1806776
* Exploring Gravitational and Nuclear Physics with Gravitational Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kento Yagi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

This project integrates a research program to reveal the extreme nature of
gravity and dense matter from gravitational wave observations with outreach
events on planetarium shows, public lectures and summer camps to expose the
public to frontier research fields in physics. Such an integrated program is
extremely timely, as gravitational waves were detected directly for the first
time in September 2015 using LIGO, which has long been funded by NSF, and the
era of gravitational wave and multimessenger astronomy has begun. The project
addresses fundamental questions in gravitational and nuclear physics: (I) Is
General Relativity correct in the strong and dynamical field regime of gravity?
(II) What is the nature of supranuclear matter? The proposed research
establishes a new framework for probing the extreme nature of gravity and dense
matter physics with gravitational wave observations. Such a research program
will significantly enhance the ability of extracting the scientific return from
current and future observations. Understanding the extreme nature of gravity and
dense matter may bring implications also to other fields, including particle and
high energy physics and cosmology. The outreach part of the project tries to
develop public's interests, curiosity and enthusiasms in science by connecting
them to the frontier scientific research on gravitational waves through multiple
outreach events. Such activities allow the PI and collaborators to directly
reach, inspire and excite, in particular, the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are (i) to maximize the
ability of extracting gravitational physics information from the currently-
available gravitational wave data, (ii) to consider new sources of gravitational
waves as probes of strong and dynamical field gravity and (iii) to reveal how
accurately one can determine the equation of state for supranuclear matter with
current and future gravitational wave observations. PI Yagi will take the
following methodology to achieve the above research goals. On the gravitational
physics front, the PI's team will focus on studying corrections away from
General Relativity entering in the amplitude of gravitational waveforms that
have mostly been neglected. The team will also consider astrophysical stochastic
backgrounds as new sources of gravitational waves to probe strong and dynamical
field gravity. On the nuclear physics front, PI Yagi and collaborators will
carry out a detailed Bayesian parameter estimation study by including spin
precession and adopting universal relations for neutron stars that do not depend
strongly on the unknown equation of state. They will also study universal
relations among tidal parameters and nuclear physics parameters so that one can
directly probe the latter with gravitational wave observations. The educational
part of the proposal aims at conveying the historical discovery of gravitational
waves and the beauty of General Relativity to the public. PI Yagi and
collaborators will achieve this goal by displaying a planetarium show created by
collaborator Yunes at Montana State University at several different planetarium
domes in Virginia, including those at James Madison University and Radford
University. The PI and collaborators at James Madison University will also host
a summer camp on General Relativity and gravitational waves for middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.