* 1806124
* EAR-PF: Investigating the utility of cherts for constraining the long-term evolution of oxygen isotopes in the oceans
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Justin Hayles, Hayles                  Justin         A
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Justin Hayles has been awarded a postdoctoral fellowship to work with at
Rice University and Pennsylvania State University to study oceanic oxygen
isotope compositions of seawater throughout Earth history. The ocean is the most
important reservoir of oxygen on Earth's surface. Its isotopic composition
varies with ice volume and is influenced by interactions with the solid Earth on
million-year timescales. Marine minerals record these variations: they inherit
the oceans' oxygen-isotope composition. Marine mineral systems, however, show
long-term secular variations that are not easily explained by changes in
temperature or ocean isotopic composition exclusively. The ocean is thought to
be buffered by high- and low-temperature interactions between seawater and
seafloor rocks. If these interactions do not vary on billion-year timescales,
the oxygen-isotope compositions of marine sedimentary rocks mostly relate to
changes in seawater temperature and global ice volume. However, if these
interactions do vary there could be a secular change in the oxygen isotope
composition of seawater toward heavier compositions. By measuring the triple-
oxygen isotope composition of ancient chert samples, it will be possible to
constrain oceanic oxygen isotope compositions and ultimately advance our
understanding of the surface environment throughout Earth history. The PI will
work with undergraduates on research projects and provide outreach to local
schools through career day events.

Recent experimental results have demonstrated that silica, precipitated under
most common Earth surface conditions, forms with a predictable temperature
dependent offset in oxygen isotope composition from the water which its oxygen
was ultimately derived. In practice, the oxygen fractionation based
geothermometer system depends on the assumption of the oxygen of the water. By
constraining this relationship, it is possible to fully constrain the oxygen
isotopes and temperature which the silica formed from. However, because marine
cherts are nearly ubiquitously diagenetically altered it is necessary to
determine what effects, if any, there will be on the determination of seawater
oxygen using this method. The effects of diagenetic alteration of marine cherts
will be done through the characterization and triple oxygen isotope analysis of
silica phases from the Miocene to Pliocene Monterey and Sisquoc formations of
Southern California where three phases of silica (Opal-A, Opal-CT and
microquartz) are known to exist.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.