* 1806604
* Microscopy of Bosonic Fractional Quantum Hall States in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Markus Greiner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 540,000.00

Fractional quantum Hall states, discovered by Tsui, Stormer and Gossard in two-
dimensional electron systems, represent new states of matter that contain a
novel kind of order - topological order. Understanding the physical origin that
gives rise to such a behavior will profoundly enhance our perspective on
topological materials and is promising for future applications such as
topological quantum computers. However, the microscopic physics and quantum
properties such as entanglement cannot be probed directly in quantum Hall
condensed matter materials. Therefore, this project will build a model system
using ultracold atoms in optical lattices. The atoms behave fully quantum
mechanically and can serve as a quantum simulator. A quantum gas microscope
enables full microscopic control, and will enable this team to shed light on the
microscopic origin of fractional quantum Hall physics, and to directly probe
quantum entanglement, which is essential for the future use of topological
materials in quantum information. This project will also train students in
atomic physics and condensed matter physics, and will help prepare them to
participate in the high-tech work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its
discovery as quantized Hall conductance at fractional Landau level filling, the
quantum Hall effect has been subject to intense theoretical and experimental
study. Yet the microscopic mechanisms giving rise to many associated phenomena
are not well understood, for example the nature of the many-body ground state,
excitation properties (in particular the depedence on defects) or the role of a
lattice structure. Theoretical studies suggest the fractional quantum Hall (FQH)
effect should exist both for bosonic and fermionic particle statistics and have
shown that the complexity arises from the interplay of strong interactions among
the particles and topological features. This project will realize a system
exhibiting the FQH effect by creating a strong synthetic gauge field in a few-
boson system on a two-dimensional optical lattice. With the manipulation and
detection techniques of a quantum gas microscope with single site resolution,
this team will be able to determine the many-body state of the system by
analyzing the density distribution on the level of single atoms. Furthermore,
this team will work towards characterizing the global entanglement associated
with the topological order by measuring the entanglement entropy of the system
with a Hong-Ou-Mandel-type interference experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.