* 1806738
* NSF-BSF: Elementary Particle Physics with ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Allen Mincer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,940,000.00

This award will provide support for the NYU group working on the ATLAS
experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle
detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and
other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the
Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model"
(SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics from the current run and by means of further upgrades of the
LHC and ATLAS to follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, the NYU group will
be studying Higgs decays, searching for evidence of supersymmetry and exotic new
states of matter through several approaches, including the reaction process
known as Vector Boson Fusion, and will be developing novel approaches to the
reconstruction and study of high energy Jets. NYU will partner with the Weizmann
Institute of Science through support from the US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation program to search for the decays of Higgs boson decays to charm quark
pairs, through heavy flavor tagging. Here the joint NYU-Weizmann effort will
exploit advanced machine learning techniques to identify and select such
challenging final states in Higgs decay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
projects include improvements and refinements of the ATLAS trigger for missing
energy, a key variable in the searches for new physics, and track triggering, an
essential technique for dealing with reconstruction of events in very high rate
collisions, which are endemic at the LHC. The group also helps to lead a smaller
experimental effort called milliQan, whose objective is to search for
fractionally charged particles that might be produced at the
LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYU group's broader impacts efforts are extensive.
For general audiences, the NYU exhibit on the LHC is estimated to reach large
numbers of school-age children, and the "Higgs Hunters" project has engaged
users from a variety of age groups in significant numbers. For secondary school
educators, workshops are also planned at NYU to familiarize and educate teachers
with some of the state of the art tools used in the particle physics domain, to
provide them with background to bring new knowledge to the classroom.
Additionally, the analytical projects of the group, which include statistical
applications, machine learning, and analysis preservation tools and techniques,
can be extended to fields outside of physics, and young researchers supported
under this program will have training in such innovative and cross-cutting
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.