* 1806904
* IGE: Partnership with Researchers in Industry for Doctoral Education (PRIDE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Helen Columba, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 440,743.00

Use-inspired research often addresses critical societal needs more directly than
traditional curiosity-driven research, and industrial research efforts are
generally more closely aligned with use-inspired research. While many of the
skills and competencies needed for both types of research are overlapping or
complementary, graduate students may not have the opportunity to fully explore
industry-related skillsets and mindsets in a traditional academic setting.
Stronger collaboration between industry and academia can bridge this gap, with
most institutional approaches involving a short-term industry internship. This
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to
Lehigh University will test a graduate training model that represents a student-
centered, holistic approach that gives students long-term, hands-on industry
experience. A key feature of the approach is early and sustained industry
engagement, with industry partners involved in identification of the research
question that forms for the basis for the student's thesis, mentoring, delivery
of professional development modules, and supervision of students during a
company residency (similar to medical school training). This approach is
patterned after successful programs in France, Germany and the UK, with the
intent of testing the model in the United States. It is hypothesized that the
approach will train graduate students more effectively to engage in use-inspired
research and prepare them with the skills and knowledge necessary to thrive in
an industrial setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pilot and test
several key features of this use-inspired research training model: (a) a pre-
program summer experience with a company to identify a research topic; (b) co-
advisers from the university and partner company; (c) modular, graduate-level
professional development co-taught by faculty and industry researchers; and (d)
a one to two semester company residency. The effectiveness of these four
elements will be assessed using a mixed-methods approach, with an eye toward
critical student skillsets identified through a gap analysis with industry
partners. The study will use both longitudinal data from individual students as
well as comparisons to non-participatory control groups. The findings will
inform our understanding of the most effective ways to experientially open
industry career paths for STEM graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.