* 1806408
* Operation of the HAWC Gamma Ray Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jordan Goodman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,025,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high energy
gamma-rays. With its large instantaneous field of view and continuous operations
HAWC surveys two-thirds of the sky every day. HAWC observations have provided
new views of the high energy sky and led to the discovery of new sources. This
award to the University of Maryland College Park supports the continued
operation of HAWC. This award will also support HAWC's public outreach programs
that include outreach to the Hispanic-American community with bi-lingual
products related to HAWC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAWC will continue to perform
deep surveys of the gamma-ray sky and will observe a large sample of gamma-ray
sources with measurements of flux, spectra and variability. HAWC's wide field
and high sensitivity enable studies of extended sources and diffuse emission
from the Galactic plane. HAWC plays an important role in multi-wavelength and
multi-messenger astrophysics campaigns. The University of Maryland plays a
critical role in HAWC operations. The PI serves as U.S. Spokesperson for HAWC
and the Co-PI serves as HAWC Data Manager. With this award they will continue to
operate and maintain the HAWC observatory, maintain the US data archive, and
provide public data access to sky maps and real-time transient
alerts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.