* 1806381
* Coupling Force, Tension and Cell Plasma Membrane Plasticity at the Nanoscale Functional Roles of Caveolin Nanodomains
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Fabien Pinaud, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Mechanical forces exerted at the cell plasma membrane (PM) direct many important
cellular and tissue processes, including cell adhesion, migration and
invasiveness. In these processes, the membrane curving protein caveolin 1 (cav1)
and the different types of nano-scale domains it forms at the PM are emerging as
critical mechano-transducing hubs and tension buffering structures of mammalian
cells. Yet, the structural plasticity of cav1 nano-scale domains and their
functional coupling to the local mechanical and tension states of the PM are
still enigmatic. Consequently, some of the fundamental mechanisms by which the
cell membrane adapts to varying forces at the nano-scale remain undefined. This
project aims at understanding how cav1 nano-scale domains modulate the PM
structure in response to mechanical cues and at defining the core physical
principles that govern PM plasticity, maintenance of membrane tension and proper
cell response to forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be implemented
through a multidisciplinary approach that integrates super-resolution (SR)
microscopy imaging, optical force sensing, engineering of bio-materials for cell
mechano-biology, quantitative biophysics and modeling. It will (i) define,
quantitatively, the nano-scale organization of cav1 nano-scale domains at the
cell PM, (ii) establish their plasticity in response to specific PM forces,
(iii) determine how they locally regulate PM tension and (iv) provide physical
models of their functions as key PM tension modulators. By its original and
multidisciplinary nature, the project engages its participants in highly
interdisciplinary research. It will provide them with skills that match the
current convergence between cell biology, physics and engineering research. The
proposed activities also provide a platform integrating modern technology and
cross-pollination science for traditionally underrepresented students at the
undergraduate and high school levels, through (i) hands-on experimentation with
imaging probes, cell culture and microscopy imaging, (ii) outreach projects and
(iii) educational activities. Economically disadvantaged undergraduate and high
school students will be recruited via established programs at USC and through
outreach to high schools in the Greater Los Angeles Area. In particular, an
8-weeks Summer Internship organized by the PI and Co-PI together with the
Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) program at USC will be
offered to high-school students over the course of the project. Experience and
knowledge gained by actively taking part in the project will attract this
younger generation of scholars to the field of Biophysics and will provide them
with strong scientific foundations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functional influence
of cellular adhesion forces on the 3D plasticity of cav1 nano-domains and their
spatial coupling to sub-membranous actin fibers and focal adhesions (FAs) will
first be established by correlative 3D SR microscopy, robust spatial correlation
analyses and modulation of adhesion geometry for micro-patterned cells. This
will provide new understanding of the homeostatic PM functions of cav1 nano-
domains as cells respond to specific mechanical constraints. The plasticity of
cav1 nano-domains will then be quantitatively correlated with extra- and
intracellular picoNewton forces developed along the PM at FAs by combining
optical force sensor measurements, SR microscopy and cell micropatterning. This
will shed new light on the role of cav1 as a mechano-transducer of
extra/intracellular forces at the cell surface. Using quantum dot tracking of
curvature- and non-curvature-coupled PM receptors together with 3D SR microscopy
of cav1 nano-domains in live cells, the functional roles of cav1 nano-domains as
local modulators of PM tension will then be established. This will reveal how
they participate in adaptive coupling between local PM tension and cellular
force generation on substrates. Finally, physical models describing the
plasticity of cav1 nano-domains as a function of local membrane tension will be
conceived and tested quantitatively to define some of the core physical
principles that govern the adaptation of the cell PM to forces. Beyond offering
new optical tools and original methodologies to study the function of PM nano-
structures in cells, this work will bring novel insights into the physics of
living systems by providing a mechanistic understanding of the physical
principles that dictate PM plasticity and adaptation to forces at the nano-
scale. This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems
program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular Dynamics and Function
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.