* 1806915
* Fundamental Processes in Formation, Dynamics, and Destruction of Molecular Ions in Cold Plasma and Ion Traps
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Viatcheslav Kokoouline, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2022
* USD 223,842.00

Molecular plasma is the gaseous state of matter which occurs when a significant
fraction of the constituent molecules are ionized, such that free electrons and
molecular ions (molecules with missing electrons) move and collide with each
other. Such colliding electrons and molecular ions initiate a network of
chemical reactions, and these processes determine various properties of the
partially ionized gas. Due to the richness of its chemical properties, such
systems have many technological applications. These include the semiconductor
industry, where they are used to fabricate integrated circuits. They also occur
in thermonuclear fusion efforts, in medical physics (plasma healing), in high-
power chemical lasers, and in depollution technologies. The observation of the
molecular ionized gas present in the interstellar medium and the upper
atmosphere allows researches to study its properties using ground- and space-
based telescopes. For its efficient use in applications, it is important to
understand and predict the behavior of the ionized gas under different
conditions (temperature, density, presence of other molecules, etc.). High
chemical reactivity makes this difficult. Because the behavior is governed by
microscopic processes such as electron-ion collisions, a quantum mechanical
approach is necessary to determine properties and to predict macroscopic
properties. That is the goal of this effort. In this project, researchers focus
on two types of processes: destruction of molecular ions in collisions with
electrons and the detachment of an electron from negatively-charged molecular
ions due to radiation. There processes are important for cold molecular plasmas,
at room temperature and below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the significant
progress in theoretical description of fundamental mechanisms in collisions of
electrons with neutral molecules and positive molecular ions in low temperature
plasma, there remain a few key mechanisms that require the development of new
theoretical methods. The need of the theoretical development is dictated not
only by a lack of fundamental understanding, but by very practical interests in
applications to plasma engineering, plasma-depolution technologies, and space
sciences technologies. One such problem that is extremely important in
applications, but not satisfactorily described by the present state of AMO
theory, is the branching ratios (BR) in dissociation of polyatomic molecules
after a collision of the positive molecular ion with an electron - dissociative
recombination (DR): branching ratios in DR with respect to electronic,
vibrational, and rotational states of the products. Another problem related to
even colder systems is how negative molecular ions are formed and destroyed.
There is no satisfactory theoretical approach that can describe the
photodetachment (PD) process accounting for the rovibrational structure of the
parent anion and the resulting neutral molecule, especially, for photon energies
near detachment thresholds, where rotational channels are coupled. This research
program will focus on two objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. The development of a set of
simple theoretical approaches to determine branching ratios in DR of small
polyatomic ions. A theoretical description of the BR is difficult because the
process involves non-Born-Oppenheimer coupling between motion of the incident
electron and rovibrational dynamics of the target.&lt;br/&gt;2. The development
of a theoretical method for the description of the PD process in polyatomic
anions and a study of the role of the weakly-bound electronic state in the PD
and the inverse process - radiative electronic attachment. In this project the
investigators will develop a theoretical method describing the PD process in
molecular anions with resolved rovibrational structure and accounting for the
correct near-threshold behavior and the multi-channel interaction in the final
state. The method will be applied to several anions that are important in
astrophysics and being studied experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.