* 1806581
* Discovery and Characterization of SAM-Dependent Pericyclases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Max Funk
* 07/31/2021
* USD 525,000.00

Nature uses enzymes to accelerate chemistry with high efficiency and
selectivity. Enzymes are employed in making complex materials known as natural
products. Many of these reactions are of importance to the chemical community,
and having stable enzymes to carry them out can lead to greener chemistry.
Gaining new understandings of how these enzymes function is therefore important
towards applications in the chemical industry, as well as discovering new
enzymes that are stable and powerful. This award from the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division examines the underlying properties
of a new class of enzymes discovered recently in the laboratories of Professors
Yi Tang and Kendall Houk at the University of California at Los Angeles: a set
of enzymes that catalyze pericyclic reactions. Pericyclic reactions are
immensely important in synthetic chemistry, as they can lead to the formation of
multiple bonds in a single step. However, only a few examples of such enzymes
exist and the chemistry is very limited compared to what can be done using
organic compounds. This set of pericyclases uses a partner, S-adenosylmethionine
or SAM, to catalyze a set of transformations never before seen in biology. This
propject combines a multidisciplinary team to study these enzymes using
biochemical, structural and computation methods. Results from this work can
illuminate the underlying basis of catalysis, and enables us to search through
other microbes for additional examples. The project also integrates an outreach
program that involves local high school students and undergraduate students in
our research laboratories to perform mentored research, and introduces them to
the power of enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pericyclic reactions are among the
most powerful synthetic transformations to make multiple bonds regioselectively
and stereoselectively. These reactions have been widely applied for the
synthesis of biologically active complex natural products containing contiguous
stereogenic carbon centers. Despite the prominence of pericyclic reactions in
total synthesis, however, only limited enzyme catalyzed pericyclic reactions
have been characterized over the past five decades. LepI represents a new family
of pericyclases (enzymes that catalyze a pericyclic reaction) that use
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) to catalyze biologically unprecedented reactions,
including hetero-Diels Alder cyclization and a [3,3]-sigmatropic retro-Claisen
rearrangement. The overarching goal of this project is to understand the
structural and mechanistic basis of the reactions catalyzed by pericyclases in
the LepI family, especially the role of SAM in catalysis and how periselectivity
(selective formation of one pericyclic reaction product) is controlled. A
combination of biochemical, structural and computational characterization
methods are being used to study the enzyme. The proposed studies are leading to
new insights into how nature catalyzes these challenging reactions and controls
the regio- and stereoselectivity, and will establish a new role for SAM in
enzyme catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.