* 1806007
* Investigating the impact of tumor heterogeneity on sustained low dosage immunotherapy via a peritumoral immunotheranostic hydrogel
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Bin Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 313,908.00

One of the most challenging aspects of cancer therapy is the uniqueness of each
patient's disease, which can result in significant delays in effective diagnosis
and treatment. This issue has become particularly critical for immunotherapy,
which is therapy that uses therapeutics (drugs) to modify or enhance a patient's
own immune system's ability to target and kill cancerous cells. Current
immunotherapy methods use a series of high dose infusions, e.g., injections, of
therapeutics into the blood circulation, which can severely disrupt the normal
function of the immune system, resulting in harsh and often unpredictable side
effects. For patients with melanoma (skin cancer) and other solid tumors,
responses to treatment depend on both the unique variety of cells within the
tumors and the therapeutics' ability to reach these cells and tissues. Thus, the
research objective of this project is to engineer a customizable delivery system
for investigating lower dose treatment strategies and for assessing the ability
of different therapeutics to reach critical immune and cancer cells within
tumors. The investigators will optimize and validate this system by measuring
the accumulation of therapeutics within tumors and cells of two mouse models of
melanoma, which are representative of two patient-specific disease differences
due to different tumor structures. As opposed to a series of high dose
infusions, these therapeutics will be administered in a controlled continuous
fashion at low doses to investigate sustained and localized immunotherapy. This
work may lead to a new immunotherapy treatment option with a lower number of
unwanted side effects. The educational objective of this project is to expose
undergraduate students and the public to the contributions of Biomedical
Engineering in the field of cancer research. A Cancer Engineering course for
undergraduates will be implemented to discuss fundamental engineering-based
strategies to treat cancer. An accompanying website will be maintained by the
students in the class that focuses on educating the public on how engineering
concepts enhance strategies for cancer therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to design and apply a novel system to investigate the impact of
tumor heterogeneity on the pathophysiology of the tumor microenvironment during
sustained low dosage immunomodulation. The project's first objective is to
tailor filomicelle (FM)-hydrogels for the sustained peritumoral delivery of
immunotheranostic (combined immunotherapy and diagnostics) micelles (MCs) and
biologics. FM-hydrogels will be customized to function as a tool for 1) real
time diagnostic assessment of tumor margin heterogeneity via magnetic resonance
imaging ( MRI), enabled by a DyLight 650 and Gd (gadolinium) tagged FM-
hydrogels; 2) the sustained low dosage delivery of an immunostimulant (IMQ
(imiquimod)) to induce pro-inflammatory stimulation of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells (MDSCs) and localized release of cytokine IL-12 from tumor
resident dendritic cells (DCs) and 3) the sustained low dosage delivery of IL-12
directly by loading the IL-12 within polymersomes (PS ) that will be covalently
retained within the FM-hydrogel. During in vitro studies, photo-oxidation will
be used to trigger the cylinder-to-sphere, i.e., FM-to-MC, transition and
release of PS payloads on demand. Studies were designed to test the hypothesis
that both IMQ and Gd will transfer from the FM-hydrogels to released micelles
during the cylinder-to-sphere transition and remain active. The project's second
objective is to investigate the influence of in vivo localized and sustained
delivery of immunotheranostic MCs and IL-12 to the microenvironment of
clinically relevant heterogeneous solid tumors. Two melanoma mouse models
(BRAF(V600E)/PTEN and B16F10) were strategically selected due to their
significant differences in vascular development and presence of
immunosuppressive cells within their microenvironments. The differences in
lymphatic drainage will be mapped and compared to provide insight into how
heterogeneity at the tumor margin can impact intratumoral targeting of
therapeutics and the interactions between nanomaterials and immune cells
critical to cancer immunotherapy will be examined. Studies were designed to test
two hypotheses: 1) that differences in tumor heterogeneity between the models
will impact lymphatic drainage and access of micelles to the tumor
microenvironment and 2) that sustained low dosage delivery of immunomodulatory
factors through the draining lymphatics of solid tumors will more efficiently
inhibit tumor-induced immune suppression compared to high dosage intermittent
injections. In addition to the potential to generate new approaches to treat and
monitor changes within tumors, the platform developed may be useful for
investigating sustained therapeutic dosing regimens, for assessing patient-
specific vascular and lymphatic access to tumors for personalized cancer therapy
and for investigating the impact of specific immunomodulatory factors on the
progression and growth of solid tumors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.