* 1806639
* Searches for New Phenomena at the Energy Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Dhiman Chakraborty, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 900,000.00

This award will provide support to a Northern Illinois University group working
on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle
physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large
particle detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from
NSF and other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to
find the Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard
Model" (SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between,
known particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been
successful. The next step in the experiments is to study the properties and
characteristics of this newly discovered particle as a laboratory to see if it
behaves as the SM predicts or if there are deviations suggesting evidence for
new physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account
for the presence of the mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the
mass of the universe. This group will participate in these studies. The LHC is
currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored earlier and
with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that evidence for BSM
physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher event statistics
from the current run and by means of further upgrades of the LHC and ATLAS to
follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate a detailed study of the Higgs Boson
and search for other new states of matter, the NIU group will be focusing their
studies on Higgs couplings, including self-coupling, in order to determine
whether this particle is the sole Higgs boson postulated in the Standard Model,
or one of multiple neutral scalar bosons postulated in various BSM scenarios.
Much of the analytical effort is focused on searches for pair production of the
only Higgs particle discovered so far. Additionally the group has had a long-
standing interest in the ATLAS searches for charged Higgs bosons featured in
certain extended Higgs models, and in differential cross section measurements of
Higgs boson decays into two gamma rays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIU group is
also engaged in the Phase 2 Upgrade of the TileCAL, hadronic calorimeter, and
experimental subsystem essential for energy and missing energy measurements, and
in advanced Fast Track Triggering for the experiment called the FTK, which is
central to being able to trigger on important physics objectives as the LHC
luminosity increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of the NIU group
activity is outreach to K-12 students, teachers, and the general public. Their
program includes an active QuarkNet center at NIU that hosts annual one-day
masterclasses, week-long workshops, and 6-8-week summer internships. The group
is also active in a variety of programs to engage the public, some hosted at NIU
and others at nearby Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.