* 1806631
* QuarkNet
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Marjorie Bardeen, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

This award supports the continuation of QuarkNet, a program which provides
valuable research experience to high school teachers, enabling them to teach the
basic concepts of introductory physics in a context that students find exciting.
QuarkNet has created an ongoing national community of researchers that include
high school teachers and students as well as physicists. QuarkNet's goals are to
maintain and enhance this community, to attract young students to careers in
science and technology, to help develop scientific literacy in society, and to
develop links between the high school classroom and experiments and techniques
used to explore the scientific frontier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key features of
QuarkNet are the establishment of mentor relationships between teachers and
scientists, summer research experiences for teachers, and the development of a
scientific and learning community within and among centers. QuarkNet provides
opportunities for teachers to become more professional, resulting in the
development of programming for peers in the center, in their schools and
districts and beyond. QuarkNet provides a centrally hosted, scalable, parallel
cyberlearning environment as a cloud-like service. Held at university and
laboratory centers, Masterclasses are institutes for teams of students who
become physicists for a day, analyzing real experimental data and discussing
results in videoconferences with peers and physicists. Under this five-year
award, QuarkNet will support more than 50 centers participating in a variety of
experiments at CERN, Fermilab and in non-accelerator and astrophysics programs.
In this five-year period, the QuarkNet Program will support: (1) the local
programs of the long-term QuarkNet centers for ~400 teachers per year who
receive stipends; (2) a few teachers with multi-week summer research
appointments to work under the guidance of physicists from a university or
laboratory near their homes should new centers join the collaboration; (3) 120
teachers who will attend a one-week particle physics Data Camp at Fermilab to be
immersed in an intensive experience to learn more particle physics and one that
models an investigation approach to inquiry teaching and learning; (4) 32
fellows with continuing training that gives them the knowledge and skills to
offer professional development experiences for other teachers; and (5) 100
teachers who will be involved with masterclasses. Over the five years
(2018-2022) this project is expected to reach, in addition to the teachers, more
than 150 physicists, and eventually well over 100,000 students. A portion of
this effort is supported through the NSF ATLAS and CMS Operations
awards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.