* 1806412
* Imaging the Yellowstone magmatic system with ambient noise and local earthquake waveforms
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Ross Maguire, Maguire                 Ross           R
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2021
* USD 189,500.00

This postdoctoral fellowship is awarded to Dr. Ross Maguire to work at the
University of New Mexico and Michigan State University on a project that will
develop a new detailed 3D image of the subsurface beneath Yellowstone. The image
will illuminate new aspects of the volcanic system that could provide insight
into the eruptive potential of Yellowstone. Much of Yellowstone National Park in
northwest Wyoming sits in a caldera that formed during a cataclysmic volcanic
eruption 640 thousand years ago. Today, geological activity shows signs that the
Yellowstone supervolcano is at unrest, but it is still unknown if a future
eruption could occur. Key insight into the current state of Yellowstone
supervolcano relies on imaging the subsurface with geophysical techniques. The
aim is to test the hypothesis that a layer of eruptible magma is present at
shallow crustal depths. The project will use recently developed seismic imaging
techniques that will allow resolution at a finer scale detail in the subsurface
than has been previously possible. The 3D model of the subsurface beneath
Yellowstone will be made openly available online and will provide an excellent
opportunity for public outreach and education about volcanic hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increased availability of rich seismic datasets
combined with recent advances in seismic imaging techniques using both seismic
noise and shear waves provides an exceptional chance to image the Yellowstone
magmatic system. The project will develop a high-resolution shear wavespeed
model of the subsurface beneath Yellowstone based on both ambient noise
interferometry and local earthquake records with the aim of identifying magma
bodies in the crust beneath Yellowstone caldera. Our model of absolute Vs
wavespeed will be used to infer the properties and distribution of melt in
Yellowstone's magmatic system and to gain insight into processes involved in
melt generation and interaction with the lithosphere. The improved imaging
technique used in this work will allow testing of the hypothesis that a melt
rich zone with eruptive potential is present beneath Yellowstone. Broader
impacts include dissemination of the results through Yellowstone National Park
to their multitude of visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.