* 1806885
* RUI: Multi-Messenger Astronomy with LIGO Gravitational-Wave Bursts
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michele Zanolin, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,969.00

The observation of the merger of two neutron stars in August 2017 with both
gravitational waves and light began the era of gravitational multi-messenger
astronomy. While much can still be learned from the mergers of two massive
compact objects, it is important to also be listening for other sounds in the
symphony of gravitational waves. Certain types of supernovae should emit
gravitational waves along with light as an old and massive star collapses into
an ultra-dense neutron star. Multi-messenger observations of these supernova
could help us learn a great deal about how and why these spectacular explosions
occur, and about the neutron star that forms as a result. Multi-messenger
observations could also be a key to unlocking the mysterious origin of short,
bright flashes of radio emission from space called fast radio bursts. This award
will also cover work in identifying and getting rid of sources of noise picked
up by the LIGO interferometers that can interfere with detecting real signals
from space. This work is particularly important as LIGO continues to look for
these new types of gravitational wave sources which don't have the
characteristic "chirp" that occurs when black holes or neutron starts collide.
Annual STEM outreach work serving the Navajo nation north of Embry-Riddle, also
supported by this grant, is one way in which LIGO members can share this new and
exciting frontier in science with the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts in multi-messenger astronomy, including
searches in coincidence with core-collapse supernovae and radio transients, will
enhance LIGO science while providing many opportunities for student involvement.
Core-collapse supernovae are an exciting target for multi-messenger astronomy.
The reconstruction of a gravitational wave from a core-collapse supernova would
address a number of open questions in astrophysics, including the mechanism of
the explosion itself as well as fundamental questions about neutrino
interactions and the neutron star equation of state. In the next few years, the
improved sensitivity of Advanced LIGO combined with more sophisticated
algorithms for detection and parameter estimation of supernova signals will
greatly enhance LIGO's contributions to supernova astrophysics, and future
interferometers carry even more promise. Another area of multi-messenger
astronomy which LIGO has undertaken is the search for transient gravitational
waves in coincidence with astrophysical sources of radio transients of duration
on the scale of milliseconds. These could be emitted simultaneously with
gravitational waves due to scenarios ranging from neutron star asteroseismology
to cosmic string cusps. Gravitational wave astronomy has the potential to shed
light on several types of radio emission, possibly including fast radio bursts.
The search for gravitational wave bursts is made more difficult by the presence
of transient terrestrial background, resulting from a combination of
environmental disturbances and behavior of the interferometers themselves.
Understanding these environmental disturbances and removing them from
interferometric data is critical in conducting sensitive searches for
gravitational waves, as it can mean the difference between a statistically
significant gravitational wave detection and a sub-threshold event. This grant
will support substantial effort in detector characterization, the identification
and mitigation of non-astrophysical background in the interferometers and
application of vetoes to eliminate them. This award also facilitates science
education and outreach at every level from high school to graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.