* 1806686
* Measuring Gravity at the Micron Scale with Laser-Cooled Trapped Microspheres: a Continuation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Andrew Geraci, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

This award is supported by the Gravitational Physics and the Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Experimental Physics programs. Gravity is by far the least
understood fundamental force of nature. One particular mystery has to do with
why gravity is so much weaker than the other Standard Model forces in nature. As
a number of recent theories have suggested, important clues related to this
"hierarchy problem" can be obtained by measuring how gravity behaves at sub-
millimeter distances. Such measurements could lead to exciting new discoveries
of physics beyond the Standard Model. However, the gravitational force between
massive objects becomes weak very rapidly as their size and separation distance
decreases, thus making ultra-sensitive measurements a necessity at sub-
millimeter length scales. This group is developing an experiment based on new
technology which could advance our understanding of gravity by several orders of
magnitude at the micrometer length scale. In this approach, a fused silica test
mass is suspended in a "container" made of light, leading to greatly reduced
friction and enhanced sensitivity. The students and postdoctoral researchers
working on this project will be broadly trained in experimental physics and
nanofabrication and will be well positioned for entry into the scientific
workforce. The fundamental nature of this project appeals to our sense of wonder
about the natural world. The nation will benefit from an improved understanding
of high-energy physics related to gravitational physics at the micron-length
scale, at a fraction of the cost of particle-collider
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an experiment which uses
laser-cooled trapped microspheres to test for Yukawa-type deviations from
Newtonian gravity at the micron length scale. By optically levitating the force
sensor, an exquisite de-coupling from the environment is possible, yielding sub
aN-Hz^1/2 force sensitivity at room temperature. This new technique could
ultimately advance our understanding of gravity at the micron length scale by a
factor of 1,000 to 100,000, and may lead to ground-breaking discoveries. In
addition to studies of short-range gravitational forces, the proposed
experimental technique will also enable novel investigations of Casimir forces
in unexplored regimes. The project is conceptually divided into three tasks: (1)
refinement of techniques to position levitated nanospheres within few-micron
distances from a source mass surface, (2) investigation of systematic errors in
preliminary gravity measurements, (3) in-parallel development of novel methods
for trapping and cooling the levitated nanoparticles, including sympathetic
cooling with cold atoms. One graduate student, one undergraduate student, and
one postdoctoral researcher will be broadly trained in experimental physics and
nanofabrication, and encouraged to present results at scientific meetings. By
participating in this highly interdisciplinary research project, students will
be well equipped for scientific careers. In addition, efforts to include women
and minority researchers in the project will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.