* 1806180
* RUI: Quantum Kinetic Studies of Molecule Formation and Destruction
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Robert Forrey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 183,576.00

Atomic and molecular collision processes are studied, with emphasis on the
calculation of state-resolved rate coefficients for systems of current
experimental and/or observational interest. A primary goal of this project is to
provide theoretical data for systems and processes where reliable experimental
data are either limited, or not currently available, thereby filling ?knowledge
gaps? that sometimes hinder the modeling of astrophysical or other environments.
This is particularly important for processes in which molecules are either
formed, or destroyed, as these are important in many applications, including
astrophysical models of photodissociation regions, protoplanetary disks of young
stellar objects, collisions within ultracold gases, and in searches for better
and less expensive catalytic materials for hydrogen storage. The project is
designed to integrate research, teaching, and educational outreach and to
provide an excellent opportunity for undergraduates to begin training for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel approach for calculating formation and
destruction rate constants will be employed which ensures detailed balance and
self-consistency with the steady-state solution of an underlying master equation
for any combination of kinetic and radiation temperature and gas density. This
approach is expected to provide a substantial improvement over conventional
kinetic models such as orbiting resonance theory, which are currently in wide
use. Applied aspects which aim to push existing methodologies in quantum
collision theory will be pursued. Dynamical de-coupling approximations will be
studied and benchmarked against numerically exact results obtained from full-
dimensional close-coupling calculations for collisions involving two diatomic
molecules. Large databases of collisional and radiative rate coefficients will
be developed in order to improve and extend the predictive capabilities for non-
equilibrium systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.