* 1806584
* Collaborative Research:  Probing Attosecond Dynamics in Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

An ability to identify, tag and follow unambiguously quantum trajectories of
electrons in molecular systems is central to addressing questions that are key
to unlocking solutions to an array of contemporary scientific and technical
challenges - understanding the chemistry of interstellar media, reducing our
carbon footprint, enabling efficient, clean energy sources and controlling
dynamics in biological molecules are just a few examples. Light-induced charge
dynamics, for example, is ubiquitous in catalysis, photosynthesis, the
photovoltaic effect, radiation damage in biomolecules and atmospheric chemistry.
With clock speeds of order 1 femtosecond (10^-15 s), the energy flow and
correlated dance between electrons and atomic nuclei require subfemtosecond
temporal resolution (e.g., 100 attosecond = 0.1 femtosecond) and carefully-
designed experimental techniques to track reliably. The University of Central
Florida (UCF) - University of Maryland (UMD) collaboration has assembled the
instrumentation and personnel to study such dynamics in important prototype
molecules. Specifically, charge dynamics will be probed experimentally by
transient changes in the absorption spectrum of so-called core-level states
(those closest to the nucleus) of the carbon atom. These novel measurements may
lead to new understanding of key physical concepts, clearer pictures of
fundamental processes and novel ways to control electron dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing a few-cycle infrared intense (IR) pump and an
attosecond soft X-ray probe in the water window (240 to 330 eV in this study)
for transient absorption of core-level carbon atoms, the University of Central
Florida (UCF) - University of Maryland (UMD) collaboration is investigating
ultrafast dynamics in two important hydrocarbons. One set of experiments is
dedicated to tracking structural changes induced by the IR pulse in methane as
it loses hydrogen atoms (deprotonization) with subfemtosecond temporal
resolution. The second study focuses on IR-induced isomerization of acetylene
into vinilydene also with subfemtosecond resolution. One novelty of these
studies rests in a forty-fold improvement in temporal resolution over previous
transient absorption measurements in the water window. The UCF-UMD collaboration
is ideally suited to carry out this investigation because of the investigators'
long history in building and operating state-of-the-art attosecond lasers (UCF)
and probing and controlling atomic and molecular dynamics (UMD). To ensure the
best interpretation of the experimental results, the team works closely with UCF
theorists running contemporary numerical codes such as XCHEM and MESA to help
analyze the data. The results will provide new insight into time-dependent
structure changes and correlated electron motion induced by strong external
perturbation, which potentially could reveal innovative ways to control electron
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.