* 1806213
* Collaborative Research: Causes and Consequences of Catastrophic Thermokarst Lake Drainage in an Evolving Arctic System
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Amy Breen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,488,193.00

Lakes are abundant features on coastal plains of the Arctic, providing important
fish and wildlife habitat and water supply for villages and industry, but also
interact with frozen ground (permafrost) and the carbon it stores. Most of these
lakes are termed "thermokarst" because they form in ice-rich permafrost and
gradually expand over time. The dynamic nature of thermokarst lakes also makes
them prone to catastrophic drainage and abrupt conversion to wetlands, called
drained thermokarst lake basins (DTLBs). Together, thermokarst lakes and DTLBs
cover up to 80% of arctic lowland regions, making understanding their response
to ongoing climate change essential for coastal plain environmental assessment.
Catastrophic lake drainage and subsequent ecosystem succession in DTLBs has long
intrigued scientists concerned with permafrost, vegetation, and carbon storage.
Less attention however has been devoted toward predicting where and when lakes
will drain and the magnitude and impacts of downstream flooding. A related
process, snow-dam outburst floods from existing DTLBs, has also been overlooked
so far in arctic hydrology. Floods generated from snow-dam outburst may help
explain abnormally large flood peaks in many arctic rivers and will be
increasingly important to consider for future petroleum development and the need
to expand roads and pipeline through coastal plain terrain. This research on
catastrophic lake drainage is relevant to improving our understanding of
permafrost and hydrological processes; identifying flood and ground stability
hazards; and predicting future vegetation, terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and
carbon storage dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of remote sensing,
field observations, and a lake-drainage experiment are targeted at understanding
the causes and consequences of DTLB formation and their broader feedbacks with
other arctic system components. Data collected in this study will feed into
future model development to enhance predictive capacity of hydrologic hazards
and landscape responses to climate change in the Arctic. Space-for-time
comparison of DTLB chronosequences provides the conceptual framework for linking
process scales. The new conceptual model emerging from this project is important
for a number of stakeholders and native villages, where water access, habitat
mitigation, and hazard avoidance are a priority. The understanding of hazards
and environmental processes gained from this research will advance the interests
of industry, land managers, and subsistence users on the Arctic Coastal Plain of
northern Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.