* 1806231
* Physics of Wind Musical Instruments
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Nicholas Giordano, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 11/30/2023
* USD 341,474.00

High performance computers are now powerful enough to enable accurate
computational studies of wind musical instruments based on the fundamental
equations of fluid dynamics. The results of this project will pave the way to
fundamental modeling studies of virtually all wind instruments. The students who
engage in this work will acquire computational skills that can be applied to a
variety of other problems in science and engineering. Indeed, modeling the sound
produced by a wind instrument involves the same equations and the same
computational issues that are encountered in studies of the sound produced by a
jet turbine, the motion of a flapping wing, human phonation, and other important
aerodynamics problems, so students involved in this project will be well versed
in the advanced computational modeling methods needed to tackle a wide range of
problems in science and engineering. Students will also learn about general
experimental skills that can be used to make the musical instruments modeled in
this project, as well as techniques for data acquisition and spectral analysis
required in the study of these new instruments. In addition, the PI will develop
instructional modules on acoustics and musical instruments for K-12 teachers and
students who participate in outreach programs at Auburn University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sound generation in wind instruments such as the recorder,
flute, trumpet, and clarinet involves the motion of a compressible fluid (air).
This motion can be extremely complicated, and can lead to vortex formation and
various nonlinear phenomena found in strongly driven fluids. The project
described in this proposal will use advanced computational methods to study the
fluid dynamics of air inside and around a variety of wind instruments, including
recorders, flutes, trumpets, and clarinets. This fluid motion is directly
responsible for sound generation, so the results of this study will lead to a
better understanding of the musical tones produced by wind instruments. The
computational results will also be compared with experiments performed with
custom made instruments, so as to test and validate the computational findings.
A first principles description of the fluid dynamics of a wind instrument
requires the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations, a set of nonlinear partial
differential equations. This project will obtain solutions of the Navier-Stokes
equations for a variety of wind instruments using state-of-the-art computational
resources and custom designed algorithms for multicore computer architectures.
These computational studies will be complemented with experimental measurements
designed to test specific qualitative and quantitative predictions of the
modeling results, leading to new insights into these instruments. Several
hypothetical new instrument geometries will be studied, work that may identify
new designs that produce specific tonal properties not found in current
instruments. This project will also explore how to model key aspects of the
player, such as the motion of the player’s lips and air flow through the
player’s mouth. The techniques that are developed in this project will be
applicable to all wind instruments and will therefore be of broad interest in
the field of musical acoustics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.