* 1806037
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding and Managing Ecosystem Change at the Forest-Peatland Ecotone
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andres Holz, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 17,514.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement project will investigate the impacts of
changing environmental conditions on the patterns and mechanisms of forest loss
and subsequent peatland expansion in temperate and other non-boreal regions.
Using a variety of methods, the doctoral student will reconstruct and compare
fire-climate-vegetation dynamics of the past century to those that have occurred
over the past millennium. The results of this project will reveal whether once-
forested but now peat-accumulating sites are novel ecosystems, or whether such
transitions have occurred in the past in these regions, possible due to drought
conditions and fire frequencies that are similar to those observed today. These
results are of interest to land managers, who require tools to determine how
best to manage altered ecosystems. By identifying whether (and which) ecological
thresholds have been crossed, this project will provide crucial input for
decision-making regarding best practices for land management. The doctoral
student will work closely with regional land managers and other stakeholders,
including land owners and educators, to ensure that project results are
available to inform collaborative land use decisions. The PIs will also engage
K-12 and college students in hands-on fieldwork, thus preparing future
scientists to employ multiple lines of evidence in investigating the causes and
consequences of environmental change. In addition, as a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a
promising graduate student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this doctoral
dissertation improvement project is to contribute to the scientific literature
on alternative stable states that result from changes in the fire regimes of
forested ecosystems. Using methods from paleoecology, dendroecology, and
community ecology, this research will examine fire-mediated effects on ecosystem
structure at varying spatiotemporal scales at the peatland-forest ecotone, a
transition zone that, like tree line, is particularly sensitive to changes in
fire and climate. The project addresses the following questions: (1) How has
fire activity during post-European settlement periods with distinct climate
conditions differed quantitatively from that of pre-settlement conditions? (2)
How has fire impacted the vegetation community of the forest-peatland ecotone
during the most recent extreme warm/dry and cool/wet periods? (3) What are the
mechanisms that favor a transition from forested to peat-accumulating lands in a
site? Specifically, the doctoral student will use tree-ring fire scar dates,
forest stand structure reconstructions, and sedimentary records to answer these
questions. In addition, surveys of present-day vegetation composition/structure
at control and burned sites will be paired with those of abiotic and biotic
factors to uncover the mechanisms underlying the persistence of the peat-
accumulating state. Although this project will focus on the forest-peatland
ecotone of southwestern Patagonia, the research will provide new insights and
approaches for dealing with the interactive effects of environmental change in
many other regions, including some in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.