* 1806355
* RUI:  Lagrangian studies of active mixing -- barriers, enhanced transport and collective behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Thomas Solomon, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 213,593.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the question of how
fluid mixing affects processes going on in the flow. During the past decade, the
principle investigator's research group has conducted experiments on the
behavior of reaction fronts moving in fluid flows. Those experiments have
verified a theory that predicts the existence of invisible barriers that block
the motion of reaction fronts in a flow. The new experiments apply very similar
theories to a seemingly very different process: the swimming of self-propelled
("active") tracers such as microscopic bacteria in a flow. The experiments
investigate whether there are invisible barriers that block the motion of
swimming bacteria and, if so, how these barriers affect both the individual and
group behavior of the bacteria. Ultimately, these experiments may lead to a
better understanding of blooms of harmful algae in the oceans that can damage
marine ecosystems; "self-assembly" of novel materials; the role of microscopic
flows in developing embryos; and the effects of moving populations on the
spreading of a disease. All of this research is done with undergraduate students
who play an active role in all aspects of the studies, including experimental
design, building and testing of the apparatus, data collection and analysis, and
publication and presentation of the results. These are the first real research
experiences for most of these students, and play an important role in their
development as scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Many fluid processes are heavily influenced by the manner
in which tracers are mixed by flows. This project is composed of a series of
experiments that study the mixing and transport of active (self-propelled)
tracers in a flow. Two strains of bacteria (bacillus subtilis) are used in the
experiments as the active tracers: (a) wild type bacteria, which follow a random
run and tumble trajectory in the absence of a flow and chemical gradients; and
(b) smooth swimming bacteria, which have been genetically mutated to eliminate
their ability to change swimming directions. The flows are either laboratory
scale, vortex-dominated flows or microfluidic flows on a small enough scale to
track individual bacteria. The experimental results are analyzed with a theory
proposed by Kevin Mitchell (University of California at Merced) that is based on
"swimming invariant manifolds" that act as one-way barriers to the motion of the
swimmers. This theory is similar to a theory of "burning invariant manifolds"
for reaction fronts that has been verified experimentally by the principle
investigator and his students to predict and explain one-way barriers that block
reaction front propagation. The research project addresses the following issues:
(a) the existence and topology of one-way barriers that restrict the motion of
active tracers in a flow; (b) the effects of nutrient gradients (chemotaxis) in
the flow on these barriers; (c) enhanced long-range transport of active tracers
due to a combination of swimming and fluid advection; and (d) the effects of
mixing and transport on collective behavior of the
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.