* 1806158
* I-Corps: High-Throughput Manufacturing of Three-Dimensional Nanostructured Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to better
identify the commercial opportunity for three-dimensional nanostructured
materials made via high-throughput holographic methods. These materials have a
truss-like structure at submicron length scales, giving them better properties
like improved strength-to-weight ratio. An analogy would be how we use trusses
for bridges instead of solid hunks of steel. This manufacturing method will
enable industrial-scale manufacturing of materials useful in multiple US
industries. For example, membrane separations are used, for example, in
biomedical testing, drug and therapeutic production, scientific research, and
water treatment. Optical devices such as cameras, microscopes, and lighting
could also be improved by various types of these three-dimensional
nanostructured materials.

This I-Corps project will identify the particular advantages of CHISEL
(coordinated holographic industrial-scale electromagnetic lithography), which
has the potential to greatly reduce the cost of three-dimensional nanostructured
materials. Conventional photolithography for making integrated circuits is high
quality, but slow and costly. Techniques such as imprint lithography are faster
and cheaper, but limited to making essentially two-dimensional structures.
CHISEL will enable continuous nanoscale manufacturing with high throughput. The
method controls the phase of several interfering optical beams to continuously
pattern a photosensitive material. A first-generation CHISEL tool (i.e. alpha
tool) can have a volume patterning rate several orders of magnitude greater than
conventional projection lithography (and with comparable or less capital cost).