* 1806577
* Gravitational Radiation from the Milky Way -- Searching for Continuous Waves from Spinning Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* J. Keith Riles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 868,390.00

The recent discoveries of gravitational waves from colliding black holes and
from colliding neutron stars marked key milestones in science, simultaneously
confirming fundamental predictions of Einstein's General Relativity, while
opening up an entirely new field of astronomy. The detection of continuous
gravitational waves from rotating galactic neutron stars will mark another major
milestone because such sources are expected to continue emitting for long
durations, allowing follow-up investigation of increasing
precision,&lt;br/&gt;including correlation with potential signals in the radio,
optical, X-ray and gamma-ray bands. Combining these gravitational and
electromagnetic signals will provide critical insight into the poorly known
structure of these exotic stars. The research to be carried out, on both the
instrumental and analytical sides, will provide training to undergraduate and
graduate students in state-of-the-art science at the frontier of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on a number of specific
areas related to the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (Advanced LIGO) Experiment: 1) searches for continuous gravitational
waves using methods developed originally by the Michigan group; 2) pioneering
new search methods that probe more deeply and computationally more efficiently
potential sources of continuous gravitational waves in binary stellar systems;
and 3) detector characterization of Advanced LIGO interferometers focused on
spectral&lt;br/&gt;line identification and mitigation, in order to improve
searches for nearly monochromatic continuous gravitational
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.