* 1806186
* Session on Fostering Engineering Mechanics Research Community Diversity and Inclusion; 2018 ASCE Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference; Cambridge, Massachusetts; May 31, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Sara Wadia-Fascetti, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2021
* USD 44,950.00

This workshop award will support a combined community panel and participant
networking conference session, focused on ways to foster diversity and inclusion
within the engineering mechanics research community by building a culture of
mentoring early career researchers, at the 2018 American Society of Civil
Engineers (ASCE) Engineering Mechanics Institute (EMI) Conference. This session
will be held on the morning of May 31, 2018, during the ASCE EMI conference at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, May 29-June 1, 2018.
This award will provide travel support for up to four invited panelists and up
to 13 early career engineering mechanics researchers from underrepresented
groups to attend the panel and networking session and EMI conference. The
invited panelists will share their research experiences and challenges during
their research career, and suggest career-building research strategies and
mentoring opportunities for early career researchers. This conference session
will support the engineering mechanics research community to develop a plan for
mentoring early career engineering mechanics researchers to enhance the
diversity and inclusion of the research community, and thus broaden the
perspectives and expertise to advance the progress of scientific and engineering
research and knowledge in the engineering mechanics field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this conference session are to: (1)
discuss the impact of role models in cultivating diversity and inclusion in the
next generation of engineering mechanics researchers, (2) identify the
challenges facing early career researchers from underrepresented groups in the
engineering mechanics community, (3) learn from and build upon successful
research mentoring activities from other research communities and academic
institutions, through the sage advice offered by the panelists, (4) highlight
the importance and impact of mentoring and networking on early career research
development, through the experience of mentees from prior National Science
Foundation-supported faculty mentoring programs, and (5) recommend steps that
can institutionalize mentorship activities for faculty to transition into
leadership roles within the engineering mechanics research community. The
outcomes of this workshop will create a positive and proactive culture for
networking and mentoring among the diverse engineering mechanics research
community. This award will produce a plan for mentoring activities to build a
diverse and inclusive engineering mechanics research community and will
disseminate the plan through a workshop report.