* 1806279
* New Lanthanide-Containing Silicate Fluoride Scintillators for Radiation Detection
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 499,773.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Border protection agencies, such as Homeland
Security, must be able to detect rogue radiation sources, for example dirty
bombs, before they are transported into the country. A pressing need exists for
large quantities of materials know as scintillators, which are used in portable
detection devices. Scintillators are materials that emit visible light when
exposed to radiation, and the better the scintillator, the brighter the light
and the smaller the amount of radioactive material that can be detected. This
research, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, involves the fundamental aspects of
crystal growth of improved scintillating materials and thereby advances the
field of radiation detection. In addition, this research project provides a
valuable educational experience for graduate and undergraduate students.
Conducting this research trains students in the art of crystal growth and
teaches them the concept of experimental design and methods optimization.
Overall, this research contributes to the education and training of a wide range
of individuals, including those from underrepresented groups, in the area of
solid state and materials
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One area where
the development of new functional materials can have a tremendous impact is
homeland security. There exists a pressing need for large quantities of
efficient scintillating materials for improved radiation detection. This
research focuses on the synthesis of new neutron, X-ray, and gamma-ray activated
scintillating oxides. Fluorine in mixed anion phases has been identified as one
element that plays a crucial role in the intensity of fluorescence, and it has
been demonstrated that fluorine can also increase the scintillation efficiency
of rare earth silicates. Specifically, it is known that luminescent oxyfluorides
in which the fluorine anions are located in LnOxFy polyhedra, such as in
Cs3LnSi4O10F2 (Ln = Eu, Tb), a recently discovered brightly scintillating
material, can exhibit scintillation as bright as Lu2SiO5:Ce3+. The targeted
crystal growth of fluorine containing mixed-anion phases takes advantage of a
recently developed enhanced flux growth technique that is known to yield
crystals of oxyfluorides and salt-inclusion silicates. To better understand the
processes involved in the formation of mixed anion phases in the various flux
environments that are used for synthesis of complex oxide single crystals, in-
situ neutron diffraction experiments are carried out to identify the optimal
growth conditions for preparing new scintillators in the laboratory as well as
to transform crystal growth from an empirical to a deliberate process.
Additionally, this research contributes to the education and training of a wide
range of individuals, including those from underrepresented groups, in the area
of solid state and materials chemistry, for example through collaboration with
Claflin University, an HBCU institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.