* 1806558
* Microwave Traps and Atom Interferometry with AC Zeeman Potentials
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Seth Aubin, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 365,000.00

This project will develop and characterize atom interferometers based on
ultracold trapped atoms on an atom chip. Atom interferometers are the most
sensitive force measuring devices ever constructed and are well suited for
precision measurements and detection of electric and magnetic fields, gravity,
and inertial forces, such as accelerations and rotations. Applications of atom
interferometers include inertial navigation in a GPS-denied environment, remote
sensing of underground structures, measuring atom-surface forces, and searching
for deviations of the gravitational force from the inverse square law. While
most atom interferometers operate with freely propagating atoms, one of the main
scientific goals of this project is to develop and evaluate atom interferometers
based on trapped atoms. Furthermore, the project will control these atoms using
AC Zeeman potentials, a novel and little explored quantum control mechanism for
applying forces on atoms using microwave fields generated in the vicinity of an
atom chip. Graduate and undergraduate student researchers will be trained in
atom interferometry, ultracold atom technologies, microwave engineering, and
micro-fabrication techniques, as well as in the broadly enabling sciences of
atomic and optical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
will construct ultracold trapped atom interferometers that are capable of long
phase integration times with well localized, positionable atomic packets. These
trapped atom interferometers will be spin-dependent so that the two arms of the
interferometer have atoms in different quantum spin states. The spin-dependence
will enable the interferometer to use atoms in many different spatial states so
that it can employ ultracold thermal atoms or degenerate fermions, which are
expected to suppress atom-atom interactions. The project will use AC Zeeman
potentials generated by microwave near-fields from an atom chip to implement the
spin-dependent forces and traps for the interferometer. Notably, the project
will design and micro-fabricate a microwave atom chip for efficient generation
of AC Zeeman potentials. An important objective of this project is to develop
and characterize AC Zeeman traps and potentials, and thus evaluate them for
inclusion in the toolbox of ultracold atomic physics
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.