* 1806593
* IGE: Leveraging Data Science Master Programs to Enhance Professional Readiness in STEM PhD Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Nechyba, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 478,443.00

Traditional STEM graduate education is primarily dedicated to training students
on how to succeed in academic jobs, despite the fact that most STEM PhD students
leave academia after graduation. This traditional approach to graduate education
leaves PhD students unprepared to enter the non-academic workforce upon
graduation. A lack of adequate preparation not only adversely affects the
students themselves, but also leads to missed opportunities for society, since
STEM PhD students often have precisely the deep technical background needed to
solve the growing number of data-driven problems society faces. This National
Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to Duke
University will test whether Master-level data science programs, which usually
have curricula that emphasize the professional skills and applied data skills
missing from most PhD programs, can be leveraged to improve the preparation of
PhD students. This project will test the outcomes of combining the applied
approach of Master-level data science programs with the depth and experience of
PhD STEM students. More specifically, it will determine which aspects of Master-
level professional curricula translate to PhD students. The results will provide
guidance on approaches to extend the impact of a growing investment in data
science Master programs to doctoral-level students and will inform the education
community on better preparing the next generation of STEM scientists to work
with and improve methods surrounding big data. In so doing, this project will
help strengthen the pipeline between universities and non-academic employers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate a select cohort of Duke's
STEM PhD students into Duke's Master in Interdisciplinary Data Science (MIDS)
Capstone projects with non-academic partners, and include the selected PhD
students in the professional development activities of the MIDS program. Duke's
MIDS program emphasizes comprehensive training in professional and communication
skills in its coursework. The program culminates in a capstone project that
requires students to solve a data-driven problem for a partner outside of the
university. Students must apply the technical skills, theoretical knowledge, and
professional skills they learned in the classroom to a real-life situation that
requires interacting with a diversity of both technical and non-technical
collaborators. The goal of this research is to determine which of these enhanced
experiences can mitigate - and ultimately, overcome - the shortage of doctoral
graduates with industry-relevant training, developed professional competencies,
and deep domain knowledge. The principles guiding this IGE project stem from
research on the use of vertically-integrated, topically-focused research teams
as mechanisms to motivate effective, meaningful learning. The MIDS Capstone
curriculum is based on evidence-backed practices from the team-based learning
and service learning literature. The effectiveness of the project for STEM PhD
students will be evaluated using survey, interview, and structured assessment
data collected from students, faculty, and Capstone partners, as well as data
from potential future employers and students' supervisors after they move to new
positions. Outcomes measured will include students' professional skills,
students' data science competencies, students' research accomplishments, and
reported benefits to non-academic partners. The results will be used to develop
scalable mechanisms for universities to extend the impact of their investment in
data science Master programs to doctoral-level students. Doing so will
strengthen the potential for PhD students to deploy their expertise to solve
society's most pressing problems both inside and outside of academia and will
provide richer opportunities for organizations to find data scientists with the
specialized knowledge needed to solve problems within their area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.