* 1806212
* Interacting Two-Element Bose-Fermi Superfluid
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

This award will support a project to study properties of superfluid matter,
matter that flows without friction. The experiments will be performed on atomic
gases cooled to very low temperatures in the laboratory, at which point they can
become superfluids. Studies of interactions between such atomic gases will be
carried out under controlled application of electromagnetic fields. These
studies will provide information regarding the behavior of interacting
superfluids and can shed light on aspects of superfluidity that are not yet well
understood. The students working on this project will gain experience in
experimental methods involving atoms, lasers, and electronics, and also be
involved in data analysis, modeling, and connecting experimental results with
theory. This will prepare them to join the work force in academics and in
industry as part of the next generation of scientists and engineers.

The thermometry of strongly-interacting fermions is an outstanding issue and is
limited by the sensitivity of current methods. Extending these limits as well as
measurement accuracy will help advance the understanding of complex many-body
phenomena. The group will utilize the mass and electronic structure differences
between fermionic lithium (Li) and bosonic ytterbium (Yb), and a Bose-impurity
thermalization method to extend the current reach of Fermi gas and superfluid
thermometry. They will also probe dynamics in a novel Bose-Fermi double
superfluid system made of Yb and Li atoms. These experiments will advance
knowledge in atomic physics, condensed matter physics and nuclear physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.