* 1806839
* RUI: Survey of Magneto-Optical Materials for Faraday Isolators in Future Gravitational-wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Rodica Martin, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 90,000.00

In the first two years after coming online following a major upgrade designed to
boost their sensitivity by a factor of ten, the twin Advanced LIGO detectors
have made several detections from binary black hole mergers and colliding
neutron stars, opening a new era of multi-messenger astronomy with gravitational
waves. To observe events from a larger variety of gravitational wave sources and
to see further into the universe requires a new-generation of detectors with
even higher sensitivity over a broader range of the gravitational wave spectrum.
This new generation of detectors will employ higher laser powers, larger test
masses of low-loss materials cooled to cryogenic temperatures, and the operation
at longer wavelength of the laser, among many others. High laser power and
longer wavelength present a challenge for the Faraday isolators whose
performance is strongly affected by the operating wavelength, requiring the
current designs to be revisited. This study will investigate new magneto-optical
materials for Faraday isolators in future gravitational wave detectors, in order
to identify high-performance, low-absorption candidates at wavelengths longer
than one micrometer. The proposed projects will enhance the research activities
in the field of experimental gravitation at Montclair State University (MSU),
will train and mentor undergraduate and master's degree students, and will help
them develop hands-on skills in areas of optics and lasers, spectroscopy, vacuum
systems and cryogenics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSU group will perform spectral
measurements of transmittance and Faraday rotation on several classes of
magneto-optical materials at wavelengths longer than one micrometer. As the
Verdet constant typically increases at low temperatures, these measurements will
be carried out both at room and at cryogenic temperatures, as low as 5K. The
proposed work will have a direct impact on developing and designing Faraday
isolators for the future gravitational wave detectors. Early identification of
suitable materials will allow for timely implementation and proper review of the
new isolators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.