* 1806318
* RUI: Topological Excitations in Spinor Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* David Hall, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Humans have long had a fascination with symmetry, a concept familiar to anyone
who has glanced in a mirror or contemplated their left and right hands. Indeed,
symmetry is a fundamental organizing principle that appears in every scientific
discipline. In physics, symmetries often manifest themselves in terms of
topology, or the study of how shapes and structures may - or may not - be
deformed continuously into one another. Topology has recently emerged as an
important and increasingly relevant topic in modern physics, as recognized by
the 2016 Nobel Prize. Shared topological features in different physical systems
permit complementary studies, even when those systems are extremely different.
For example, similar physics can be studied both in giant particle accelerators
at the highest energies and in tabletop apparatus at the coldest temperatures.
The ultracold environment central to this research is a dilute gas cooled to
tens of billionths of a degree above absolute zero, at which point it develops
properties that make it into a kind of well-controlled "universe" into which may
be summoned analogues of particles that might - or, perhaps more interestingly,
might not - appear in the "real" universe. This project will study the creation
and time-evolution of these particle-like phenomena, including point-like
monopoles and extended particles known as "skyrmions" and "knots." Such
experiments can provide insight into the phenomena and behavior of many
different topological systems, and contribute to emerging technologies based on
their manipulation and control. The scientific program will also enhance the
relationship between cutting-edge experimental research and undergraduate
education by providing technological and scientific training opportunities for
several highly motivated undergraduates, as well as for a graduate student
researcher. In these ways it contributes to the education of the next generation
of citizen-scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle-like topological
structures are ubiquitous in physics, appearing in cosmology, particle physics,
and condensed-matter physics, among others. They can exhibit a surprising degree
of persistence, as they are characterized by a conserved topological charge.
Superfluids, such as dilute-gas Bose-Einstein condensates, provide new and
exciting opportunities to examine these excitations in highly-controlled
environments. The underlying symmetries (and magnetic phases) of a superfluid
determine what kinds of topological excitations it can support. This
experimental research program examines three-dimensional topological excitations
within spin-1 and spin-2 Bose-Einstein condensates, including monopoles, knots,
and skyrmions. The spin-1 experiments will explore the time evolution of the
excitations following their creation. The spin-2 experiments will begin by
creating and exploring the topological excitations permitted by the wider
variety of available magnetic phases, and answer similar questions about their
time-evolution. The excitations will be created by exposing the condensate to
time-dependent magnetic and optical fields, and will be subsequently
characterized by close examination of the superfluid using established imaging
techniques. The results are expected to contribute directly to our scientific
understanding of topological excitations across the many branches of physics in
which they appear. The scientific program will also enhance the relationship
between cutting-edge experimental research and undergraduate education by
providing technological and scientific training opportunities for several highly
motivated undergraduates, as well as for a graduate student
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.