* 1806718
* EAR-PF: Source or Sink? Hyporheic zone controls on the biogeochemical processing of arsenic in rivers impacted by acid mine drainage
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Nell Hoagland, Hoagland                Nell           E
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2020
* USD 174,000.00

The process and conditions by which arsenic (As) goes from being in sediment
loads, in solids, and into the drinking water may effect public safety and
environmental health. Dr. Nell Hoagland has been awarded a postdoctoral
fellowship to work at the Colorado School of Mines to determine the conditions
driving the sequestration or release of arsenic (As) from the hyporheic zone in
rivers impacted by acid mine drainage. Using a combination of microbial and
hydrological methods, the researcher will investigate the spatial and temporal
scaling of the hyporheic zone, where groundwater-surface water interactions
modulate the timing, magnitude, and speciation of solutes. This work will build
upon previous U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) investigations of the hyporheic zone
in the Animas River of Colorado, where an accidental breach of mine pond
wastewaters in August 2015 led to the release of 11 million liters of tailings
directly into the river. By constraining the location and timing of total As and
As(III) fluxes to the stream channel, this study will provide the geochemical
and hydrological context needed to develop engineering solutions for river
recovery in mine-impacted catchments. New insights related to the timing of As
release to the Animas River will be shared in a publically accessible technical
report with public health officials and municipal water authorities in the
affected region. This project will engage undergraduate and graduate students at
Colorado School of Mines and local community colleges by offering a summer
short-course, where students will learn about the field of environmental
hydrology and the impacts of acid mine drainage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biogeochemical processing of metalloids such as arsenic is unpredictable in
redox transition zones. Redox conditions in the hyporheic zone will change on
seasonal and storm-event scales, impacting net As release or storage. The
working hypotheses for this study include: (a) the export of total As and the
ratio of As(III)/As(V) from the hyporheic zone in an acid mine drainage stream
increases over the course of a storm event in response to increasingly reduced
sediment conditions, and (b) the hyporheic zone acts as a source of As to the
stream channel during the summer (e.g. wet, high discharge) and a sink of As in
the winter. The proposed work will evaluate the hyporheic zone at high temporal
and spatial resolution in order to provide new information on microbial and
mineralogical mechanisms controlling As speciation across redox gradients.
Deliverables will include a conceptual model that relates climatic controls on
hyporheic zone area and exchange rates to the mobilization of contaminants from
hyporheic sediments at the reach-scale. The conceptual framework in combination
with reactive-transport modeling will guide interpretations of contaminant
transport at the watershed-scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.