* 1806692
* Core Collapse Supernova Gravitational Wave Signature Predictions based on 3D Ab Initio Models with Increasing GR Realism
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Stephen Bruenn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 492,761.00

The death of massive stars in core collapse supernovae (CCSNe) is directly or
indirectly responsible for the largest share of the elements in the Periodic
Table. CCSNe involve extremes in density and other quantities. Newtonian gravity
is insufficient to describe such extremes. Einsteinian gravity is needed. This
project advance the treatment of gravity in supernova models from a Newtonian
treatment with a correction to account for some Einsteinian effects, to a far
more sophisticated treatment of Einsteinian gravity, thereby advancing the
realism of CCSNe models significantly. As such, researchers will be better
positioned to predict gravitational wave (GW), a ripple in the fabric of space-
time, emission in CCSNe, among the sources that produce GWs detectable by LIGO.
This project will support the training of a graduate student in supernova theory
and will provide (i) a bridge between the supernova modeling community and the
LSC via the Supernova Multi-messenger Consortium, (ii) organized lectures on
relativity as part of a Physics Academy at a local, diverse public high school,
and (iii) public lectures on relativity and supernovae.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Advanced multi-physics models of core collapse supernovae (CCSNe),
which include multi-frequency neutrino transport with a complete set of neutrino
interactions and relativistic corrections such as gravitational redshift, have
implemented an effective gravitational potential given by the Newtonian
potential (obtained by solving the Poisson equation) plus a correction to the
monopole term (obtained from an integral formulation of the Tolman-Oppenheimer-
Volkoff equation using angle-averaged densities). More realistic models will
require more realistic treatments of general relativistic gravity. This project
will support the implementation of the Conformally Flat Approximation across all
model components: gravity, hydrodynamics, and neutrino transport. The PI and his
collaborators will compute the emission of gravitational waves (GWs) in the CCSN
models and will work closely with members of the LIGO Scientific Collaboration
to optimize GW predictions for their use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.