* 1806090
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Reconstructing Northeast Mexico Hydroclimate since the Last Interglacial Period
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Kathleen Johnson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 402,300.00

The majority of climate models show enhanced aridity throughout Mexico as a
result of climatic warming. However, instrumental data, existing paleoclimate
proxy records, and climate model simulations demonstrate that precipitation in
the region exhibits substantial interannual to decadal scale variability in
response to naturally recurring internal climate modes. A more complete
understanding of the impacts of natural variability and forced anthropogenic
climate change on water resources in Mexico and the southwestern U.S. is
important given the potentially serious impacts of increased drought frequency
and magnitude on economic, agricultural, and public water supply
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of hydroclimate records from low
latitude regions is of critical importance for assessing the response of
regional climate to external forcing and internal modes of climate variability,
for investigating teleconnections between the tropics and high-latitude regions,
and for evaluating climate models. This work will address several key questions
about the climate system, including: (1) Does NE Mexican hydroclimate vary in
phase with Northern Hemisphere Summer Insolation? (2) Did abrupt decreases in
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) strength during Heinrich
Events lead to dry conditions in NE Mexico? (3) Do patterns of decadal to
multidecadal scale rainfall variability track Atlantic and/or Pacific sea
surface temperatures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a potential for
greater understanding of hydroclimate using cave deposits. The project will also
contribute to the scientific training and professional development of graduate
students, including one Mexican-American female, and multiple undergraduate
students. The lead investigator is a Native American female and for the past six
years has directed the American Indian Summer Institute in Earth System Science,
a two-week residential program for Indigenous high school students. The
researchers and students will incorporate aspects of this research into existing
outreach efforts, including graduate school outreach at the annual Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) and
American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) conferences, climate
science lessons at local classrooms, and presentations at the Cambridge Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.