* 1806290
* Dynamics and Symmetry in Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Jonathan Engle, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 179,999.00

An important question facing fundamental physics is how the well-tested laws of
Einstein's theory of gravity and quantum mechanics are consistent -- the
question of quantum gravity. This question is central for understanding the very
origin of our universe, the big bang. Remarkable progress in understanding the
big bang has occurred through the use of loop quantum cosmology (LQC), a
simplified version of loop quantum gravity (LQG) for modeling the universe as a
whole. This award seeks to bridge the gap between LQC and full LQG. Such a
bridge would allow future comparisons of LQC with data to tell us exact details
about the fundamental laws of quantum gravity. Bridging this gap requires
answering a number of interesting fundamental conceptual questions. A second
part of this research aims to answer key questions regarding the Feynman sum-
over-histories formulation of loop quantum gravity, in which space and time are
treated in a more unified way, and to bring this formulation closer to
completion. By enabling graduate students to participate in frontier physics,
and to interact with other research groups, this award will have a broad and
long-term impact on the development of future scientists. The results of the
research will be disseminated to the scientific community through peer reviewed
publication and scientific lectures, as well as to the general public through
public lectures and other means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
observational, cosmological consequences of different proposals for dynamics in
LQG will be studied. To accomplish this, the PI will first find an embedding of
LQC states into diffeomorphism invariant LQG states that satisfy the
diffeomorphism invariant, quantum criterion for homogeneity and isotropy
recently established by the PI's group. This embedding, appropriately
regularized, will enable different proposals for dynamics in LQG to be
translated into LQC, and thereby to distinguish their observational consequences
using established methods. The task of finding the corresponding LQC dynamics
will be simplified by the fact that the resulting possibilities are severely
restricted by diffeomorphism invariance, as proven recently by the PI's group.
The PI also plans to further develop the sum over histories approach to LQG,
known as spin-foams. In prior work of the PI, the prevailing EPRL model of spin-
foams was modified to correct its semiclassical limit, yielding what is called
the proper spin-foam model. Since then, other research groups have indicated how
this modified model may solve a number of long-standing issues in spin-foams.
These possibilities, as well as other issues in spin-foams, will be investigated
with the present award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.