* 1806311
* Selective-Spectrum Thermophotovoltaics for Primary Power Generation and Energy Harvesting
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Thomas Vandervelde, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 432,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Electricity has been generated in largely the same way
since the 1800s. Heat is used to boil water to make steam, the steam turns a
turbine, and the turbine turns an electrical generator. Each of those stages
introduces inefficiencies of lost heat and energy as well as moving parts that
break and need to be replaced. Thermophotovoltaic cells (TPVs) are a new type of
device that can reduce or eliminate some of these inefficiencies. They are
similar to the more familiar solar cells that are widely used to generate
electricity. Whereas solar cells primarily absorb visible light, TPV cells
absorb infrared light (radiated heat). They can potentially be used to generate
electrical power from any heat source, without moving parts or any of the stages
between generating heat and electricity. This project will develop each of the
primary components of the TPV generator system to bring this technology to
fruition. Once realized, these TPV generators can be used to improve the
efficiency of existing energy conversion technologies (natural gas, coal,
nuclear, and solar thermal) and allow for the harvesting of waste heat from heat
source such as furnaces and engines. It may even be possible to power implanted
medical devices like pacemakers with one's own body
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Thermophotovoltaic (TPV) systems
are similar to solar (photovoltaic, PV) cells in that they function through the
photovoltaic effect. Incident light promotes charge carriers across the bandgap,
which are driven apart by the built in voltage of the photodiode. These carriers
become electrical current. However, whereas PV cells absorb primarily visible
light, TPV cells function primarily in the infrared and include additional "host
machinery," consisting of three primary components: 1) a frequency-selective
emitter; 2) a filter; and 3) a TPV photodiode. These elements are combined to
create a highly efficient energy conversion process. In this work, we are
addressing the significant challenges in each of the three components 1)
frequency-selective emitters do not function well at higher temperatures, so we
are employing new materials that will solve that problem; 2) filters that are
separate are less efficient, so we are incorporating them into the photodiode;
and 3) TPV photodiodes do not work well at longer wavelengths (i.e. smaller
bandgaps), so we are using new materials and device structures to extend the
operational wavelength. In general, if successful, these TPV devices will make
possible a new array of technological applications. They will increase the
efficiency and reduce the waste heat from a multitude of devices; including,
civilian and naval nuclear power plants, computer chips, car engines, and many
industrial processes. It may even be possible to power implanted medical devices
(e.g. pacemakers, and neural implants) with one's own body
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.