* 1806363
* Advanced organic and hybrid electronic devices for high-resolution Hall effect and photocurrent spectroscopy.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Vitaly Podzorov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the working principles
of transistors and photo-detectors based on two classes of novel materials.
Organic semiconductors and organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites are promising
materials for applications in solar cells, flexible electronics, sensors and
actuators. High-purity single crystals of these materials are expected to
conduct charge efficiently, have long charge carrier lifetimes, and tolerate
defects. All of these properties are attractive for future applications in
optoelectronics. The research team will characterize electrical conduction with
high-precision of organic and perovskite devices under various external stimuli.
Stimuli include calibrated mechanical strain, performed by bending flexible
devices, illumination with visible light and varied temperature. These studies
will yield a better understanding of the unique properties of these novel
materials and behavior of devices based on them. The project will boost the
development of flexible transistors and photo-detectors and yield powerful
methods to characterize these devices. This project will give students an
opportunity to perform research on emerging electronic materials. Aspiring
researchers will learn semiconductor science, acquire modern research skills and
prepare for careers in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Novel electronic devices
based on emergent highly crystalline organic semiconductors and perovskite
materials are under intense research for their potential use in the next-
generation optoelectronic applications. The main focus of this project is to
significantly advance the fundamental understanding of operating principles and
microscopic mechanisms governing the behavior of organic field-effect
transistors and perovskite photo-conductors. The research team plans to achieve
this by employing a unique and powerful combination of high-resolution ac-Hall
effect measurements, an in-situ application of calibrated uniaxial mechanical
strains, variable temperature and/or photoexcitation, as well as using
complementary theoretical modeling in order to understand the intrinsic (trap-
free) charge carrier mobilities, electron-hole recombination rates, carrier
lifetimes and diffusion lengths in these devices. Implementation of the project
is expected to result in the development of high-performance, flexible organic
field-effect transistors based ultra-thin organic crystals and optimized
perovskite photo-conductors with chemically passivated surfaces, lead to new
methodologies of high-precision Hall effect measurements, especially important
for emergent ?soft? and flexible electronics, and more broadly contribute to a
better understanding of the electronic, photonic and magneto-transport
properties of novel semiconductor devices. The interdisciplinary nature of this
project provides excellent educational, human resource and outreach
opportunities in the area of optoelectronics and semiconductor device
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.