* 1806011
* Foamability of Ionic Micellar Solutions: Adsorption Kinetics and Supramolecular Surface Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Vivek Sharma, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,271.00

Aqueous micellar solutions of ionic surfactants play a significant role in
diverse applications including biological membranes, fat-digestion, detergents,
petrochemical processes, chemical catalysis, etc. Foams are ubiquitous as they
exhibit a range of complex, unique and useful properties. The proposed research
aims to develop the scientific and engineering foundations for understanding
foam stability and formability of ionic micellar solutions. Obtaining
comprehensive experimental data and developing methods for describing adsorption
kinetics and supramolecular forces for ionic surfactants are primary motivations
for this study. Another goal is to find quantifiable measures of heuristic
criteria like foamability and foam stability and correlate them to
physicochemical properties of surfactants to aid in the discovery of better
surfactants, including biodegradable bio-surfactants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Foams
contain a complex architecture of thin films and channels, and, at the molecular
level, foam films are stabilized by surfactants. Layering of micelles in foam
films results in stratification, manifested as stepwise thinning and coexistence
of regions with different thicknesses. The layering contributes supramolecular
oscillatory surface forces to disjoining pressure, that influence the stability
of foam films. The proposed experimental and theoretical research focuses on
understanding the adsorption kinetics and foam film stability of ionic
surfactants, to quantitatively analyze the influence of charge on dynamical and
equilibrium measurement of surface tension and disjoining pressure dominated by
supramolecular structural forces. The PI proposes to correlate foamability to
adsorption kinetics characterized by using maximum bubble pressure apparatus
built by the PI's group and foam stability to supramolecular structural forces
using a modified thin film balance apparatus. The theoretical effort will focus
on developing a robust free-energy based framework for quantifying the influence
of charge on both adsorption kinetics and supramolecular structural forces. A
focused summer experimental research initiative is proposed to bring together a
team of undergraduate students at UIC to conduct experiments in the realm of
soft matter at interfaces. A course titled 'Fizzics and Interfacial Phenomena',
developed by the PI, will be offered as an interdisciplinary elective to
graduate and undergraduate students. Fizzics (or the science of drops, bubbles,
emulsions and foams), optics, rheology and mechanics of complex fluids will form
the basis for outreach activities. The participating students will develop
several low-cost, robust instruments for studying interfacial phenomena and will
make the instruments available to K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.