* 1806606
* Collective Dynamics and Collaborative Killing: Synergistic Elimination of Bacteria by Immune Cells and Viruses
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Joshua Weitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 537,617.00

Bacteriophage ('phage') - viruses that exclusively infect and lyse bacteria -
are highly abundant in the environment. Phage infections of bacteria can release
matter, nutrients, and toxins, mediate the transfer of genes, and transform
ecosystem function. In practice, phage are increasingly used as a form of
biological control, to eliminate or prevent the proliferation of targeted
bacteria - usually pathogens - from colonizing surfaces and organisms. The PI
recently proposed a model of "immunophage synergy" to explain how phage and
innate immune effector cells can, together, eliminate target bacteria in animal
hosts, even when neither can do so alone. This model has been tested and
validated in animal hosts. This project will integrate novel experimental
methods with theory to transform our physical and systems-level understanding of
how viruses and innate immune cells jointly modulate the dynamics of bacterial
microcolonies and biofilms. It is also highly interdisciplinary, combining the
fields of quantitative viral ecology, nonlinear dynamics, cellular biophysics,
and soft matter physics. Thus it provides strong interdisciplinary training for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step, the project will extend a novel
theory for synergistic elimination of bacteria by phage and neutrophils (a key
component of the mammalian innate immune system). The theory combines principles
of quantitative viral ecology, nonlinear dynamics, and mathematical immunology.
This project will translate these principles into an explicitly spatial and
individual-based context. This new framework will enable analysis of the basis
for emergent, collective dynamics given tripartite interactions between phage,
bacteria, and neutrophils. Second, this project will enable new in vitro
experiments to probe the mechanistic basis for synergistic elimination of
bacteria. Integrated research will assess the importance of nonlinear feedback,
cellular biophysics, and soft-matter physics in governing tripartite dynamics
via the visualization and quantification of interactions. Third, via an
iterative and integrative approach, the project will combine new theoretical
methods and in vitro techniques to evaluate principled mechanisms for combined
use of phage and neutrophils to eliminate entire biofilms at different stages of
development. This project will further the interdisciplinary study of the
physics of viral and microbial systems, combining the fields of quantitative
viral ecology, nonlinear dynamics, cellular biophysics, and soft matter physics.
Two physics PhD students will be trained in an interdisciplinary context, i.e.,
including theory, large-scale computational modeling, and experimental studies
of living systems. Research advances will be translated into reproducible
software methods for use by the community, disseminated as protocols on
protocols.io, with additional training materials and results presented as part
of a collaborative workshop to be held in Year 3. The translation of discoveries
to the public will be furthered by annual presentation of general interest talks
to local communities, including elementary school, middle school and high school
students, leveraging established contacts of the PIs. Discoveries of new
principles underlying synergistic elimination of bacteria by phage and
neutrophils also have the potential to influence the ongoing study of phage
therapy for clinical use to treat multi-drug resistant bacterial infections in
animals and humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In immunophage synergy - the
catalyzing discovery for this project - nonlinear feedback mechanisms are
essential to understand system-level fates. The goal of this project is to
develop an integrated approach to understand the physics of complex interactions
amongst phage, bacteria, and innate immune effector cells. This project will
combine theory of nonlinear dynamics, computational simulations of living
systems, and in vitro experiments to: (i) Extend immunophage synergy to an
explicitly spatial framework, including the analysis of emergent, collective
dynamics. (ii) Establish and characterize physical interactions amongst phage,
bacteria, and innate effector cells during bacteria microcolony and biofilm
formation. (iii) Test principled combinations of phage and neutrophils to
eliminate growing biofilms given environmental and strain heterogeneity.
Together, these aims will deepen efforts to understand physical principles and
feedback mechanisms by which phage transform bacterial populations given
interactions with eukaryotic host organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.