* 1806419
* Correlating Structural and Electronic Disorder in Organic Semiconductor Single Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 522,687.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are the advanced
materials enabling bright displays commonly found in smart phones and
televisions. OLEDs(organic light-emitting diodes) employ thin films of organic
semiconductors to convert electricity to red, green, and blue lights necessary
for displays. In this project, principal investigator Daniel Frisbie is seeking
to understand the properties of single crystals of organic semiconductors that
have applications in other types of devices such as organic field effect
transistors (OFETs). For OFETs, charge velocity is critically important, but
structural defects in crystals can trap electrical charges, lowering their
average speed. Professor Frisbie aims to determine what types of defects exist
in organic semiconductor single crystals using a powerful high resolution
microscopy technique called scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM). SKPM images
electric potential and many types of defects in crystals have a "voltage
signature" that can be detected. Frisbie will use SKPM and a combination of
other characterization techniques such as X-ray diffraction and electron
microscopy to locate defects, to determine the structural nature of defects and
to characterize their electrical properties. The work should lead to a better
understanding of structure-property relationships in organic semiconductors and
thus enable expanded real-life applications. An important broader impact will be
the training of graduate students in organic semiconductor materials science and
device physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to advance the materials science of organic semiconductors by
elucidating relationships between mechanical strains, defects, surface
potential, and electrical transport in single crystals of pi-conjugated
molecules. The experimental plan builds on prior work in the Principal
Investigator's (PI's) laboratories that demonstrated surface potential imaging
by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) is surprisingly sensitive to defects
and inhomogeneous strains in crystalline organic semiconductors. The PI seeks
(1) to understand the causes of the strain/defect-surface potential
relationship, (2) to demonstrate its relevance to broad classes of crystalline
organic semiconductors, and (3) to establish the relationship between surface
potential variations and electrical transport. The research focuses on organic
single crystals as their low levels of disorder facilitate identification and
analysis of precise structure-property relationships. Single crystals of
benchmark organic semiconductors are grown by vapor transport and characterized
with a spectrum of methods including SKPM, ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy (UPS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The PI employs a robust
platform to apply strains to crystals inside operating SKPM, UPS and XRD
instrumentation. Strains ranging from 0.01-0.5% are applied this way, which
allows for precise quantitation of the mechanical strain-surface potential
relationship. In a second direction, the PI is uncovering the causes of step
edge potentials so far observed in a handful of organic semiconductor single
crystals and correlates the potentials with field effect (FET) transport. In a
third vein, he examines the impact of planar defects induced by solid-solid
phase transitions on the surface potential of organic crystals and correlates
the results with FET performance. The work is leading to a deeper understanding
of structure-property relationships in organic
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.