* 1806990
* RUI: Tests of Gravity, Data Analysis, and Detector Characterization for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nelson Christensen, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 119,960.00

An exciting era in gravitational wave physics and astronomy has begun as the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and the Virgo
Observatory have now detected gravitational waves from several binary black hole
mergers and a binary neutron star merger. Interpreting the scientific
implications from these events and detecting additional sources of gravitational
waves will make a significant contribution to our understanding of nature.
Events seen by LIGO produce a wealth of astrophysical information and
information on gravity theory. The extraction and interpretation of that
information will require advanced techniques in data analysis, parameter
estimation, statistics, and phenomenology. Detector characterization work will
provide scientists with confidence in the quality of the data, and the
performance of the detectors. Carleton College will continue with its efforts in
identifying and characterizing noise in LIGO data. The use of LIGO to search for
a stochastic gravitational wave background will continue at Carleton, and the
Carleton team will continue to develop the implications of those results for
astrophysics and gravitational physics. The team will also continue to develop
the tools to perform and interpret multimessenger
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carleton College is a leader in producing
future scientists. This project will provide research opportunities to students
with interests in physics and related fields, and help train them to become the
next generation of scientists. Carleton students are eager to participate in
exciting research, and their interest in gravitational wave astronomy, tests of
General Relativity, and science in general, is large. The methods and results
developed as a consequence of this project have, and will continue to have,
significant influence in other scientific fields: astrophysics, gravitational
wave detectors in space, and alternative gravity theory. The project will
continue to provide material that will improve teaching at the college level and
it will create opportunities for scientific outreach at Carleton, in the local
community, and in the K-12 schools. This outreach generates much excitement for
science and physics. Finally, the research work of this project promotes
international scientific collaboration. Albert Einstein predicted the existence
of gravitational waves in 1916; a century later we observed them. They will now
tell us new things about the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.