* 1806638
* Physical Mechanisms of Cell State Transitions: Size Homeostasis in Budding Yeast
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Catherine Royer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 910,000.00

In all species, cell growth and division are tightly coordinated to establish a
homeostatic cell size. Size control optimizes fitness under variable
environmental conditions in unicellular species, and is critical for proper
organ development and maintenance in multi-cellular organisms. In humans,
disruption of the networks that control cell growth, division or size is linked
to many diseases, including cancer, metabolic syndrome, and cardiomyopathy. In
budding yeast, size is modulated by nutrients. Cells grow fast and are large in
rich nutrients and slowly and are small in poor nutrients. The PI will use a
unique combination of state-of-the-art quantitative imaging methods, genetic
manipulation, and mathematical modeling to construct a systems-level framework
for cell size homeostasis in budding yeast. These studies will answer the
longstanding question: How do cells know when they are big enough to divide?
Application of the approach proposed here to other important cell state
transitions will provide the foundation for the development in the private
sector of new products or processes for in-tissue engineering and drug
discovery. The proposed project provides highly interdisciplinary graduate
training in biology, genetic engineering, physics, computation and mathematics.
The Royer group hosts a large number of undergraduate students as part of the
CBIS Undergraduate Research Program, the BCBP Summer internship program for
predominantly minority institutions and the CBIS High School Scholars Program.
Students participating in these programs will experience a "real life"
application of their knowledge. The uniquely broad set of skills implicated in
the research will help to prepare them for the increasingly interdisciplinary
word of science and technology. The PI as Director of the RPI Graduate Program
in Biochemistry and Biophysics will organize outreach to four-year colleges in
the Northeast and to the public annually during Biophysics
week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis is that the transcription factors
which activate the G1/S regulon leading to commitment to division,
differentially and dynamically integrate nutrient signals to coordinate growth
and division, thereby enabling adaptive nutrient modulation of cell size. This
project has three specific objectives: i) Map the G1/S transcriptional activator
nuclear organization at super-resolution as a function of size and nutrients,
ii) Measure and model nutrient dependent Start dynamics, and iii) Define the
upstream signaling pathways and targets for nutrient modulation of cell size.
Despite the identification of literally hundreds of genes implicated in size
control in budding yeast, it remains a mystery how this complex genetic network
impacts the Start machinery to control size. The PI will move beyond the
qualitative genetic characterization of the size control network to a
quantitative understanding of how this network dynamically processes
information. The strategy that will be used by the PI will provide a
comprehensive, quantitative assessment of a complex biological state transition,
commitment to division. The measurements of Start factor concentration and
super-resolution localization will identify the key parameters for nutrient
control of cell size. The mathematical models will serve as a conceptual
framework for testing hypotheses, and will inform physical principles of cell
division in higher organisms, including humans. Finally, the results will reveal
the impact of cell-to-cell heterogeneity, or biological noise, on cell growth
and the dynamics of commitment to division and size homeostasis. This work will
provide the foundation for a rigorous understanding of how evolution has shaped
molecular networks to cope with a stochastic environment and how robust cellular
decision-making is established. This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular
Dynamics and Function as well as the Systems and Synthetic Biology Programs in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.