* 1806939
* Collaborative Research: Predictive theory, synthesis and characterization of a new type of transparent conductor without doping
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Alex Zunger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Non-technical description: Technologies such as photovoltaic solar cells, smart
windows, light emitting diodes, touch-screen sensors, electronic papers, and
flat panel displays require for their operation a critical component that is
both an electrical conductor and optically transparent, the so-called
transparent conductors. These compounds are unique, as transparency and
conductivity are generally mutually exclusive properties of compounds. Indeed,
optical transparency (as in window glass) is generally associated with
electrical insulation, whereas electrical conductivity (such as in copper or
gold) is generally associated with optically opaque metals. Known transparent
conductors such as indium oxide doped with Sn are made by instilling
conductivity in transparent insulators. The research team aims to develop a
novel family of transparent conductors - metallic ceramics - by designing
transparency in metals. This presents a new method to design optical properties
as distinct from electronic properties. The approach has an exciting
intellectual impact as it suggests a general approach for inverse design -
starting from science-based design principles used as 'filters' for
computational material selection, followed by identification of representative
examples and then laboratory validation. The graduate students and postdocs of
CU Boulder and Northwestern Universities are given exciting opportunities to
participate in this cutting edge research effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Transparent conducting oxides are
paradoxical materials that form the basis of modern day technologies, such as
touch screens, flat panel displays, solar panels, etc. The current method of
choice for discovering new transparent conductors have relied on heavily doping
transparent insulators until they become conducting. Unfortunately, wide band
gap materials are intrinsically resistant to doping of charges because of the
existence of so-called 'doping bottlenecks'. Namely, the introduction of a high
concentration of free carriers into insulators generally leads to the
spontaneous formation of structural defects with polarity that compensate that
of the intentional doping. Consequently, the progress in finding and optimizing
such technologically critical transparent conducting oxide materials has been
frustratingly slow. The research team proposes an opposite, and likely more
fruitful alternative of designing transparency in metals by looking for
compounds that obey a set of 'design principles' with specific band structures.
The design rules for such intrinsic transparent conductors are: (i) identify a
compound with metallic band structure; such that (ii) it has low plasma
frequency and (iii) low inter-band optical absorption across the Fermi level,
and (iv) apply synthesis and characterization to the 'best of class' compounds,
here Ba-Nb-O. The most visible advantage of metallic transparent conductors is
that their conductivity comes from their high, indigenous carrier concentration.
The complex theory-experimental approach in the proposal enables more efficient
progress as alternative to the previously used trial-and-error
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.