* 1806366
* Functional Biomembrane Architectures in Mesoporous Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Subhash Risbud, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to incorporate
biological membrane materials into mesoporous (5-50 nm pores) gel materials to
be used for discovery of new medicines, energy generation, and efficient
delivery of medicine to the body. Biological membranes serve as biological
workhorses by hosting proteins that serve as receptors, channels, transporters,
enzymes, and produce energy as long as the proteins remain embedded in
biological membrane hosts. Similarly, mesoporous inorganic and organic gels and
glasses are workhorses of modern technology yielding unique porosity,
photochemical, optical, and catalytic properties. In this project, improved
biomaterials will be produced by combining the properties of biological
membranes and membrane proteins with the unique properties of mesoporous gel
materials. The properties of these new biomaterials will be studied by
challenging biophysical and materials characterization, important from a
scientific standpoint of unstudied biological organic/inorganic interfaces as
well as toward imagining and optimizing any future applications. The proposed
activities will provide engineering students with training in biotechnology and
biomaterials, recruit a diverse pool of graduate and undergraduate students,
provide for exchange of ideas at an international level by organization of an
international workshop, and engage freshman and undergraduate engineers via
seminars and mentored teaching experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;A goal of this proposal will be to implement a novel approach
to encapsulate integral membrane proteins (IMPs) into silica- and titania-based
mesoporous sol-gels in order to make and study better materials that combine the
properties of functional integral membrane proteins (receptor-ligand
interactions and ion pumping) with the unique properties of sol-gel materials
(high porosity and photocatalysis, respectively). Characterization of these
composite mesoporous biomaterials by in-situ methods will be used to study the
influence of sol-gel chemistry and nano-confinement details on IMP structure,
function, dynamics, and environment. Another goal of this proposal will be to
leverage findings and experience in developing pH and crowding-triggered
membrane architectures to engineer and study endosomal compartment escape
strategies for mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) as drug delivery vehicles.
The proposed strategies provide opportunities to characterize and study the
influence of a mesoporous surface on the dynamic and thermodynamic behavior of a
membrane and associated proteins and examine the molecular mechanism of
endosomal escape. Engineering undergraduates and graduate students working
toward these goals will receive valuable interdisciplinary training in new cell
biological and genetic engineering techniques, i.e. cell free expression, in the
context of production of functional biocomposite sol-gel derived materials. This
project will involve organization of an international workshop, creation of a
freshman seminar that introduces concepts of biomaterials through study of food,
mentoring of an undergraduate team to make a screening platform, and mentored
teaching experiences for engineering undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.