* 1806199
* Energy Storage 2017: Opportunities and Challenges for Electric Grid, Wave, Hydropower and Other Sustainable Energies
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Zhenxing Feng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 11/30/2018
* USD 2,000.00

This grant supports the workshop Energy Storage 2017: Opportunities and
Challenges for Electric Grid, Wave, Hydropower and Other Sustainable Energies at
Oregon State University on November 5-6, 2017. The objective of this workshop is
for researchers from academia, national laboratories, and industry to discuss
the fundamental and applied research needs for energy storage with renewable
energy including wind, wave, and solar. The workshop will include topics on the
fundamental issues of the use of battery packs for electric vehicles; and of
large storage capacity systems to handle grid interconnections. The discussions
will be focused on how robust these systems and electric grids are. The
resilience in energy storage technologies will affect the choices of storage
systems and their implementation with a given energy resource or application.
The workshop will also address issues related to the commercialization and
manufacturing of energy storage systems.

National Science Foundation will provide travel funds and registration to
support approximately 20 undergraduate and graduate students to attend the
workshop. The organizers will emphasize broadening participation to encourage
women and underrepresented minorities in STEM attendance. The students will have
an opportunity to attend talks and poster sessions and network with faculty and
national laboratory and industry researchers. The outcome of the workshop is a
strategy to increase collaboration across universities, national laboratories,
and industry for fundamental and applied research supporting energy storage for
sustainable transport and electricity generation.