* 1806227
* Spin Tensors in Ultracold Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Chuanwei Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

The quest for quantum materials with novel functionality has led to great
advances of modern electronic devices in the past few decades. Spin, a
fundamental degree of freedom of particles, and its coupling with orbital
degrees of freedom (e.g., momentum) has played a crucial role in the discovery,
characterization, and application of novel quantum materials. In conventional
materials, electron spins are fully described by spin-1/2 vectors. Recently the
study of unconventional quantum materials with large effective spins (e.g.,
spin-1) has emerged as a forefront of materials research. Since a full
description of any large spin (spin-1 and larger) naturally involves spin-
tensors, understanding the effects of spin-tensors and their coupling with
momentum in a controllable platform could provide important guidelines for
future design and discovery of new quantum materials with desirable properties
and functionalities. In this context, ultracold atomic gases offer such a
controllable platform with an unprecedented level of experimental control and
precision. Previous research has realized the coupling between spin vector and
momentum for ultracold atoms, which has now become a major research frontier in
physics. This project studies the generation of spin-tensors and spin-tensor-
momentum coupling for ultracold atoms and explores their applications in
engineering new quantum states. The study of such highly controllable spin-
tensors in a cold atomic platform will in turn influence future electronic
materials design and discovery. The research will not only pave the way for
coherent control of cold atomic systems for many important applications (e.g.,
materials design, spintronics, quantum computation, etc.), but will also
influence fundamental research in cold atomic and condensed matter physics. The
project provides a diverse platform for both graduate and undergraduate students
to explore theoretical cold atomic and condensed matter physics. The scope of
this project also includes specific outreach activities for K-12 students
including involving students from under-represented groups, such as women and
minority students, for broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
objective of the project is to address two outstanding questions: i) Can we
experimentally realize the coupling between spin tensors of ultracold atoms and
their linear momenta? ii) If so, what type new physics may emerge from such
spin-tensor-momentum coupling? Specific tasks include: i) Schemes for
experimental generation of various types of spin-tensors and spin-tensor-
momentum coupling for a large spin (particularly spin-1) atomic gas; ii) Exotic
quantum phases induced by spin-tensors, such as spin supersolid stripe phases
with long periods and high visibilities, large Chern number topological
insulators and superfluids with high-order band touching points, topological
triply-degenerate points and nodal lines, etc. Various numerical and analytical
methods (e.g., mean field approximation, time-evolving-block-decimation
algorithm, perturbation theory, etc.) are applied in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.