* 1806932
* Clustering of Neural Activity: A Design Principle for Population Codes
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Michael Berry, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2022
* USD 450,000.00

In virtually every part of the brain, information about the sensory environment,
internal body states, or intended movements is encoded by more than one neuron.
This was apparent as early as the nineteenth century from the extensive
interconnectivity of nearby neurons and continues to be apparent from numerous
measurements of the tuning curves and correlation of nearby neurons. Despite its
fundamental importance, population neural codes are poorly understood. In this
project the PI will test a recently developed principle for population code -
namely, that neural activity patterns should always be organized into a discrete
set of clusters. This organization is appealing, because clusters exhibit error
correction, encode qualitatively different stimulus features than their
constituent neurons, and can be learned in an unsupervised fashion by downstream
neural circuits. Together, these properties enable a powerful form of
hierarchical detection of complex stimulus features. The PI aims at developing a
principle of population coding that applies widely across the brain.
Furthermore, his hypothesis is connected to a model of hierarchical feature
detection, which may be operating across all the ascending pathways in the
neocortex. In addition, the neocortex's modular structure lends itself to
machine learning algorithms. In addition,the project will involve the
development and dissemination of software to perform fits of maximum entropy and
hidden Markov models to neural data, which could help spur on the research
programs of many labs that use these methods to analyze neural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will combine large-scale neural
recording methods from the retina and cortex with state-of-the-art theoretical
analyses to study collective phenomena in population neural codes. The PI has an
extensive track record in multi-electrode recording from the vertebrate retina,
along with applying maximum entropy models to analyze states of network
activity. In addition, the PI has recently started a collaboration with Prof.
David Tank to record from cortical populations using two-photon calcium
fluorescence imaging. The project's aims are: 1. Study how cluster codes can
simultaneously encode categorical and continuous stimulus information; if true,
this idea would constitute a new example of multiplexed coding in neural
populations 2. Study how biologically plausible neural networks can learn and
readout clusters; if true, then this makes possible hierarchical cluster
processing in the neocortex and will lead us to formulate specific experimental
tests to see if layer 4 of V1 is learning LGN clusters. 3. Test whether cluster
codes are present in central brain areas, like the visual cortex and
hippocampus; this study may generalize his results beyond the retina and help
establish a new design principle for population codes. This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Modulation Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.