* 1806473
* Quantum Dynamics and Fluctuations in Nonlinear Nanomechanical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Roukes, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 599,996.00

Nanomechanical systems are of significant fundamental interest and are also
playing an increasingly important role in various applications - including
biosensing, mass spectrometry, force detection at the atomic scale, and
realization of stable frequency sources. The unique and advantageous feature of
such systems is that they are sufficiently large that the vibrations can be
studied in an individual system while, at the same time, they are sufficiently
small as to provide that exceptional detection sensitivity enabling their novel
applications. Because of the smallness of nanomechanical systems, a
fundamentally important role in their dynamics is played by quantum
fluctuations, which are unavoidable even for low temperatures. Also fundamental
is that vibrations have a relatively large amplitude compared to the system
size; as a consequence, they can become strongly nonlinear. Although substantial
progress has been made over the last few years, major questions remain
concerning the fluctuations of nanomechanical systems and their various
consequences. Addressing these questions requires new characterization tools and
new theoretical techniques. Poorly understood fluctuations and energy
dissipation currently limit the performance of nanomechanical systems in
applications. The proposed research is motivated by the largely untapped
richness of this field. It has the dual aims of studying the underlying physics
of nanoscale vibrational systems and using these systems to explore
nonequilibrium phenomena in a uniquely well-controlled and highly-sensitive
setting. The combined expertise of the principal investigators in theoretical
and experimental physics should facilitate significant and rapid progress in
these studies. The project should also provide an excellent platform for cross-
disciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in theoretical and
experimental physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major emphases of the proposed
research are: (i) To develop new theoretical and experimental means and to
study, using these means, both the spectra and the statistics of eigenfrequency
fluctuations. This should reveal the physical mechanisms underlying these
fluctuations. (ii) To explore Floquet dynamics of periodically-driven nonlinear
quantum dissipative modes. Here, of particular interest is the spontaneous
breaking of the discrete time-translation symmetry in the quantum-coherent
regime. Also of interest are new types of quantum-coherent and dissipative
states with a period, which is a multiple of the period of the driving, as well
as the transitions between these states, and (iii) To explore interaction-
induced symmetry-breaking for coupled, periodically-modulated nonlinear modes
that is mediated by quantum and classical fluctuations. This symmetry breaking
should sensitively depend on the connectivity of the nanomechanical modes -
which the investigators can precisely engineer - and should encompass phenomena
such as frustration and quantum phase transitions in the time domain, as well as
the occurrence of microscopic currents in the stationary state of quantum
systems far from thermal equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.