* 1806698
* IGE: Graduate Identity Formation through Teaching
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Megan Frary, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,820.00

A principal goal of U.S. graduate education is to prepare independent
researchers by focusing students on learning content and conducting research,
particularly in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. Students have primarily been prepared for academic career paths
although a significant proportion of STEM graduate students go on to non-
academic careers. Therefore, it is vital to focus graduate education efforts on
preparing a new type of scholar - one with a strong professional identity and a
flexible set of tools - rather than preparing a person for a specific type of
career. Although often neglected in traditional graduate education, the
development of a student's professional identity is proven to raise retention
rates and promote academic success, particularly for underrepresented students.
This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Boise State University will test an educational model that supports the
cultivation of STEM graduate students' professional identities through
collaboration with undergraduate education majors and elementary students in
STEM learning. The teaching and communication skills that graduate students
develop through the project will be transferable to diverse career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GIFT (Graduate Identity Formation through Teaching)
focuses on the promotion of graduate student professional identity via the
concept of disciplinary stewardship, wherein professionals learn not only the
knowledge and skills of their discipline, but also how their discipline connects
to and serves society as a whole. Through a one credit hour course, graduate
students will develop a deeper understanding of pedagogy, as well as issues
related to teaching and learning. The graduate students simultaneously serve as
disciplinary experts as they teach elementary teacher candidates specific topics
related to the Next Generation Science Standards. The teacher candidates
subsequently turn this knowledge into 15-minute mini-lessons for elementary
students at a local Title I school. Based on interdisciplinary collaborations
with four STEM departments at Boise State, spread over six semesters, it is
anticipated that this effort will provide a transferable, low/no-cost model for
future interventions that support graduate students more broadly. A
comprehensive, longitudinal research plan employing both quantitative and
qualitative data will enable analysis of the intervention with respect to:
graduate student professional identity development, including variability across
student demographics/attributes; graduate faculty advisors' attitudes/outlooks
on the purposes of graduate education; and the impact of the academic
disciplinary context/setting on the design of the intervention, and hence its
scalability and transferability. This work stands to contribute to the fields of
graduate education, educational opportunities, and STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to
pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). EPSCoR co-funds projects
that advance excellence in science and engineering research and education.
Fostering sustainable increases in research, education, and training capacity
and competitiveness within EPSCoR jurisdictions will enable EPSCoR participants
to have increased engagement in areas supported by the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.