* 1806332
* SCH: EXP: Intelligent Clinical Decision Support with Probabilistic and Temporal EHR Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Sriraam Natarajan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2018
* USD 127,346.00

Clinical decision support has the potential to reduce healthcare costs and
improve patient outcomes, while shedding light into policy questions surrounding
healthcare costs and practices in the US. This project aims to develop
intelligent clinical decision support techniques for recommending optimal action
plans - including both diagnostic tests and medical interventions - for treating
chronic disease, performing multi-step and adaptive treatments, and modifying
long-term health habits. In an effort to integrate evidence-driven decision-
making with established clinical practices, the research will develop disease-
agnostic artificial intelligence techniques that combine data from large
electronic health records (EHRs) with recommendations from human experts. A
prototype decision support system will be tested on three clinical settings -
cardiology, clinical depression, and emergency room readmission - using existing
EHR datasets and consultation with domain experts from clinical partners.
Outcomes-driven and cost-driven optimized decisions will be compared to current
clinical practice. This exploratory research will provide the groundwork for
follow-up projects in decision support information presentation, integration
with clinical workflow and IT systems, and making the transition from
retrospective studies to clinical trials. Other broader impacts include
workshops for healthcare applications of AI, and women and minority students
will be recruited and mentored in graduate and undergraduate computer science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach of this research builds on
state-of-the-art machine learning and artificial intelligence methods to
automatically learn, simulate, and reason about patient-specific treatment
plans. Such methods must be simultaneously probabilistic and temporal.
Probabilistic techniques are needed to handle significant uncertainties in
clinical diagnoses and outcomes, much like a human clinician would. Temporal
techniques are needed to consider sequences of future decisions over the course
of treatment, rather than decisions at single time points. More specifically,
this project will consider the use of statistical relational learning (SRL)
techniques to mine for probabilistic, temporal patterns in large electronic
health records, and these patterns will be used in partially-observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs) that exhaustively search for optimal treatment
sequences. Recent results indicate that SRL achieves superior performance to
other machine learning methods in predicting cardiac arrest from demographic and
lifestyle observations, and POMDP treatment plans outperform existing fee-for-
service practices by reducing costs by 50% and improving outcomes by 40% on a
clinical depression dataset. By combining SRL and POMDPs, specifically, using
SRL to learn a disease progression model used by the POMDP, this project aims to
achieve further improvements in recommendation quality and computational
scalability for complex treatments. Furthermore, because EHRs may suffer from
limited or missing data, clinical decision support tools should follow
established practices and expert knowledge when necessary. To do so, new
workflows for integrating expert knowledge into SRL and POMDPs will be explored.
Evaluation will be performed on a variety of disease scenarios in conjunction
with clinical partners at Marshfield Clinic, Centerstone, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, and South Bend Memorial Hospital.