* 1806594
* Transient Optical Nonlinearities Engendered by Femtosecond Laser Filamentation in Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Dmitri Romanov, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 01/31/2023
* USD 270,377.00

Atomic and molecular processes initiated and controlled by intense, ultrashort
laser pulses are a subject of steadily growing interest in plasma science and
related technology. The laser-induced ionization and excitation of individual
atoms and molecules beget in turn various nonlinear optical phenomena in the
plasma medium. One such phenomenon, laser filamentation, is enabled by self-
focusing of the laser beam, which results in a drastic contraction of the laser
pulse and generation of an extended filament at a controllable stand-off
distance. Partially ionized plasma is left in the wake of the filamenting laser
pulse; it can be probed by subsequent laser pulses and is open to various
practical applications. This theoretical research addresses a new realm of
transient nonlinear optics in evolving filament-wake channels; it explores
longer-lasting optical consequences of strong-field ionization occurring in a
relatively dense plasma. The research will advance broader understanding of
means to control strong-field light-matter interaction on a microscopic scale.
It also directly addresses recent developments of filament-based, multiplex
methods of remote detection of complex mixtures, which is a challenge with many
technological applications. It is related to control of filamentation dynamics
with the aim of remote lasing in the atmosphere, and to developing new sources
of attosecond and X-ray pulses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research concerns the
interrelated dynamics of ions, energetic free electrons, and excited neutrals in
wake channels of femtosecond laser filaments, as well as the interaction of the
evolving system with probe laser pulses. The expected outcomes will form a basis
for effective control of filament-wake nonlinear optical effects. The task will
be addressed using a combination of ab initio calculations for nonlinear
response of individual ions, kinetic modeling of inhomogeneous ionized-gas
medium evolution, and density matrix calculations for probe laser coupling with
the medium. The objectives include:&lt;br/&gt;1) developing predictive models of
the evolution of ion density profiles and molecular/atomic excitation in
filament wake channels and ionization gratings, which is driven by competing
processes of impact ionization, impact electronic excitation of neutrals and
ions, dissociative recombination, vibrational excitation, and elastic
scattering; &lt;br/&gt;2) calculating dynamic polarizability and
hyperpolarizability coefficients of ions in the wake of the ionizing laser pulse
(when perturbative approaches become applicable) by implementing the auxiliary-
field approach and ab initio calculations, and applying the results to obtain
evolving spatial profiles of dynamic quadratic and quartic nonlinear refractive
indices in filament wake channels; and&lt;br/&gt;3) predicting outcomes of
nonlinear interactions of probe laser pulses with the wake channels, including
two-beam coupling mediated by ionization gratings, ionic rotational revivals,
and controllable spatial-spectral patterns of dynamic Rabi sideband emission.
&lt;br/&gt;The expected results will be applied to experiments on ionization-
related polarization rotation, rotational-revival spectroscopy, and dynamic Rabi
sidebands in filament wake channels at the Center for Advanced Photonics
Research (CAPR) at Temple University. Further, the ionization-specific nonlinear
effects are related to recent experiments on bright higher harmonic generation
(up to X-rays) in highly ionized gases and on igniter-heater processes in
filament wake channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.