* 1806307
* Bath-Induced and Long-Range Interactions in Disordered Strongly Correlated Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Brian DeMarco, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

Disorder, inescapable in nature, can strongly affect the behavior of materials
underpinning modern technologies. An urgent problem confronting physics is
understanding the interplay of disorder and strong inter-particle interactions
in quantum materials. Strong interactions are an ingredient crucial to
remarkable phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity. How
interactions and disorder compete or cooperate in these materials to affect
superconductivity and give rise to new quantum states is not fully understood.
Ultracold atoms trapped in an optical lattice, which is a crystal formed from
light, will be used as a model system to study this critical problem.
Controllable and completely characterized disorder will be introduced by
superimposing optical speckle, which is a laser beam consisting of randomly
distributed bright and dark regions. The emergence of different quantum states
as the disorder and interactions are independently tuned will be measured.
Knowledge gained from this system may lead to a better understanding of high-
temperature superconductors and techniques for mitigating the impact of disorder
on their performance. The next generation of engineers and scientists will be
trained on cutting-edge technologies in laser science, high-frequency microwave
electronics, and high-speed computer-controlled
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous lattice
experiments that discovered a disorder-induced bosonic insulator using Rb-87
atoms and observed a disorder-induced metal-insulator transition using K-40
atoms. Two projects designed to resolve outstanding questions regarding the
interplay of strong interactions and disorder in three dimensions will be
pursued. First, the impact of a bath on disorder-localized states will be
measured using a mixture of Rb-87 hyperfine components trapped in a spin-
dependent lattice. Second, the influence of long-range interactions on quantum
localization will be investigated using Rydberg dressing of K-40 atoms trapped
in a disordered optical lattice. These studies will advance the state-of-the-art
in disordered quantum gases, thus enabling new methods for attacking outstanding
questions related to condensed matter physics and materials science and
enhancing knowledge of strongly correlated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.