* 1806263
* Photoinduced Charge-Shifting and Self-Assembly of Photochromic Polyelectrolytes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Samuel Thomas, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 02/28/2023
* USD 423,694.00

There are many ways to control the properties of matter through chemical
reactions. Light is an especially unique tool for causing chemical reactions
that has many advantages: it can pass through barriers such as glass, travel
long distances, and be switched on and off easily. To control matter with light,
a particular type of light-sensitive chemical called a photochrome is especially
useful. Photochromes are molecules that change structure and color when
irradiated with light. Photochromes also changes back to their original form
when the color of light is changed or the light is removed. Examples of
photochromic matter are glasses that become sunglasses outdoors, but are regular
glasses indoors. The research group of Professor Samuel Thomas at Tufts
University investigates new forms of photochromic matter: plastics that not only
change color, but also dissolve in water when irradiated with light. Because
light causes photochromic molecules to switch reversibly between two structures,
these polymers can then be separated from water when the light is removed,
allowing for "on-demand" control over the water solubility of these plastics.
This fundamental research has the potential to benefit society by opening the
door to a new class of aqueous nanomaterials that harnesses the power of light
to remotely control their properties for eventual utility in encapsulation and
release of drugs in biomedical applications, membranes with switchable
permeability, and reversible adhesives. Beyond the hands-on training that this
research provides to graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, this project
also provides college students from a variety of racial and ethnic backgrounds
with their first experiences in original scientific research. Professor Thomas
continues his successful program of recruiting students from
Bunker&lt;br/&gt;Hill Community College, as well as his partnerships in the
Tufts Visiting and Early Research Scholars Experiences (VERSE) program, which
recruits summer research students from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry and
the Polymers Program of the Division of Materials Research, this project
develops a novel approach to control the properties of polyelectrolytes and
enable the formation of new, self-assembled nanostructures and coacervates that
undergo reversible, photoinduced phase changes as a result of charge shifting.
The first phase of this project is to establish how the structures of both
spiropyran pendants on polymers and hydrophilic co-monomers influence the key
properties of the photochromic units. These properties include the acidity of
protonated merocyanines, the quantum yields of merocyanine ring closures, and
the rates of spiropyran openings. Measurements of photoinduced changes in
solution pH and zeta potentials serve to correlate changes in optical properties
to changes in polyelectrolyte charge. The second phase of this project harnesses
these systematically-derived structure-property relationships to develop
reversible, photoinduced formation of polyelectrolyte nanostructures and
coacervates through the corresponding changes in polymer charge at near-neutral
pH. Further extension of these principles to photochromic block copolymers is
aimed at reversible self-complexation and self-
coacervation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.