* 1806733
* Correlations of Stimulated Matterwave Emissions and Interaction-Induced Gauge Field in Driven Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Cheng Chin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 495,000.00

This project will explore a new phenomena called "Bose fireworks" that was
recently discovered at the University of Chicago. Bose fireworks occur when
dense samples of ultracold gas known as Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC) emit
jets of matterwaves in different directions, making formations reminiscent of
fireworks. Such behavior is stimulated by subjecting the BEC to periodic
modulations in potential energy. This project will investigate in detail how
Bose fireworks occur, and how correlations between the strength and direction of
the jets develop. This can serve as a model for universal behavior of a quantum
many-body system driven far from thermal equilibrium, and may pioneer a new type
of quantum simulation. This is important because it can address fundamental
issues in nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, and even cosmology.
Graduate students engaged in this project will be trained in cutting edge atomic
physics research techniques. This team will also disseminate research excitement
to broader audiences, including underrepresented minority (URM) K-12 students
and undergraduate students on the south side of Chicago via an outreach activity
that provides week-long science activities in summer. Another educational
activity as part of this project will be the establishment of a new
undergraduate-led laboratory for innovative experimentation, called
"Undergraduate Research Center on Levitation Science". The laboratory will offer
unique opportunities for many talented undergraduate students to innovate and be
involved in the development of new ideas that can potentially impact fundamental
science and interdisciplinary applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study novel correlations of matterwave emissions recently observed in
driven Bose-Einstein condensates. By periodically modulating the atomic
scattering length, a firework-like emission of matterwave jets is found to
reveal rich, intricate correlations between the populations in different
momentum modes. The emission resembles the matterwave version of superradiance
in a dense sample, and is theoretically predicted to be a universal signature
for driven quantum many-body system far from thermal equilibrium. This team will
investigate the stimulated emission of matterwaves in both Bose condensates and
Bose-Fermi mixtures. The fireworks can be a powerful tool to probe weak quantum
fluctuations and correlations. This team will also develop a new scheme to
realize an interaction-dependent synthetic gauge field by combining the
modulation of scattering length and the shaking of a 2D optical lattice. This
will test a prediction that the scattering length modulation will hybridize the
Floquet bands in the two lattice directions and will lead to an interaction-
dependent D4 and D2 symmetry breaking that would not occur for non-interacting
bosons. The interaction-driven gauge field is an essential step to couple matter
and gauge fields and to explore quantum simulation of dynamical gauge fields and
anyonic excitations based on atomic quantum gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.