* 1806514
* Gravitational Radiation from Black Holes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Jeffrey Winicour, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2020
* USD 40,415.00

This award supports studies of the revolutionary prediction of Einstein's
general theory of relativity that accelerated bodies produce gravitational
waves, analogous to the way electric charges produce electromagnetic waves.
Waves, such as water, sound, elastic and electromagnetic waves, are a prominent
feature of physical systems. Previous work on this project involved
international experts spanning applied mathematics, computation, gravitational
theory and astrophysics and led to new methods which have found application to a
broad class of problems, e.g. seismology. In a historic scientific event leading
to a Nobel prize award, gravitational waves were recently detected by a Laser
Interferometric Gravity Wave Observatory (LIGO). This initial detection was a
resounding confirmation of Einstein's theory. In collaboration with the European
Virgo gravitational wave observatory, it opens a new form of astronomy which
will expand our knowledge of the universe. The powerful gravitational waves in
the initial detection resulted from the inspiral and merger of two co-orbiting
black holes. The excitement generated by this dramatic event has led to overflow
audiences at public lectures and has inspired young talent to enter the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Einstein's equations describe the
production of gravitational waves, their complexity and nonlinearity make a
purely analytic approach inadequate. This necessitated the introduction of
computational methods into general relativity. A main goal of the project is to
develop new methods for computing the gravitational waveform and other physical
properties of binary black hole inspirals, such as the energy-momentum and
angular momentum loss. The approach utilizes characteristic evolution based upon
the light cones on which the radiation propagates. Most computational work is
based upon time evolution using the Cauchy initial value problem. The
reformulation of the initial value problem for general relativity in terms of
light cones by Bondi and by Penrose resulted in the first clear understanding of
gravitational radiation. Characteristic evolution has led to the first code
which could successfully locate, track, evolve and compute the waveform for a
single distorted, spinning and moving black hole. However, the focusing of the
light cones in a binary problem leads to interior caustics which prevent a
purely characteristic approach. On the other hand, present Cauchy codes require
a finite artificial outer boundary which introduces ambiguity and error in
extracting the waveform. The global strategy pursued here combines Cauchy
evolution in the interior region containing the black holes with characteristic
evolution in the exterior region extending along the light cones to infinity.
This integrates the complementary strengths of Cauchy and characteristic
evolution and has led to a characteristic wave extraction tool which is
available to the numerical relativity community as part of the Einstein
Toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.