* 1806926
* Collaborative Research: A Quantitative Framework for the Flow of Metals in Nearby Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Kristen McQuinn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2019
* USD 255,632.00

Chemical elements, such as oxygen and nitrogen, are forged in the interior of
stars. When stars end their lives as supernova explosions, many of these
elements are expelled and mix into the local environment within a galaxy. These
expelled elements are the seeds for future generations of stars and planets. If
there are enough supernova explosions, or if the galaxy is small, some of the
elements will leave the galaxy entirely and end up in intergalactic space.
Therefore, measuring the types of elements in galaxies, and finding where the
elements are located, give important clues about the history of galaxies in the
Universe. These investigators will perform optical and radio wavelength
observations of 36 nearby galaxies to study how galaxies produce, distribute,
and expel elements. Their research results will help us understand how galaxies
change over time and will be used as input to galaxy formation models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally, the observed gas-phase metallicities in
nearby galaxies should correspond to the production and release of stellar
nucleosynthesis products and, thus, provide a robust trace of galaxy formation
and life cycle. Global scaling relations, such as the mass-metallicity relation,
show gas-phase metallicities increase steeply with galaxy mass. The
investigators seek to build an over-arching, quantitative framework of the
production, transport, distribution, and retention of metals in low-mass
galaxies. Specifically, they will determine the full chemical enrichment
histories of a statistical sample of low-mass galaxies in the nearby universe
from a comprehensive set of spectroscopic and imaging
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators, both women astronomers, will work
to develop a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce by working with
undergraduate and graduate students on this research project. Additionally,
their research highlights will be broadcasted on the public "StarDate" Radio
program to an audience of 750,000. The co-investigator will continue to lead
nationwide efforts to reduce interference at radio wavelengths. The efforts to
reduce radio interference are critical for enabling radio astronomy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.