* 1806147
* Rational Design of High-performance Semiconductors based on Inorganic Perovskites Containing Bismuth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Pratim Biswas, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The development of high-performance oxide
semiconductors with desired electronic structure has direct implications on many
energy-related applications including photovoltaics, high-power electronics, and
photocatalysis. This project employs an integrated theoretical and experimental
approach to rapidly discover new high-performance semiconductors based on
perovskite-framework oxides and oxynitrides containing bismuth. This family of
promising compounds represents a vast composition space that remains largely
unexplored. The project combines first-principles quantum-mechanical
calculations with materials informatics to rapidly predict promising new
semiconductors. Advanced synthesis and characterization techniques are used to
optimize the microstructure and improve the performance of these semiconductors.
Education and outreach components of the project focus on preparing both
graduate and undergraduate students for the workforce needed to realize advanced
energy technologies. The project leverages a co-advised doctoral program, the
McDonnell Academy Global Energy and Environmental Partnership (MAGEEP), to
provide graduate students with an international experience to interact with
their counterparts from universities in developing countries, where energy
issues play a vital role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project
seeks to discover high-performance and defect-tolerant semiconductors that can
replace unstable and toxic lead-halide perovskites in a variety of applications
including in high-efficiency solar cells and photocatalysis. This is carried out
by replacing the toxic lead cation in 2+ oxidation state with isoelectronic
bismuth cation in 3+ oxidation state, without compromising the advantages
presented by the perovskite framework. This interdisciplinary research combines
first-principles density-functional theory calculations with materials
informatics to accelerate the discovery of stable Bi-based perovskites with
targeted band gap and electronic structure. The research employs a combination
of solid-state chemistry, wet-chemistry and aerosol-based synthesis techniques
to synthesize the predicted materials and control their microstructure. It uses
a variety of characterization techniques including aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscope imaging and monochromated electron energy loss
spectroscopy for atomic-scale characterization of the defects in the synthesized
materials. Education aspects include training of undergraduate and graduate
students including exposure to international students working on energy
materials and the organization of summer workshops on nanomaterials for energy
applications for K-12 teachers and students from schools in St. Louis and the
surrounding region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.