* 1806368
* Research in Theoretical Nuclear and Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Akif Baha Balantekin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 255,000.00

Exploring the origin, evolution and the structure of the visible matter is an
ongoing quest of modern science. The lightest elements are formed during the
first minutes after the Big Bang, the epoch known as the Big Bang
Nucleosynthesis (BBN). The BBN epoch and the proceeding evolution of the stars
until they go supernova produce elements up to iron. Most of the elements
heavier than iron are thought to be produced by the capture of neutrons on seed
nuclei. Possible sites of the rapid neutron capture process (r-process) include
matter evaporated from the surface of a hot neutron star formed following a
supernova explosion, the merging of two neutron stars (recently observed for the
first time), and accretion disks in gamma-ray bursts. Irrespective of the
precise details of the elements-formation process, one needs an abundance of
neutrons over protons. All environments listed above also contain a very large
number of neutrinos, which control the ratio of neutrons to protons. This
project will explore the interplay between neutrino properties and the formation
of elements using tools from nuclear physics and astrophysics, as well as
experimental and observational data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the description of neutrino transport in the r-process sites by
solving the many-body equations describing collective oscillations of neutrinos,
which are emergent nonlinear flavor evolution phenomena instigated by neutrino-
neutrino interactions in astrophysical environments with sufficiently high
neutrino densities. The goal is to bring together our theoretical and
computational efforts with the optical observations of the abundances of
chemical elements to explain where in the cosmos these elements are formed. The
PI and his students will explore properties of neutrinos such as masses,
mixings, and dipole moments and calculate their capture cross sections to
facilitate this goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.