* 1806962
* RUI: Dense Matter and Gravitational Waves: The Coalescence of Neutron Star Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jocelyn Read, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 204,874.00

The LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the Virgo Collaborations recently
announced the first observation of gravitational waves from merging neutron
stars. The first gravitational-wave constraints on neutron-star matter have
begun to shine new light on the properties of matter above nuclear density,
cross-checking neutron-star measurements in electromagnetic astronomy and
informing calculations in nuclear physics. Upgrades to the detectors are in
progress, and we are soon to enter an era in which regular observations can used
to learn about astrophysical sources. These first constraints will be supplanted
by precision measurements that rely on an accurate understanding of how neutron
star matter affects gravitational waves. In the proposed work, the CSUF students
will explore the impact of dense matter on gravitational waves. This research
introduces them to the science community, sparking future participation in
gravitational astrophysics, data science, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSUF group will develop on-the-fly hybrid
waveform infrastructure within LIGO software, connecting expensive numerical
mergers to long analytic inspirals with desired parameters, yielding waveforms
spanning LIGO's entire frequency band and quantifying accuracy requirements.
They will determine and work to reduce the systematic errors in gravitational-
wave parameter estimation techniques using multiple neutron-star waveform models
and simulations. These efforts will connect the information coming from
gravitational-wave observations with the broader astrophysical context of dense
neutron-star matter and microphysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.