* 1806461
* Experiments and Simulations for Improving the Sensitivity of Advanced LIGO and Future Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Paul Fulda, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2022
* USD 412,614.00

The first detection of gravitational waves by Advanced LIGO in 2015 marked the
dawn of the era of gravitational wave astronomy. Since then Advanced LIGO has
continued to provide fascinating insights into the nature of our universe;
confirming the existence of several merging black hole binary systems, as well
as detecting gravitational waves from a neutron star inspiral and merger in
parallel with electromagnetic observations. In spite of these incredible
achievements (recognized with awards including the Nobel Prize in Physics),
Advanced LIGO is not yet operating at its predicted maximum sensitivity. This
award supports research in the form of experiments and simulations towards
improving the sensitivity of Advanced LIGO, with the aim of detecting
gravitational wave events more often and with higher signal-to-noise ratios.
Higher sensitivity observations will increase the scientific yield of observing
runs, allowing us to make stronger statements about the nature of gravity, the
composition of neutron stars, and the formation history of black holes in our
universe. This award also supports research into technology for gravitational
wave detectors beyond Advanced LIGO, so that the scientific community can be
prepared to build the detectors of the future with the best possible design and
components. Much of the supported work will be performed by undergraduate
students, postgraduate students and recent PhD graduates. This will provide an
excellent training opportunity for these junior scientists, allowing them to
gain valuable skills and experience, while also serving to bolster the
scientific workforce in the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
several experimental programs aimed at developing specific technologies for
potential use in Advanced LIGO and future gravitational wave detectors. All
interferometric gravitational wave detectors employ schemes to manage wavefront
distortions in the laser beams that probe the position of the test masses, which
can limit the sensitivity of detectors in several ways. Wavefront distortions
will become even more critical as squeezed light technology is employed in order
to reduce the quantum noise limit of the detectors. An experimental program will
be carried out to investigate new ways to sense these distortions as they arise,
in order that they can be corrected before they negatively impact the detector
sensitivity. Another experimental program performed under this award will
develop a new alignment sensing technique, which has the potential to simplify
the optical layout of gravitational wave detectors and reduce the misalignment
driven noise. An experimental investigation will also be pursued to determine
the feasibility of using non-traditional laser beam shapes in order to reduce
the effects of mirror thermal noise on interferometer sensitivity. This award
also supports the development and use of laser interferometer simulation tools
for characterizing and improving the operation of the Advanced LIGO detectors.
Simulations have often played a key role in understanding the limiting noise
sources in interferometers, and can be used to provide rapid tests of potential
solutions before their often costly and time-intensive implementation in real
detectors. The work performed under this award will also look beyond Advanced
LIGO to near-term upgrades and longer-term new detectors, using similar
simulations to help in the design and optimization of these new, more sensitive
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.