* 1806356
* Theoretical Investigations in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Abhay Ashtekar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 906,968.00

This project will aim at making significant contributions to several areas
within gravitational physics. The topics range from understanding the signals
observed by gravitational wave detectors such as NSF's Laser Interferometric
Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) and the European Virgo, to studying the
nature of black holes and the origin of the Universe. As with the past research
supported by ongoing NSF grants, these results are likely to feature as
highlights in interdisciplinary conferences, enhancing communication between
diverse communities. Research funded by this grant will also add to human
resources in STEM disciplines since post-docs and students will acquire diverse
skills, including advanced computational and modeling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported by this grant will cover the
following main themes: (i) Gravitational waves. Recent discoveries at LIGO have
opened a brand new window on the universe. The first set of projects in the
proposed research will lay down foundations for production and propagation of
gravitational waves in the realistic context of the accelerating universe with
dark energy, which we inhabit. (ii) A second set of projects will focus on
quantum mechanical properties of black holes. In the classical world of general
relativity, black holes are sinks of matter, energy and information. But they
evaporate through emission of quantum radiation. There is a general agreement
that energy is conserved in this process but there has been an ongoing debate on
whether information is still lost, or if it is fully encoded in the quantum
radiation that is emitted. Previous work supported by this ongoing NSF grant
strongly suggests that quantum gravity effects will remove the `singularity' at
the center of the black hole, thereby clearing the way for information --that
appeared to be lost there-- to come out. Details of this process will be worked
out. (iii) The third project involves the very early universe. In the currently
accepted cosmological paradigms, quantum physics is indispensable in the very
early phase of the universe, and yet, soon thereafter it is customary to assume
that the universe behaves classically, as in general relativity. How this
classical behavior can emerge, and why all the subtleties and intricacies of
quantum physics can be ignored, are issues of great interest both for
foundational reasons and for bridging theory with observations. They will be
addressed using a combination of methods from quantum field theory in curved
space-times, equations governing dynamics of the early universe and geometric
formulation of quantum mechanics. (iv) All three projects discussed above are of
deep interest to researchers working at the interface of philosophy and
frontiers of physical science, particularly general relativity, cosmology and
quantum physics. The results will be discussed at conferences and workshops in
these fields, and serve to train young scientists and philosophers in both
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.