* 1806924
* Thermochronology at the nanoscale: delineating the challenges and opportunities in Pb isotope analysis of zircon by atom probe tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Tyler Blum, Blum                    Tyler          B
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2021
* USD 174,000.00

This postdoctoral fellowship is awarded to Dr. Tyler Blum to work at the
University of Wisconsin Madison and Max-Plank-Institut fur Eisenforschung GmbH
(MPIE) in Dusseldorf, Germany. The proposed work will analyze several 3.3-4.0
billion-year-old zircons from the Beartooth Mountains, USA, in order to study
the geological controls (thermal, temporal, and crystallographic) on the
formation of small, trace element-rich clusters, and how they can be used to
deduce unique information about the thermal histories for old, out of context
zircons. Recent technological advances have enabled the application of atom
probe tomography (APT) to geological materials, where it offers a unique means
to study mineral structure and chemistry (with isotope sensitivity) in three
dimensions and at the near atomic scale. This work expands upon recent atom
probe analysis of zircon, the mineral most widely relied upon for dating
geologic events and looks to improve our understanding of how clustering of
trace elements at the nanometer scale relates to changes in mineral structure
and temperature over geologic time. Importantly, it will help to delineate the
applications and limitations of APT in geochronology, the time periods in
Earth's history where it can be utilized, and the geological variables important
to modeling cluster formation ages. This work will also contribute to a greater
understanding of the nanometer-scale defect structures produced during
radioactive decay and their characteristics over geologic time; the stability
and behavior of these crystallographic domains is highly relevant to more
effective engineering of nuclear waste forms. In collaboration with the
University of Wisconsin -Madison Geology Museum, this work will also include
outreach and education on the geological time scale, our understanding of the
early earth, and the mineral zircon.

The formation of nanoscale trace element-rich clusters is thought to represent a
complex interaction between the atomic-scale processes of radiation damage
accumulation, structural annealing, and trace element migration. As such, there
is potential for the chemistry of these clusters, as well as their phase
relations and formation ages, to record previously unrecognized high-temperature
episodes early in Earth's history. The ability to extract information from
clusters hinges on a thorough understanding of their formation and stability, as
well as the instrumental and geological limitations in age determination. This
project combines secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), electron backscatter
diffraction (EBSD), hyperspectral Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and APT to characterize zircon structure and chemistry from the
grain scale to the atomic scale. By applying this set of characterization tools
to both Archean zircon grains from the Beartooth Mountains, USA, and laboratory
annealed zircon, this proposal seeks to resolve: (1) the structural and thermal
controls on formation of trace element-rich clusters, (2) the geological and
instrumental limitations for determination of 207Pb/206Pb ratios (and modeled
formation ages for clusters), and (3) where APT analysis of zircon can be
applied within the geological record to extract novel information about zircon
thermal histories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.