* 1806874
* IGE: Individualized Pathways and Resources to Adaptive Control Theory-Inspired Scientific Education (iPRACTISE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sy-Miin Chow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 490,804.00

Big data and the data science skills to analyze data are critical in all
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) areas. Within this
data-rich context, incoming STEM graduate students with different levels of data
science and STEM training can complicate curricular approaches for mastery of
data science techniques. Linear and uniform preparation models may even widen
the performance gap among students with diverse levels of preparation. This
issue might be circumvented by replacing traditional "one-size-fits-all" course
content with personalized electronic training modules that are tailored to each
student's unique strengths, weaknesses, and training goals. This National
Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education award to Penn State
University aims to develop, test, and refine a set of digital educational tools
brought together by the Individualized Pathways and Resources to Adaptive
Control Theory-Inspired Scientific Education system (iPRACTISE). The goal of
iPRACTISE is to direct each student toward a personally optimized training
pathway for mastery of data science techniques. The iPRACTISE system will allow
students to specify their own learning goals, provide customized assessments to
evaluate their performance levels, and guide them to educational resources that
help them reach their goals. In this way, the iPRACTISE system serves as an
initial proof-of-concept for a personalized, digital graduate educational system
that could be adapted for use in a broad array of educational settings to
enhance individual learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personalized education can be
viewed as a control theory problem in which students seek ongoing input, such as
classes, curricular resources and training exercises to minimize the
discrepancies between their actual and targeted levels of expertise. The
iPRACTISE system will include: (1) digital training materials curated from
existing teaching resources and a user-interface for instructors to populate the
system with new training materials; (2) a user interface to specify training
goals; (3) a computerized assessment system that evaluates students' current
ability levels; and (4) control theory algorithms that automate the delivery of
optimal, individualized training modules. The project will collect test data
from a calibration sample consisting of graduate and advanced undergraduate
students from multiple campuses at Penn State University to develop and test the
assessment system (for evaluating student competency) and the control theory
algorithm (for making personalized recommendations on training contents). After
initial calibration, the iPRACTISE system offerings will be expanded and
learning outcomes compared across diverse student cohorts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.