* 1806059
* Mixed Ion Electron Conductor (MIEC) Cascade Electrodes for High Density Energy Storage in Li2O2
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Adam Holewinski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2022
* USD 342,695.00

The lithium (Li)-air battery, with its potential energy density close to
1,700Wh/kg, is a promising battery solution for electric vehicles and renewable
energy storage. In addition, light-weight and low-volume energy storage is
crucial for a broad range of mobile power supply needs. This project will
characterize a number of chemical processes that are relevant to storing energy
using a reversible reaction between lithium and oxygen. The lithium-air battery
system has the potential to be significantly lighter than conventional lithium-
ion batteries of similar capacity. Current Li-air technology suffers from low
efficiency and energy capacity. Battery cell design and operating conditions can
be modified in ways to increase performance, but these conditions create a
number of new complications, particularly with regard to materials durability.
This project addresses a battery using solid materials (in contrast to
conventional cells using organic liquid electrolytes). The research will
determine the chemical nature and physical properties of various requisite
solid-solid interfaces that can influence the viability of this battery design.
The research will also provide fundamental knowledge of materials that are
applicable to safer solid-state designs for conventional Li-ion batteries as
well. Several educational outreach efforts will also be undertaken in this
project. The PI will engage in a research experience for teachers (RET) program
for local community college instructors for them to gain direct exposure to
energy research and to incorporate related concepts into their curricula.
Several undergraduate research internships will also be provided, and a series
of educational web-modules related to batteries will be
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li-O2 batteries have received recent attention due
to their high theoretical energy density. To date these devices are still
regarded as impractical due to the poor conducting character of the Li2O2
product (resulting in self-limiting discharge), as well as parasitic reactions
with electrolyte solvents. This project will explore chemistries associated with
a novel approach to raise the conductivity of Li2O2 through adjustments to
operating conditions and doping. The approach utilizes an all-solid-state cell
architecture. There is presently very little knowledge of the growth mechanisms
and polarization behavior for the Li-O2 redox system under these conditions. The
fundamental research will characterize charge carrier mobility, interfacial
stability, and dopant chemistry with the aim of understanding how to engineer
reversible, energy-dense storage systems based on Li-O2 redox. A key aspect of
this work is a multi-faceted methodology for characterization of 'buried
interfaces' between interacting solid materials, which are notoriously difficult
to access. The project will utilize a combination of in-situ XPS, impedance
spectroscopy, and cross-sectional aberration-corrected electron microscopy to
characterize the properties of these interfaces and their evolution as a
function of time, temperature, and polarization. While emphasis is placed on
characterizing interfacial chemistries between Li2O2 and solid electrochemical
materials, the methods and systems studied will yield insight that is
transferrable to problems of broader interest in solid state ionics,
particularly in the growing field of solid state Li-ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.