* 1806152
* Fundamental Study of Dopants Effect for Stable Hybrid Perovskite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Tao Xu, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,585.00

Nontechnical Description: Dopants govern and regulate a variety of electronic,
optical, thermal and mechanical properties, thus playing a pivotal role in
various materials research ranging from metals, semiconductors and insulators.
Therefore, fundamental insights to the dopants effect on emerging materials
provide a versatile kit to radically tailor the material properties to best fit
in their desired practical applications and even lead to discovery of new
materials and applications. As a game-changing player in the field of
photovoltaics, organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites materials (HPM) has
exhibited impressive photovoltaic efficiency. However, HPM still suffer from
major challenges including chemical instability and lead toxicity due to: (i)
hydration effects, leading to structural failure and (ii) formation of vacancy
defects, leading to poor carrier lifetime. In this project, the research team
aims to understand the various dopants in HPM and to pursue their synergistic
effect towards stable HPM based on fundamental chemical principles. Meanwhile,
as an effective way to train the next generation of scientists, the team aims to
work with the nearby world-class research facilities at Argonne National
Laboratory through existing collaborations with Argonne scientists such that
both graduate and undergraduate students with wide diversities can be involved
in frontline research projects at their young age, and trained with skills in
cutting-edge facilities, interdisciplinary knowledge, critical thinking, problem
solving, and team work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project
has a two-fold objective, namely to establish the relationship between dopants
(type, amount and location) and the chemical stability of the HPM while
minimizing the loss in PV performance; and to provide an atomic level
understanding of how the proposed dopants stabilize the vulnerable ions in HPM
and affect their PV performance. A synergistic co-doping of both cations and
anions is conducted to study their effect on the overall chemical stability. The
team is also exploring the interplay between charge-isotropic cationic dopants
and multivalent anionic dopants, which are hypothesized to enhance electrostatic
coupling between the cationic and anionic parts in HPM, and thus enabling
greater rigidity of the overall perovskite structure. The research involves the
use of dopants capable of forming strong hydrogen bonding at the atomic level
gateway of the perovskite structure to effectively block the ingression of water
molecules. Furthermore, the research also involves the use of selected reducing
dopants to suppress oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ in Sn-based HPM, based on
understanding of what and how reductants can retard the oxidation of Sn2+.
Additionally, a high pressure technique is used to minimize the Sn2+ vacancy
defects in Sn-based HPM. By prudently designing the type, amount and location of
the dopants towards minimal loss in PV efficiency and maximal stability
enhancement benefited from the dopants, the ultimate research goal is to provide
a clear path to atomically reinforced structure of HPM using dopants as the
stabilizing rivets in order to achieve stable and lead-free perovskite solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.