* 1806113
* RUI: Multipole Plasma Trap Proof of Concept Investigation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Nathaniel Hicks, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 252,726.00

The goal of this research is to investigate a new concept for containing a
plasma, the Multipole Plasma Trap (MPT) concept. Plasma is a state of matter
similar to a gas but consisting of electrically charged particles such as
electrons and ions. The MPT is a structure of specially shaped electrodes that
creates electrical conditions in which the plasma particles may be contained due
to the focusing effect of rapidly varying voltage applied between the
electrodes. The ability of the MPT to trap various kinds of plasma for
laboratory studies will be explored by conducting experiments and computer
simulations. The MPT project at the University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA) is the
centerpiece of the UAA Plasma Lab, which supports undergraduate research
experience across several STEM fields. Plasma science and engineering is a
rapidly growing, multidisciplinary field, with many basic physics questions to
be answered as well as technological applications to be developed. The UAA
community, ranging from students working directly on the project to broader K-12
and general public audiences, will observe and participate in the MPT research,
will see the benefits and opportunities of STEM education and careers, and will
make connections with plasma science and engineering in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is an experimental and
computational study of the trapping of quasi-neutral plasma by three-dimensional
(3D), time-varying electric multipole fields. Prior work has shown that radio-
frequency (RF) structures of varying multipole order can trap various plasma
configurations, consisting of ions only, electrons and ions, or pair and
antimatter plasma components. The multipole field is chosen predominantly to
interact strongly with light particles but negligibly with heavy ones. Two-
dimensional particle-in-cell (PIC) modeling has shown that the light species
experiences a pseudopotential well, with overall space charge neutralized by the
heavy species, and the modeling has defined particular multipole and plasma
configurations of interest for detailed 3D PIC modeling and first experimental
tests of this Multipole Plasma Trap concept. The behavior of marginally stable
particles at the plasma edge and RF sheath, as well as ponderomotive
gyroresonance effects, are new topics to be studied. The proof of concept
experiment will utilize a hexadecapole structure in an ultrahigh vacuum chamber
to trap plasma consisting of light positive ions and heavy negative ions, as
well as positive ions and electrons, and it will investigate loading the trap
via ion sources and diagnosing trapped plasma
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.