* 1806130
* LSAMP BD: University of Alabama at Birmingham-Alabama LSAMP Sustainability of Best Practices
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Louis Dale, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022
Strategic Plan, namely to foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation. The vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) will be
the host site for the 2018-2020 Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP BD) Program. The activities of
UAB's intensive, highly interactive program will provide diverse graduate
students who are Alabama LSAMP BD Fellows with research training in STEM
disciplines. Retention strategies for BD students at UAB will be carried out by
providing the best available research experiences and resources; establishing
appropriate faculty guidance; quality mentoring and providing the support needed
to accomplish the goal of earning doctoral degrees in STEM. Additionally,
students will participate in special topic seminars, professional and social
networking activities, receive group and individual career counseling, and
engage in internship opportunities and travel to attend professional
conferences. The project will build upon existing relationships between UAB and
other universities, national laboratories and NSF programs such as EPSCoR, to
increase the number of minority students enrolling and matriculating in MS and
PhD STEM graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.