* 1806259
* Spin and Spatial Correlations of Few-Body Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Doerte Blume, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 352,580.00

Ultracold systems comprised of a few isolated trapped atoms permit quantum
correlations and entanglement to be studied with an unprecedented degree of
control. Using analytical and numerical techniques, this project studies
correlations between spatial positions and spins in such ultracold atomic few-
body systems. These theoretical studies are conducted in close collaboration
with experimentalists exploring ultracold matter. The project aims at developing
a microscopic, bottom-up understanding of the correlations in different
prototype quantum systems, where theoretical predictions can be confronted with
experimental results. The long term goals of this branch of physics include the
development of significantly improved imaging systems and sensors, which could
have widespread applications. As part of this project, graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in science and technology areas, in which
there currently exists a high demand across the US. While conducting this
research, the students will develop subsidiary skills in high performance
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea behind the first study, which is
motivated by on-going experiments in Jochim's group in Heidelberg, is
conceptually simple. Preparing an initial few-fermion state in an external trap
and then inducing an expansion by weakening the trap potential, the group will
study how correlations of the initial state get imprinted on the time-evolved
wave packet. They will try to develop methods to distinguish between "trivial"
correlations induced by the particle statistics and "non-trivial" correlations
due to the short-range contact interactions. Likewise, they will try to identify
correlations which are signatures of the initial state, and contrast them with
those developed during the expansion. The second and third topics are
interrelated. They consider ultracold few-atom systems in the presence of
synthetic gauge fields, which introduce a coupling between the spin and the
linear momentum of an atom. The spin-momentum coupling leads to non-quadratic
single-particle dispersions, which modify the large interparticle-distance-
asymptotics of oscillatory scattering wave functions and exponentially decaying
bound state wave functions. The second topic entails developing two-particle
scattering frameworks for various spin-momentum coupling schemes that account
for the correlations between the spin and momentum. The anticipated findings are
expected to significantly modify the standard textbook framework of partial wave
scattering. The third topic entails determining bound state spectra and wave
functions of few-atom states in the presence of spin-momentum coupling.
Particular emphasis will be put on the enhancement of the correlations in the
near-threshold regime. Spin-momentum coupling is an essential component in a
myriad of applications including the study of (fractional) topological
insulators, interferometry and gravimetry, spintronic devices, and the creation
of Majorana fermions and their use in quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.