* 1806809
* Quantum Dynamics of Rydberg Atoms in Molecules and in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Since its inception, quantum mechanics has intrigued both scientists and non-
scientists alike due to its prediction of mind-boggling phenomena that seem to
defeat common sense. These include the tunnel effect (particles penetrating
through walls), entanglement and non-locality (long-range spooky actions that
seem incompatible with special relativity and causality), and quantum coherence
of large objects. This project aims at harnessing quantum-mechanics rules to
achieve objectives in the fields of molecular physics, the quantum dynamics of
large particles (Rydberg atoms) in trapping structures, and high-precision
spectroscopy to measure fundamental constants. Work in these areas furthers
progress in fundamental and applied science, is important for continued national
progress in technological infrastructure and defense, and is necessary to
maintain competitiveness within the international landscape. Through student
involvement, the project also contributes to the development of a capable
scientific workforce, which is essential for a technology-driven
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is focused on quantum-dynamical
studies of Rydberg atoms. These are atoms that have an electron in a highly
excited state, leading to a rich internal electronic structure with many
quantum-mechanical states. A quantum description of the atomic center-of-mass
motion is added to arrive at a comprehensive quantum-mechanical description that
includes both internal and external degrees of freedom, needed to accomplish new
goals in both theoretical and experimental research. Methods of high-precision
laser spectroscopy are employed to measure optical and sub-Terahertz atomic
transitions, allowing one to determine atomic and ionic polarizabilities, as
well as the Rydberg constant. This high-precision-measurement component of the
work is important because it helps solving a challenge known as the "proton
radius puzzle", which has recently arisen in advanced fundamental science. The
center-of-mass motion of Rydberg atoms trapped in periodic, laser-generated
wells (optical lattices) is manifest in vibrationally resolved lattice
modulation spectra, in Bloch oscillations induced by electric-dipole forces
acting onto the atoms, and in atom-interferometric effects (such as the Talbot
effect). These aspects may lend themselves to future practical measurement and
sensing applications. In Rydberg molecules, improved atom localization tools and
time-resolved imaging of the Rydberg atoms on sub-atomic length scales enable
direct studies of vibrational dynamics. This component is important because it
advances the understanding of novel classes of molecules that involve paradigms
of molecular binding that were, until recently, unknown. The work is accompanied
by studies on optical circularization of Rydberg atoms, the continued
development of multi-photon electromagnetically-induced transparency as an all-
optical readout of spectroscopic data, and the pursuit of ultra-clean optical-
lattice potentials using optical cavities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.