* 1806595
* Synthesizing and Harnessing Ultracold Single Molecules for Quantum Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Kang-Kuen Ni, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Atoms and molecules are the building blocks of everyday matter, and scientists
are learning to control these building blocks with ever more precision. In one
noteworthy example, quantum control of atoms was used to build atomic clocks
that enable the Global Positioning System (GPS). More recently, scientists
discovered that atoms and molecules can be harnessed to build a quantum
simulator, a resource for studying complex quantum phenomena. This is important
because quantum simulators may lead to advances in chemistry, medicine,
computation, and several other scientific fields that contribute to the national
health and economy. However, a reliable way to build useful quantum simulators
is not yet known. This project aims to pioneer methods to prepare and control
individual molecules for use in a quantum simulator. If these basic steps are
successful, then larger quantum simulators can be built using these principles.
This project will also train graduate students and undergraduate students to use
molecular physics and quantum control techniques, and this will prepare them to
participate in the high technology work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop a source of trapped ultracold ground-state molecules with single
particle manipulation and detection capability, which are crucial to future
quantum applications. To develop tools to build such diatomic molecules atom-by-
atom, many widely used Atomic Molecular and Optical (AMO) physics techniques
need to be further updated and expanded in order to access a much broader array
of atoms and molecules. This includes the ability to trap single atoms by fast
alternating trapping and cooling beams to eliminate light shifts, Raman sideband
cooling of single atoms outside the Lamb-Dicke regime, and coherent all-optical
atom-to-molecule conversion without large spontaneous emission. Many new tools
will be explored, including atomic species-dependent optical tweezers for
transportation without motional excitation. Combining such exquisite control of
individual atoms with a tightly focused spectroscopy laser beam will enable the
first realization of single molecule spectroscopy in the gas phase. Such a novel
source of two atoms would also provide a new paradigm of collisional study in
which the exact number of participating collision partners are prepared.
Furthermore, one could use the rich manifold of internal states of molecules as
synthetic dimensions, strong electric dipolar interactions, and flexible
geometric arrangement of the molecules in order to study novel phases of matter
such as many-body localization and a quantum dipolar spin
liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.