* 1806785
* RAPID: Interactive Internet Outages Visualization to Assess Disaster Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2019
* USD 198,850.00

Natural disasters such as hurricanes and blizzards cause economic and social
disruption in the U.S. and globally. First responders need information about the
extent of problems, citizens would like information about cities where friends
and relatives live, and government planners and researchers would like to design
stronger infrastructure. However, information about the location of problems and
speed of recovery can be slow to emerge during a disaster, and often remains
imprecise and incomplete days or even weeks afterwards. Internet outage
measurements can be a sensor to measure the effects natural disasters. The
principal investigator and his team have shown that Internet outages can be
observed from a few central sites--their work on Trinocular has been peer
reviewed and they have been collecting data twenty four hours a day, seven days
a week for more than two years. Serious natural disasters often result in
Internet outages, typically because of power or communication loss due to
utility pole failure, flooding, or wire breakage; this correlation has been
shown by several groups. While the team makes outage data available to
researchers today, this data is currently inaccessible to lay-people and even
scientists, since they cannot easily browse the data or drill down into regions
of interest. This project makes Internet outage data accessible through a new,
interactive website, with goals of directly assisting citizens, first
responders, and scientists to understand the scope of disasters and their
recovery. Second, this website and data is used to compare the team's outage
data with two sources of "ground truth" outages from disasters. A primary source
of ground truth will be the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC's) NORS
(Network Outage Reporting System): these industry-reported outages are the data
the U.S. Government uses today to assess the status of the U.S.
telecommunications system. This work will build on ongoing collaboration with
the FCC, in which the team provides the FCC with its outage data and works with
them to compare it with the FCC's proprietary data. The team also expects to
compare its data to public reports of utility outages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds a better understanding of the
relationship between detectable outages in the Internet and public utility
outages. This understanding will result from making current data more accessible
to researchers and the public, and through our comparisons of Trinocular to
ground truth data sources. In addition, making existing outage data more
accessible to other researchers. This work promotes a better and more timely
understanding of the consequences of natural disasters and the speed of
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.