* 1806372
* Complex Networks on Quantum States in AMO Platforms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 287,960.00

Complexity science is one of the deep outstanding problems of the 21st century.
What are the origins of complexity generally? Does it appear at the quantum
level? If so, how can it be quantified and what exactly does it imply? This work
will address these questions in three concrete experimental contexts in quantum
simulator platforms, promoting national interests through the progress of
science. This work will expand atomic, molecular, and optical physics and
quantum information science further into complexity science, providing a
concrete way to quantify complexity of quantum states. It will provide an
interdisciplinary connection to statistical physics and complex network science,
applied up till now mainly at the classical level. The semiconductor
technological revolution is based heavily on single-particle quantum mechanics,
from band theory to quantum tunneling; the next step in quantum technology will
certainly involve entanglement. This proposal will explore complexity science as
a key component of that next revolution, by determining the complexity of
entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will explore the complexity of
quantum critical phenomena by applying complex network measures to quantum
mutual information, bounded from below by all two-point correlators. What is the
role of finite temperature and disorder in complexity? How does complexity
depend on different universality classes? Second, this team will study the
emergence of complexity in quantum cellular automata, in particular in
Goldilocks rules, which exhibit robust dynamical features and persistent entropy
fluctuations. What are the dynamical properties of complexity? Does it decohere
easily? How sensitive is it to gate fidelity in quantum operations, or precision
of a Hamiltonian realized in a quantum simulator? Third, this team will apply
complex network measures to higher order phase correlators in atom
interferometry. Does complexity depend on the order of the correlator? What new
features might be unlocked in the high-dimensional spaces of such correlators
with a complexity perspective? Moreover, this grant supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in critical analysis for scientific problem
solving and rigorous numerical techniques for high-performance parallel
computing, which are key to success in a number of arenas in society, from the
materials genome initiative to the space program to quantum computing and the
next stage of quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.