* 1806561
* Exploring the High Energy Frontier with the CMS Electromagnetic Calorimeter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Toyoko Orimoto, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2021
* USD 660,000.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been a remarkably successful theory,
agreeing with several decades of experimental observations involving weak,
electromagnetic, and strong interactions. The LHC discovery of the Higgs boson
in 2012 was further confirmation of this success. However, the Standard Model
remains an incomplete theory. This research will address some of the most
intriguing and pressing questions in particle physics--what is the nature of
electroweak symmetry breaking? What is dark matter? Are there extra spatial
dimensions? In particular, the Higgs boson will be used to constrain the
Standard Model and to probe for new physics. The research carried out through
this award will exploit the excellent performance of the electromagnetic
calorimeter of the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider facility at CERN
in Switzerland to pursue strategically selected physics channels with common
final states and analysis methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines
important contributions to the CMS electromagnetic calorimeter with compelling
physics studies in electron and photon final states, in addition to
contributions to the operation, maintenance, and calibration of the CMS
calorimeter, and involvement in the Phase-2 upgrade of the electromagnetic
calorimeter electronics to fully exploit the opportunities at the High-
Luminosity LHC. Through direct studies of the Higgs boson in the H-&gt;WW,
H-&gt;gamma gamma, H-&gt;Zgamma channels, the question of electroweak symmetry
breaking will be elucidated. Additionally, these channels will help constrain
new physics through indirect means. The group is also searching directly for new
particles (via HH-&gt;bbgammagamma, h-&gt;aa-&gt;4photons) that may exist due to
supersymmetry or extra dimensions. In addition, the study of di-Higgs production
will probe the stability of the vacuum. This work also includes mentoring of
women in physics at Northeastern University and engagement with undergraduates
in research through the Northeastern cooperative education
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.