* 1806596
* Boosting Algorithmic Efficiency: Numerical Relativity in Dynamical, Curvilinear Coordinates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Zachariah Etienne, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 155,893.00

Einstein's theory of general relativity (GR) provides science's current best
understanding of gravity. It predicts the existence of bizarre objects like
black holes and neutron stars, and ripples in spacetime called gravitational
waves. These predictions motivated the construction of the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), which has detected several gravitational
wave signals from colliding black holes and one signal from colliding neutron
stars so far. For their efforts in making these detections possible, the leaders
of LIGO were awarded the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physics. To obtain a deeper
understanding about what produced the observed gravitational waves, LIGO data
analysis compares observed waves with those predicted by Einstein's theory of GR
for a very large number of possible scenarios. Construction of reliable
theoretical models requires the full solutions to the equations underlying GR,
provided by the field of numerical relativity. This project builds upon recent
advances in this field to develop new software that greatly reduces the cost (in
memory) of generating these solutions. Where before numerical relativity largely
depended upon supercomputers, this new software will enable even consumer-grade
desktop computers to generate needed theoretical predictions of merging black
holes needed for LIGO data analysis. In the latter half of the funding period,
the software will be made supercomputer-capable to enable (the far more memory-
hungry) simulations of merging neutron stars on supercomputers with state-of-
the-art accuracy. By unlocking the consumer-grade desktop as a powerful tool for
numerical relativity, this project has the potential to enable the public to
participate in the science in unprecedented ways. This will be made possible by
incorporating this software into SETI@Home's "BOINC" volunteer computing
infrastructure. The hope is that when LIGO detects a pair of merging black
holes, thousands of black hole merger calculations will be launched for the
benefit of LIGO science, each on a consumer-grade desktop computer running our
"BlackHoles@Home" software. To educate the public and advertise this volunteer
computing project both locally and globally, the West Virginia University group
will give convocations in nearby high schools and write articles for the widely
aggregated news site "The Conversation".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical
relativity (NR) solves Einstein's equations of general relativity (GR), in full,
on the computer. Improvements to the algorithmic and mathematical underpinnings
of NR codes have recently culminated in a coming-of-age for the field, moving it
beyond proof-of-principle calculations and into the realm of predictive
astrophysics. Over the past two years, NR-based theoretical predictions of
gravitational waves (GWs) were central to uncovering the binary parameters in
LIGO's recent GW discoveries. Now that the age of multi-messenger astrophysics
has arrived, physical scenarios involving gravitational field and magnetized
fluid dynamics spanning orders of magnitude in length scale and timescale will
need to be modeled. NR codes bridge these scales by dynamically adjusting their
spatial numerical grids to better sample the space, but current algorithms do
not account for near-symmetries in these systems or rely on complex mesh
algorithms. The proposed project involves the development of a new NR code with
the unique goal of being both algorithmically simple and highly efficient,
minimizing computational and human effort while maximizing scientific impact. We
call it SENR, the Simple, Efficient NR code. SENR is unique in its aim to
perform NR simulations of compact binary inspirals atop a single, dynamical,
bispherical-like spatial grid. Exploiting near-symmetries in the underlying
system can reduce computational cost over the most widely-adopted NR methods by
orders of magnitude, and minimizing the grid management infrastructure greatly
simplifies the interpretation of numerical errors and the addition of new
physics modules. SENR builds on a new, highly-robust approach in NR for solving
the GR field equations with hydrodynamics on static curvilinear spatial grids
with coordinate singularities (e.g., spherical polar coordinates), and the PI's
team is extending the approach to arbitrary, dynamical coordinate systems.
Development of SENR is accelerated by a Python-based code-generation tool
developed for this project called NRPy+. Following best-practices in software
design, the small SENR codebase is carefully optimized after each major feature
is added to maximize scientific impact. SENR's memory efficiency unlocks the
desktop as a tool for NR, enabling us to launch the first major volunteer
computing effort to generate an enormous NR-based GW catalog for binary black
holes. Further, SENR's scalability will enable us to leverage supercomputing
resources to generate a very large double neutron star GW catalog as well.
Simplicity in infrastructure greatly reduces effort required to add new physics
modules, and we plan to incorporate Monte-Carlo-based photon and neutrino
feedback to enable state-of-the-art realism in our compact binary
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.