* 1806608
* An Ocean Bottom Seismic Instrument Center at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 27,339,734.00

Seismology is the primary tool that scientists use to investigate Earth's
structure and dynamic processes, such as earthquakes and volcanism. About 70% of
Earth's surface is covered by water, and while data from land seismographs can
tell us much about large-scale structure and seismicity under the oceans, many
questions related to the nature of mid-ocean ridges, hot-spots, subduction
zones, and continental margins can only be addressed by data acquired with
ocean-bottom seismometers (OBS). The construction, operation and maintenance of
OBS requires specialized facilities and technical expertise that are beyond the
ability of most individual investigators to maintain. The Ocean Bottom
Seismometer Instrument Center (OBSIC) at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) will provide instrumentation and the skilled personnel to
operate these instruments to all NSF-funded investigators whose research would
benefit from seafloor seismic observations. WHOI has over 40 years of experience
developing and operating ocean-bottom seismic
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Bottom Seismometer Instrument
Center (OBSIC) will provide state-of-the-art OBS instrumentation to the
community while also evolving OBS operations toward an optimal, stable and
strategic state. The state of the facility is optimal when data quality and the
quantity of data that the facility can deliver are maximized for the available
funding; it is stable when it is immune to perturbations (such as personnel
changes or fluctuations in user demand), and it is strategic when new
technologies and procedures are anticipated and seamlessly incorporated and
standards of excellence are continuously rising. Key components of OBSIC include
standardization of instrumentation, enhanced component tracking and the
maintenance of instrumentation at a high readiness state, economical
maximization of operational capacity through a combination of permanent OBSIC
personnel and trained technicians from the UNOLS Marine Tech Pool and the USGS,
and following a staffing and hiring plan that promotes continuous transfer of
expertise, reducing risk to the health of the facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expansion of seismic capabilities to the marine
environment has and will be necessary for national and international needs such
as Earth hazards mitigation, environmental monitoring and marine resource
exploitation. OBSIC will provide training in OBS science and instrumentation for
a postdoctoral researcher, as well as for several engineering undergraduates.
Outreach and information will be provided through an OBSIC website and through
open meetings at the American Geophysical Union Annual Fall
Meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.