* 1806523
* Collaborative Research: Parity-Time Symmetry and Anti-Symmetry in Quantum Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Yuping Huang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 280,966.00

Parity and time (PT) symmetry underlies the fundamental laws of physics, and has
been extensively studied in atomic, molecular, solid-state, and high-energy
physics. Lately, PT symmetry has emerged as an interesting subject of optics
research, and as a versatile resource promising a multitude of capabilities not
offered by conventional systems based on coherent optical effects. Yet most
studies thus far have been concentrated in classical optics. This project will
make an experimental attempt, guided by theoretical efforts, to study PT and
anti-PT symmetry in quantum optics, where a breadth of new phenomena and
application opportunities are expected in optical computing, secure
communications, and others. To this end, a scalable nanophotonic platform will
be developed so that the project outcomes can be quickly adopted by broad
research communities and industrial stakeholders in quantum computing, quantum
communications, single mode laser, and others. The project will be carried out
collaboratively by experimental and theoretical researchers from Stevens
Institute of Technology and Kennesaw State University. Scholars and students in
both institutes will get exposed to this new research front and encouraged to
think outside the box, such as seeking unconventional solutions to critical
technological challenges. Through the Stevens Technical Enrichment Program and
institutional affiliations with organizations such as the Women in Engineering
Program and the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering, focused
outreach activities will be made to students from low income and under-
represented groups. At Kennesaw, a Physics Day program will be hosted for local
elementary and middle school students with displays of science and knowledge
through hands-on demonstrations. In addition to the standard knowledge
dissemination via publications and conference presentations, quantum science and
technology workshops open to public will be held yearly rotating between the two
institutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A chip-integrated optical platform for probing
exotic quantum dynamics under PT and anti-PT symmetry will be developed based on
lithium niobate nanophotonics and quantum nonlinear optics techniques. The
effects of PT symmetry and its broken phase will be examined at a single photon
level by linking spontaneous parametric down-conversion with phase sensitive
amplification. The quantum anti-PT effects will be explored using three
evanescently-coupled micro-ring cavities, one with strong dissipation, and by
measuring the resultant transmission spectra and photon correlation. The
successful outcomes of this project will deepen the understanding of the
fundamental roles that gain and loss play in quantum physics and their
implications for open quantum systems, while providing experimental insights to
several outstanding questions in this field. Furthermore, the new quantum
phenomena under PT and anti-PT symmetry may lead to elegant solutions to several
key challenges in quantum information processing, including those caused by
dissipation and decoherence. Although the present experimental research is to
study specifically a couple of fundamental quantum effects, the developed
systems and techniques are ready to be deployed for other optics and photonics
research and applications. Overall, this collaborative project will extend PT
and anti-PT studies to the experimental domain of quantum optics, and
potentially pave a way to new opportunities in quantum science and optical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.