* 1806656
* Instrument Development and Data Analysis for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gabriela Gonzalez, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,340,000.00

The last two years were very exciting in gravitational wave astronomy, with the
first several detections of gravitational waves with LIGO detectors of black
holes and neutron star binary systems. The GW170817 detection of colliding
neutron stars with electromagnetic counterparts on the spectrum of
electromagnetic waves, from gamma-rays to radio waves, has started the era of
multi-messenger astronomy with gravity being one of the messengers; the LSU
group has been a critical contributor to these discoveries. The group's
activities in the next years will focus on aspects of improvement of the
Advanced LIGO detectors and the characterization of data from the Advanced LIGO
interferometer. These efforts are fully integrated with those of the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC), and are especially integrated with the
activities of the LIGO Livingston Observatory, since that Observatory is located
only 30 miles from the LSU campus. In doing its research, the group will train
students and a postdoc who will add to the quality and diversity of the STEM
workforce, as well as share the research with the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU group will pursue research activities in
two main topics, all coordinated with the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC)
and key to the improvement of detection rates of gravitational waves with the
Advanced LIGO detectors. The first topic is Advanced LIGO detector improvement
and application to future designs; the group will help diagnosing and improving
the detector's noise in the frequency domain due to higher laser power. The
group will model the performance of the system, compare models with actual
performance, and then apply the models and the experience to the conceptual
development of such systems for upgraded detectors. The second topic is
characterizing data from Advanced LIGO detector; the group will identify
instrumental artifacts, in particular those related to the group's expertise on
calibration and scattering sources. The group will eliminate the cause of the
transients when possible, and if not create data analysis algorithms for
minimizing the influence of such artifacts in the search for astrophysical
signals in LIGO data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.