* 1806689
* Decoding the Extreme Physics of Ultrasound Generation in the Bat Larynx
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Cynthia Moss, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 12/31/2023
* USD 615,325.00

Ultrasonic call emissions with frequencies ranging up to 40-times those produced
by human vocal cords; sound intensities that exceed that of a jet engine;
subglottic pressures that would shred the human larynx to pieces; the highest
tissue velocities found anywhere in nature; exquisite control of intensity and
tone that would be the envy of any soprano; and call rates that are double that
of the fastest machine gun. These are the capabilities that make the larynx of
an echolocating bat one of the most extreme acoustic "instruments" in nature.
This project will develop and employ a suite of scientific tools to gain a
comprehensive understanding of the extreme physics that underlies the generation
of ultrasound in the bat larynx. In addition to extending our understanding of a
mammal that perceives the world in a way that is fundamentally distinct from
most other mammals, particularly humans, the current research will explore a
rich, coupled multiphysics problem that lies at the very edge of current
scientific capabilities. Beyond the scientific advancement of elucidating the
physics of ultrasound generation in bats, the broader impacts of the project
span the fields of computational physics, bioinspired ultrasonic technologies,
assistive technologies, vocal dysfunction, animal behavior and cyber-enabled
science. The coupled aerodynamics, tissue mechanics and bioacoustics
computational models developed here have a wide variety of applications in
biophysics and engineering. The undergraduate and graduate trainees working on
this project will become part of a new generation of scientists and engineers
who can apply computation, experimental methods, and data-enabled science across
disciplines to solve the most complex problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of the research span the areas of acoustics, biomechanics,
aerodynamics, computational physics, nonlinear dynamics, data-enabled science
and organismal biology. The science in this project is driven primarily by a
first-of-its-kind, image-based, coupled aero-tissue-acoustic computational model
of bat laryngeal function. In addition, sophisticated experimental tools, such
as nano-indentation, micro-Computed Tomography and scanning electron microscopy
for model parameterization, will be employed. Novel ex-vivo experiments to
support the development and testing of these models will also be conducted. The
specific objectives of the projects are (1) conduct ex-vivo analysis of vocal
fold dynamics and acoustics in a vocalizing excised bat larynx; (2) conduct 3D
imaging and biomechanical testing of a bat larynx for model development; (3)
develop and validate a coupled aero-tissue-acoustics computational model for
simulation and analysis of ultrasonic vocalization in the bat larynx; and
finally (4) decode the physics of ultrasound generation using the validated
aero-tissue-acoustic model. The topic of the current project has inherent appeal
to high-school and university students, and the group will leverage this for a
broad outreach to the wider community. This project is jointly funded by the
Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics and the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program of the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.