* 1806142
* Powder-Based Dealloying
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Jonah Erlebacher, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 490,955.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and design of new
metals involves controlling material composition and structure at the
microscale. By such control, better materials can be made for many different
applications, from structural materials to catalysts to batteries, and to
materials with high tolerance to radiation damage. This program is examining a
new approach to making these next-generation metals and metallic nanostructures,
mixing inspiration from powder metallurgy and from an exotic materials
processing technique called dealloying. Dealloying occurs when one element of a
solid metal is pulled out of the metal, leaving behind a nanoporous material.
The central hypothesis of this work, is that a powder mixture can be used to
create dealloyed materials. One powder component acts to absorb elements
dealloyed from the other. Because powders are being used, it is expected that
bulk amounts of processed materials can be made easily and readily tested for
different applications. Student training at the undergraduate and graduate
levels will help develop the next generation of materials scientists trained in
modern metallurgy. Such training will be complemented by organizing and
participating in international conferences on dealloying and related
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocomposite and nanoporous metals consisting of
multiple interpenetrating but compositionally distinct solid and void phases
hold promise for structural applications requiring high strength, high
ductility, radiation tolerance, catalysis, sensing, supercapacitors, batteries,
and as templates to make new nanocomposites via backfilling. A technique to make
such materials is dealloying - the selective dissolution of one component from a
multi-component alloy. This project explores the next-generation of dealloyed
nanostructured materials, using a concept called powder-based dealloying.
Powder-based dealloying refers to the metallurgical phase evolution in the
environment of mixed powders, where the composition of one powder is the
material to be dealloyed, and the other powder, when melted, acts as the
dealloying medium. This involves analysis of the kinetics of dealloying in fixed
volumes, and it is hypothesized that bulk samples of metals can be made that
exhibit very fine microstructures with characteristic lengths less than 50 nm.
We are also taking the first steps to assess how dealloying can be integrated
into powder metallurgical processing methods, and perhaps ultimately additive
manufacturing. By examining a range of model materials made by powder-based
dealloying, a database of basic physical kinetics behavior will be developed
that will be applicable to many high-temperature processing technologies, from
sintering to additive manufacturing, as well as more efficiently work with rare,
hard-to-sustain, and refractory materials. Student training at the undergraduate
and graduate levels will help develop the next generation of materials
scientists trained in modern metallurgy. Such training will be complemented by
organizing and participating in international conferences on dealloying and
related professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.