* 1806858
* Enabling Precision Neutrino Physics with DUNE: Development of Design and Production Plan for DUNE TPC Wire Planes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Bonnie Fleming, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,620,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). The Standard Model predicted that there were three
different kinds of neutrinos, all massless, that were distinguishable through
the different interactions that they undergo whenever they interact with matter.
But recent measurements have totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now
know that neutrinos do have a mass and because they do, they can actually change
from one type to another. Detailed measurements of these changes as well as
others form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the
Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment
(DUNE) will make comprehensive measurements of neutrino and anti-neutrino
oscillations to investigate neutrino CP violation, determine the ordering of the
neutrino mass eigenstates, and perform precision tests of the neutrino Standard
Model. DUNE will take advantage of both an accelerator-based neutrino beam from
Fermilab and be sensitive to extra-terrestrial neutrinos, including those from
supernova explosions. DUNE's massive detector, a 40-kton Liquid Argon Time
Projection Chamber (LAr-TPC) System, will both enable these precision
measurements in neutrino physics and astrophysics as well as extend the
sensitivity in the search for nucleon decay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LAr-TPC
System will be divided into four 10-kton modules. At the heart of two of these
large modules are wire chamber planes called Anode Plane Assemblies (APA) which
record the signatures of particles propagating in the argon and provide high
resolution images of neutrino interactions. The groups leading this planning
project, funded in part through earlier investments from the NSF, have led the
development of wire chamber planes for LAr-TPC experiments laying the groundwork
for DUNE. These groups will now develop a construction strategy, methodology and
plan to construct half of the APAs needed for the first two 10-kton modules of
DUNE. It is envisioned that 2-3 APA "factories" would be built at university
sites that have the technical facilities and infrastructure required to host the
APA production lines. These multiple regional factories would allow for direct
participation by many collaborating university groups. Ultimately, developing
and then operating an APA construction program would provide excellent training
opportunities for postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate
students. It is anticipated that the project would interest and engage a diverse
group of undergraduate students at each of the construction
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.