* 1806815
* IGE: Enhancing Graduate Education in Systems Thinking and Multi-Stakeholder Design through a Co-Creation Toolkit
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Miho Mazereeuw, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,908.00

Major global challenges often require convergent, inclusive approaches that
involve science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) professionals.
Training students to work with multiple stakeholders, such as non-profit
organizations and local populations could better prepare them to address
problems that involve multiple disciplines or perspectives. For example,
humanitarian organizations are engaging both STEM professionals and members of
affected populations to design innovative interventions for refugee relief and
response. This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) award to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) will train STEM
graduate students to adopt more collaborative and inclusive approaches to
problem-solving within the humanitarian response context. MIT D-Lab, which
focuses on Development through Discovery, Design and Dissemination, will expand
its contributions to the humanitarian relief sector through a novel approach to
teaching graduate-level design and systems thinking courses. The goal is to
train future STEM leaders to incorporate a more inclusive and participatory
approach to problem solving. MIT D-Lab will develop, pilot, and evaluate a
multi-week module on how to effectively facilitate co-creative design sessions
that include both humanitarian organizations and affected populations on the
design team throughout the entire process. While the module is being developed
and tested within the context of D-Lab?s humanitarian efforts, it has
applications in many other settings, both in academia and in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will develop and pilot elements of the
design and systems thinking module in D-Lab, the Systems Design and Management
program and the Urban Risk Lab at MIT; in the Humanitarian Engineering program
at Oregon State University; in the Program on Forced Migration and Health at
Columbia University; and in the School of Information at the University of
Michigan. In parallel, students will work on a semester-long project with a
partner organization (such as Oxfam, UNICEF or the Red Cross) to develop a co-
creative activity between the organization and an affected population. After the
class, students will have the opportunity to work with D-Lab staff and partners
in the field to deliver the co-creative activity. The researchers will measure
learning outcomes for the curriculum and identify changes in the students?
skills, knowledge, and attitudes. In addition, researchers will determine the
effectiveness of co-creation processes and will compare the activities developed
as part of this project to the current process for identifying solutions and
engaging users in the humanitarian sector. By comparing these processes, the
team will be able to identify important hypotheses about effective ways to teach
co-creation and participatory principles as well as the effects of a co-creation
process on students and refugees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in
Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education.
The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to
graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move these
approaches into the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.