* 1806148
* I-Corps: Effectively transparent contacts for solar applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Harry Atwater, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to increase the efficiency of
solar modules by up to 6%, a significant improvement in the photovoltaics (PV)
space. This project replacies standard screen-printed metal contacts with an
effectively transparent contacts (ETC) where the shading loss is brought down to
0%. A significant fraction of the PV ecosystem will benefit from this
technology. ETCs can enable solar module manufacturers to fabricate up to 6%
higher relative efficiency solar modules. This higher efficiency can lead to
reduced cost overall for land use, transportation, installation and cleaning.
Therefore, the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) can potentially be reduced
and photovoltaic electricity can become more
affordable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops
effectively transparent contacts (ETC) that mitigate shading losses inherent to
screen-printed metal contacts over the entire solar spectrum and for all angles
of incidence. ETCs are triangular cross-section micro-scale metal contacts that
redirect the incoming light efficiently to the active area of the solar cell.
Overcoming front contact shading loss without reducing the grid conductivity
increases the silicon solar cell power output by up to 6%. When replacing
standard screen-printed metal contacts with ETCs the amount of used silver can
also be reduced. The ETC's are made via a residue-free three-dimensional micro-
imprint process that enables large scale printing of ETCs by solar module
manufactures. To date, the integration of ETCs with state-of-the-art silicon
heterojunction solar cells has been successfully demonstrated on a laboratory
scale.