* 1806066
* Engineered Biofiltration Processes for Microcystin Removal in Drinking Water: A Structured Enzyme-Kinetic Modeling Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Sunny Jiang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 365,794.00

Harmful algal blooms are caused by the growth of algae that produce a toxin
known as microcystin. Microcystin is linked to liver cancer and is difficult to
treat using conventional drinking water treatment practices. This project
investigates biological filtration ("biofiltration") to remove microcystin
during drinking water treatment. Biofiltration relies on natural communities of
bacteria in sand filters to degrade microcystin. This research focuses on
establishing a stable biofiltration treatment system under the highly variable
environment of a drinking water treatment plant. The project will develop models
to predict biofiltration treatment behavior with the goal of making
biofiltration an effective treatment process to protect the Nation's drinking
water supply. The educational program will train students in cross-disciplinary
science and engineering to improve the scientific literature and the
technological skills of the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a predictive understanding of the environmental and
operational factors governing microbial community dynamics and microcystin
biodegradation in biofiltration systems. The specific objectives are to: 1)
quantify and compare the steady-state growth characteristics of suspended and
immobilized microcystin-degrading bacterial consortia (MC-DBC) in engineered
reactors; 2) define environmental and hydraulic conditions that enhance the
activity and stability of the aqueous and biofilm MC-DBC in these reactor
systems; and 3) investigate and compare the microbial community structure and
function within each MC-DBC to gain a holistic understanding of the microbial
community interactions within MC-DBC. This research will combine culture based
and genetic microbiological investigations with numerical simulations of fate
and transport to optimize management of algal toxin removal in biofiltration
systems. The effects of various nutrient conditions on the growth and
degradation kinetics of MC-DBC will directly inform biostimulation practices to
improve biodegradation kinetics during harmful algal bloom periods. Integration
of experimental observations with the development of a mechanistic numerical
model will highlight the relative importance of enzyme induction kinetics,
enzyme dilution, or enzyme regulation to biofiltration efficiency. The numerical
model simulations will advance our ability to design biofiltration systems by
assessing the feasibility and treatment capability of algal toxin removal over a
wide range of operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.