* 1806479
* RUI: Free Space Multimode Quantum Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andrew Dawes, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 69,175.00

Free-space optical communication systems are a leading candidate for global
quantum-key distribution networks. Recent results have demonstrated the
feasibility of networks that include key distribution and secure quantum
information transfer via ground-to-satellite channels. These optical channels,
however, suffer from disruptive atmospheric effects due to airborne water vapor,
smoke particles, and turbulence. The goal of this program is to apply multimode
quantum state measurement techniques to free-space optical systems. Building on
an existing research program, this project will create opportunities for
students to study quantum optics at the cutting edge of the field while working
on an accessible system with immediate applications to technological
advancements. Undergraduate researchers participate in every step of the
project, and gain experience with experiment design, data collection, analysis,
and dissemination. The technical skills acquired during this experience,
combined with attentive mentoring in a supportive research community, prepare
students for successful science careers. Attendance and presentations at
regional and national conferences provide students with insight into the
scientific profession and an opportunity to expand their network of peers.
Additionally, students will participate in a regional four-school consortium of
atomic, molecular, and optical physics research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program applies a new quantum state
measurement technique to experimental systems that distribute quantum states via
free-space channels. The result is a more complete understanding of the quantum
state of light before and after atmospheric transmission. Array detection
methods maximize the retrieved photon number and allow computation of the
retrieved spatial mode. Compared to single-mode detection schemes, these methods
recover more information on the quantum state of light. Array detection is also
used to compare multiple retrieved modes, and reveal correlations between modes.
This information reveals fundamental properties of the optical channel and will
lead to channel optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.