* 1806341
* DMSS: a Dark Matter Summer School
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Cecilia Levy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 01/31/2019
* USD 11,000.00

This award will provide support for DMSS (Dark Matter Summer School), a summer
school dedicated only to dark matter. The school is geared towards junior
graduate students and will have a few spots open for exceptional undergraduate
students. The summer school will be held at the University at Albany, SUNY. It
is foreseen to be held from July 16-20, 2018.

The summer school will impact the community on three levels: minority students,
high school students and the general public. Women and underrepresented minority
students will be given a place of choice, at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The organizers will promote diversity and encourage underrepresented
minorities to pursue their studies in graduate schools by reaching out to women-
only colleges, as well as historically black colleges and universities. DMSS
will also contain an outreach component, allowing select high school students,
at least one from an inner city high school, to come, take a tour of a research
lab, attend student's talks, and discuss with both undergraduate, graduate
students and lecturers to give them an idea of what a future in physics
realistically looks like and hopefully convince them to go to college in
physics. A public talk on dark matter is also scheduled to trigger the interest
of both the public and the future generation of scientists.

Astroparticle physics, specifically, the search for dark matter, is currently
one of the most attractive research areas. However, not many universities, and
even less liberal arts colleges, offer a particle physics class at the
undergraduate level. In addition, universities who offer a graduate program in
astroparticle physics tend not to have an astroparticle physics class offered
every year. All the topics of this summer school will be related to dark matter
and will encompass both experiment and theory, in order to attract students in
both experimental and theoretical physics.