* 1806334
* Non-Adiabatic Effects in Ultracold Chemistry
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Balakrishnan Naduvalath, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 326,311.00

The ability to prepare reactants and control products on demand with quantum
state precision is a long cherished goal in chemistry. This goal is increasingly
becoming achievable thanks to the progress in recent years in cooling and
trapping molecules and controlled manipulation of their interactions at
temperatures close to absolute zero. The fundamental question of how chemical
reactions proceed at a collision energy close to absolute zero can now be
explored both by experiment and theory. Such controlled manipulation of atoms
and molecules is an integral part of current research in quantum technologies,
including quantum information processing and quantum computing. Theoretical
studies of molecular encounters in this area face significant obstacles as
computations become intractable when all relevant quantum states and external
field effects are included. The goal of this NSF award is to develop and
implement new methodologies to study ultracold chemical reactions with full
quantum state resolution of both reactants and products. The research may lead
to new computational programs capable of describing chemical reactions at
ultracold temperatures. The research crosses disciplinary boundaries in diverse
areas of chemistry, physics, and astrophysics and develops a highly skilled
science and engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An ultimate goal in
chemistry is the complete control of quantum states of both reactants and
products with high selectivity and specificity. The quantum state resolution
applies both to the internal states of the molecules and the angular momentum
partial waves involved in the collision process. Restricting partial waves
requires reducing the collision energy to a kelvin or below for most molecular
systems. Even in this regime, electronically non-adiabatic and geometric phase
effects play an important role in governing the outcome of a chemical reaction.
However, such processes remain largely unexplored in the utracold regime. The
main goal of this NSF Award is to develop new methodologies and computer codes
to study electronically non-adiabatic effects in chemical reactions at cold and
ultracold temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.