* 1806942
* Chemical Composition and Energy Spectrum of Cosmic Rays Using the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Karen Andeen, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2022
* USD 312,201.00

Cosmic rays constantly bombard the atmosphere, yet key information regarding the
processes of cosmic ray creation, acceleration, and propagation is lacking.
However, candidate theoretical models have been developed to make testable
predictions about cosmic ray parameters that are observable at Earth. In order
to test these models, precise experimental measurements of multiple elemental
spectra of cosmic rays are needed from a single experiment across the full
energy range. Using the IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO), the IceCube group
at Marquette University will provide the cosmic ray community with the first
measurement of the elemental spectra from four distinct mass groups from the
'knee' to the 'ankle' in the cosmic ray energy spectrum using six years of
IceCube data, new post-LHC simulations, novel methods for event selection,
reduced systematic errors, new software algorithms, and new composition-
sensitive parameters. The group will share their research with the broader
Milwaukee community to help bridge the racial and socio-economic divide in one
of the most highly segregated cities in the United States. Under this award,
they will go out into the community to inspire the diverse local high school
student population with fun and interactive "household physics" projects and
bring diverse high school students back to Marquette to expose them to "big
science" job opportunities through an IceCube Master Class. In order to increase
awareness among high school students of physics as a strong and viable career
path for students from all backgrounds, this work will be framed by an
intercultural competency program to train Marquette students to interact and
connect with their local community empathetically, increase their own
intercultural competency, and to build a culture of compassion within the
physics department to sustain the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNO is the only detector that
can presently perform this highly sought measurement that includes an entire
decade in energy where four elemental spectra have never been measured. This
will provide a new and coherent picture across the entire transition region from
galactic to extragalactic cosmic rays. Further, the Marquette IceCube group will
simulate and fully optimize the detector response and array layout for a new
prototype scintillator array being partially deployed at the South Pole this
season (2018-19) to maximize its effectiveness for the cosmic ray analyses. This
new array is designed to mitigate the problem of snow drift and accumulation
that threatens the effectiveness of the current ICNO surface array
(IceTop).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.