* 1806122
* RAPID:  Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico:  adult and larval mosquitoes, disturbance, and disease
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Donald Yee, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 177,646.00

This project will explore how sudden and significant environmental changes after
a hurricane event affect both larval and adult populations of two important
disease vectors, the mosquitoes Aedes aegypti and Aedes mediovittatus in Puerto
Rico, considering the viral infection status of the three major arboviruses on
the island (dengue, Zika, chikungunya). This research is of practical importance
for the implementation of effective vector control and public health
strategies as it will help anticipate where hot spots of disease outbreaks may
occur in future hurricane events and how to mitigate them, is broadly
transferable to other locations (such as Florida and Texas). Outcomes from this
research contribute to fundamental ecological knowledge relating sudden
landscape disturbance to vector population and disease dynamics. This proposal
will assist in the training of two graduate students and several undergraduates,
with an emphasis on underrepresented groups (i.e., women and
minorities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Maria provides an important
opportunity to link extreme disturbance to disease ecology, including changes in
detritus inputs that affect nutrient availability, flooding, production of
vectors, and vector infection status across time. The use of ecological filters
as a framework allows for an examination for how landscape level changes caused
by the hurricane affect larval and adult populations separately, and how they
collectively affect vector populations and infection. A stoichiometric framework
will leverage previously collected data from Puerto Rico, and link changes in
resource environments (due to the hurricane) to mosquito production and
infection dynamics. A structural equation modeling approach will be used to
understand the basis for variation of titer levels of wild caught mosquitoes
based on the detrital environment and its effect on population parameters. The
importance of a model's path will be assessed via the fit of reduced models,
relative to a full model using goodness-of-fit chi-square tests. As non-linear
associations may occur between some independent variables, log10 and quadratic
transformations of dependent variables will be included, and effects will be
assessed by comparing changes in important paths across time, as well as via the
use of more traditional statistical approaches.