* 1806818
* Collaborative Research: Formation of a High Flux Student Research Network (HF-SRN) as a Laboratory for Enhancing Interaction in the PoLS SRN
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,485,949.00

The NSF Physics of Living Systems (PoLS) Student Research Network (SRN) strives
to unite students and faculty working at the interface of physics and biology at
different institutions ("nodes") within the US and internationally. A well
functioning virtual network could give students at local nodes the ability to
take advantage of global educational and research opportunities in PoLS. PoLS is
a diverse field, and is composed of researchers and students from varied
backgrounds. No single institution can offer (1) the breadth and depth of
research and (2) courses that both cover the relevant intellectual landscape and
provide in-depth training for students. Such training is critical to create the
next generation of researchers who can contribute quantitatively to biophysics,
with the ability to move between biology, physics, mathematics, and engineering;
PoLS students have important roles to play in this next generation. In addition,
no single institution has the range of equipment needed to study PoLS on the
enormous range of time and length scales encountered in biological systems.
Finally, few single institutions can fruitfully integrate science and
engineering to inspire biomedical, robotic and prosthetic devices that will
result from basic PoLS research. The HF-SRN will create an environment for
students in which they can work among various disciplines while maintaining the
physics mindset (simplified systems, few parameter predictive models) and
developing new physics. This network will train students (paraphrasing Philip
Nelson in his 2008 Biological Physics textbook) "who can switch fluidly between
both kinds of brain: the `developmental/historical/complex' sciences and the
'universal/ahistorical/reductionist'." As significant collaborative and
educational flux develops within the HF-SRN, successful activities will be
broadened to the other US nodes (ultimately with the expectation to engage PoLS
SRN international partners). The evaluation plan will help guide aspects of the
HF-SRN that could increase flux in other programs in the NSF Science Across
Virtual Institutes initiative. More broadly, PoLS SRN students can be leaders in
the next generation of researchers who blend biology and physics research
seamlessly. Such students will create materials which will seed future K-12 as
well as university PoLS curricula. Efforts will be made to extend the
educational and research efforts developed within the HF-SRN (and entire SRN) to
a broader community including local minority serving institutions. Advances in
PoLS can lead to advances in applications such as genome editing, cancer
dynamics, robotics and human-assist devices, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last period of funding as part of the
SRN, the Georgia Tech, Harvard and Maryland nodes have advanced their respective
PoLS programs, developing cohesive local communities. The goal of this project
is to further develop opportunities for students (and their ideas) to "flow"
more easily within the SRN and thereby discover working principles of increased
human network flux that can be transferred into the larger SRN. To do so,
significant interactions (and evaluations of those interactions) will be
developed among three existing SRN nodes (adding Emory as a subcontract to
Georgia Tech), forming a "High Flux SRN" (HF-SRN). The HF-SRN will engage in
activities such as 1) Collaborative Focused Research Projects, which span nodes
and are "built to succeed" by leveraging student and faculty expertise in
current projects; 2) Student-Led Dynamic Working Groups (e.g., in biomolecular,
microbial, cellular and organismal physics) leveraging faculty research
strengths and student interest to develop cross-node communities for these
topics. 3) Student-Led Bootcamps: intense 2-3 day tutorials (e.g., microscopy,
robophysics, image analysis) with cross-subgroup cutting themes, open to HF-SRN
members and held at a particular node; 4) Student-Led Workshops: composed of
talks, poster and discussion sessions, inviting the entire PoLS SRN; 5)
Curriculum development via open-source course materials, integrating
complementary expertise across nodes. All activities will be evaluated and
assessed by a Council composed of the lead PIs at each node. This project is
being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division
of Physics, the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, and the Modulation Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.