* 1806571
* Ultracold Triatomic Molecules : Collisions &amp; Cooling
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* John Doyle, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

Atoms and molecules are the basic building blocks of nature, and their behavior
is governed by the microscopic theory of matter given in quantum mechanics. One
of the basic aims in physics is to investigate interactions between atoms and
molecules in order to more profoundly understand complex physical systems such
as computers, the internet, and the human body. Another aim is to apply quantum
mechanics to invent new substances that are needed for electronics and medicine.
Progress towards these aims will benefit from more detailed studies of quantum
physics. This project will develop new methods to cool, trap, and manipulate
molecules in order to study their quantum behavior. In particular, this project
will enable new explorations with triatomic molecules in a gas at very low
temperature. Low temperature is important because when they are cooled, the
quantum nature of atoms and molecules is greatly amplified, thus exposing
quantum phenomena to more careful examination. This project will also train
students in atomic and molecular physics research methods which will help
prepare them to participate in the high tech work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is to cool atoms and
molecules using lasers and then hold them in a trap to watch how they interact.
The trap is not one made of hard walls, but rather relies on creating an optical
or magnetic bottle. The molecules must be cold because these traps are
relatively weak; molecules that are too hot will just boil out. The researchers
previously invented a way of laser cooling molecules to low enough temperatures
for trapping. (Cooling atoms had already been accomplished.) The cold atoms and
molecules will be suspended in an otherwise nearly perfect vacuum, never
touching a solid matter wall. The researchers will study in detail what happens
when atoms and molecules interact, the first most basic step in the creation of
more complex atomic systems. The goal of the work is to observe the exchange of
energy and other phenomena in increasingly complex atom-molecule collisions,
starting using triatomic molecules as a fundamental testbed. This will add to
the understanding of nature and help science to design new physical systems and
new quantum tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.