* 1806248
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Regeneration of Human Settlements after Episodes of Societal Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 25,176.00

Doctoral candidate Roberto Rosado-Ramirez, of Northwestern University, along
with colleagues in the US and Mexico, will conduct research to examine the
social conditions that stimulate the regeneration of human settlements after
episodes of societal collapse. Societal collapse is a process that brings
political entities to an end, prompting economic instability, political
fragmentation, and changes in a society's structure. Throughout human history,
many societies have been able to reorganize after the challenging times brought
about by episodes of collapse. With its long-term perspective on the study of
social phenomena, archaeology can advance a broader understanding of the social
and economic conditions that are instrumental in the process of revitalization
of human settlements. This research project will evaluate four social factors
that may contribute to post-collapse settlement regeneration: participation in
exchange networks, limited wealth inequality, human migrations, and interactions
with ruins. Determining the role that these social factors play in the
establishment of post-collapse settlements has important implications for the
present and the future. Research results may have a positive impact on the lives
of people affected by episodes of societal collapse, such as displaced
populations and refugees. Through public talks, academic articles, and an online
platform, a wide range of individuals, including social scientists, government
officials, and the general public, will have access to the conclusions reached
by this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Rosado-Ramirez and his
research team will investigate whether participation in exchange networks,
limited wealth inequality, human migrations, and interactions with ruins were
instrumental in a case of post-collapse settlement within a ruined city. The
research will take place in Ake, an ancient city located in southeastern Mexico.
This region was impacted by an episode of societal collapse between 750 and 1100
CE, that resulted in the abandonment of urban centers, the end of a political
system based on the institution of divine kingship, and massive depopulation.
After that period, people reorganized and established new settlements that
thrived for hundreds of years. The research team will conduct systematic
excavations in domestic mounds and shrines in Ake. They will analyze artifacts,
human and animal remains, and architectural evidence to determine the social and
economic conditions that allowed people to revitalize a settlement within a
ruined city in the wake of collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.