* 1806285
* Mid-Infrared Semiconductor Lasers based on virtual substrates with designer specified lattice-constant
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Luke Mawst, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2023
* USD 359,994.00

Semiconductor lasers have found widespread application that greatly benefit
society, including in the telecommunications field (for fiber-optic
communications), data transmission for high-speed computing, and many medical
therapies. However, new semiconductor lasers with extended capabilities, such as
high optical power emission, lower input-power requirements, and the ability to
operate in wavelength regions that are difficult to access with commonly used
semiconductor materials are still under intense development by researchers. The
technologies developed in this program will provide new commercial product
opportunities by enabling semiconductor lasers to operate with high performance
under continuous current operation, in the technologically important mid-
infrared wavelength region, that is currently difficult to access. High-
performance compact light sources (lasers) operating in the mid-infrared
wavelength region are ideal for remote gas sensing, laser-based range finding,
free-space optical communication, product marking of materials such as plastics,
and medical/dental applications. A case in point, environmental monitoring
(remote sensing) of methane represents a potentially large volume application
for the proposed devices, since methane is a major source of radiative forcing
with a global warming potential 25 times greater than CO2. For many of these
applications, practical requirements in terms of cost, size, weight, performance
and reliability preclude any other technology from being a viable
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: In this program we will be
developing 3.0-3.5 micron-emitting, high-power quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) on
metamorphic buffer layer (MBL) substrates. The MBL technology permits the
fabrication of lower-strain QCLs to provide a higher-power CW alternative to
antimonide or type-II interband lasers, which are inherently performance limited
by Auger recombination. Although QCLs have been demonstrated at 3.5 micron using
conventional InP substrates, active-region carrier leakage and high material
strain have compromised the performance and reliability of these short
wavelength QCLs. Consequently, high-performance QCLs on InP substrates are
typically above 4.5 micron in wavelength. Utilizing unconventional superlattice
(SL) material compositions, possible only on MBL substrates, QCLs will be
developed with sufficiently deep wells to minimize carrier leakage at these
wavelengths and reduced material strain levels to provide performance and
reliability advantages over conventional approaches at and below 3.5 micron
wavelength. A further benefit of the MBL technology is the transition from InP
to GaAs substrates, which will present significant advantages in terms of
manufacturing cost and yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key fundamental issues are
addressed in the development of strained-engineered SL materials for application
to QCLs. The application of SL structure formation on virtual substrates is
proposed which greatly expands the compositional space accessible for many
device applications and addresses in a transformative way the shortcomings of
current QCL technologies. There are no existing high-power single-mode
(&gt;0.5W) semiconductor lasers in the 3-3.5 micron wavelength region. It is
proposed to develop 3.0-3.5 micron-emitting laser sources with at least an order
of magnitude increase in coherent CW output power compared to current state-of-
the-art 3.0-3.5 micron semiconductor lasers. Such high-power devices will open
up a plethora of new applications from remote sensing of chemicals (methane and
other hydrocarbons) to product (plastics) marking. Two novel approaches are
proposed to achieve the overall goal i) the implementation of novel step-tapered
active-region (STA) quantum-cascade laser (QCL) designs for 3.0-3.5 micron-
emitting QCLs, in order to completely suppress carrier leakage (including
leakage to indirect valleys in the active region), as well as achieve efficient
resonant carrier extraction from lower active region states; thus, obtaining
both high T0 and T1 values and low threshold currents; ii) the use of a novel
metamorphic-buffer-layer (MBL) approach to bypass the strain-relaxation
constraint, thereby allowing growth of QCL structures of the same strain as
4.6-4.8 micron QCLs and thus of relatively low active region thermal resistance
and potential for reliable operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.