* 1806722
* PICO-500: Improving Acoustic Particle Identification in Superheated-Liquid WIMP Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2022
* USD 572,645.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays. PICO, a merger
of the PICASSO and COUPP collaborations, employs room-temperature super-heated
liquids to search for dark matter particle candidates. Previous
e&amp;#64256;orts by PICO at SNOLAB have resulted in a world-leading sensitivity
to spin-dependent WIMP-proton couplings. Recent progress has been made in
acoustic discrimination against alpha particles and particulate-induced
backgrounds. These developments will enable the next-generation of PICO bubble
chambers to also lead in sensitivity to spin-independent couplings in the WIMP
mass range below 10 GeV/c2, thus contributing substantially to the search to
address the fundamental question of what Dark Matter actually
is.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will generate substantial broader impacts in
the areas of education and mentoring. The PICO collaboration has a long history
of commitment to providing undergraduates with laboratory research
opportunities, and to the mentoring and professional advancement of graduate
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superheated liquids provide the best
discrimination of any dark matter detector against dominant electron recoil
backgrounds (10^-10 at ~ keVnr threshold, i.e., seven orders of magnitude better
than liquid-xenon detectors). PICO chambers aim to perform an extensive probing
of the remaining supersymmetric dark matter parameter space via spin-dependent
interactions, an approach that is highly complementary to other experiments.
This maximizes the chances of WIMP discovery. The activities envisioned during
the period of support include participation in the design of PICO-500, a large
(500 liter) chamber recently approved for construction by the Canadia Foundation
for Innovation, and an expansion of PICO's acoustic detection methods to a
promising higher frequency range, thus far unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.