* 1806826
* Advanced Event Reconstruction and the Study of Prompt Muons in Ultrahigh Energy Extensive Air Showers in IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Xinhua Bai, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 189,634.00

The IceCube Neutrino Observatory has discovered an extraterrestrial component of
high-energy neutrinos in the energy range between 20 TeV and 10 PeV, yet their
specific sources remain unidentified. To better understand the atmospheric and
astrophysical nature of these neutrinos, precise modeling of atmospheric muons
and neutrinos in the corresponding energy region is among the top priorities. In
a related field, there have been discoveries regarding the origin and
propagation of Galactic cosmic rays in past decades. One key question concerns
the transition to cosmic rays of extragalactic origin at ultrahigh energies.
Answering this question requires reliable measurements of both the energy and
mass composition of cosmic ray primary particles between 10^15 eV (PeV) and
10^18 eV (EeV). This group will develop new analysis methods for better
determining the energies and directions of these very high energy particles
based on the data obtained from the IceCube Observatory. The broader impacts of
this project will be both educational and synergistic. This award will provide
funds for the support of a graduate student and some
travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With its surface array IceTop, IceCube provides
unique data for the study of cosmic rays in the entire Galactic to extragalactic
transition region and the atmospheric muons and neutrinos induced by them. The
goals of this award are:&lt;br/&gt;--The study of prompt muons in ultrahigh
energy extensive air showers (EASs) with a new analysis technique. Comparing to
other approaches, this technique has the unique advantage that the prompt muon
signature is insensitive to the cosmic ray primary particle mass
composition;&lt;br/&gt;--Characterization of the time residual fluctuation of
particles in the ultrahigh energy EAS front and its relation to the angular
resolution in a newly improved reconstruction algorithm that solved a long-
standing problem in high energy EAS direction reconstruction in
IceTop;&lt;br/&gt;--R&amp;D toward a unified 3-dimensional reconstruction that
derives cosmic ray primary mass and energy directly from IceTop and InIce
coincident data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.