* 1806278
* Simulating the Multi-Messenger Emission from Merging Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Francois Foucart, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 130,000.00

The recent observation by the LIGO detectors of gravitational waves produced in
the collision of two neutron stars represents a giant step forward in both
physics and astronomy. Neutron stars are extremely compact objects, and their
collision provides us with an extraordinary laboratory to test the laws of
gravity and nuclear physics. They also power some of the most energetic
electromagnetic signals observed in the Universe, and may be the main production
site of gold, platinum, and many other elements. This project will use numerical
simulations to produce publicly available, high-accuracy predictions for the
gravitational waves emitted by colliding neutron stars. With these results,
models of the gravitational wave signal can be brought to an accuracy sufficient
to avoid the introduction of significant errors in the analysis of upcoming LIGO
results. This project will also lead to the development of novel methods to
simulate the complex physical processes that determine the properties of the
electromagnetic signals powered by colliding neutron stars, particularly the
interaction of neutrinos with neutron star material. Understanding these
interactions is critical to analyzing electromagnetic signals emitted after the
collision, and to determine the role of neutron star collisions in the
enrichment of the Universe in gold and other atomic nuclei. This project will
leverage the power of joint observations of gravitational waves and
electromagnetic signals to study the Universe. It also funds the training of
graduate and undergraduate students with advanced skills in numerical modeling
transferable to careers in either academia or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the general relativistic
radiation-hydrodynamics SpEC code to simulate the late inspiral and merger of
neutron star binaries. The main goal of the project is to generate a library of
high-accuracy numerical waveforms covering the parameter space of merging
neutron stars: the mass and spin of each star, and the equation of state of
nuclear matter. The project will leverage one of the main strengths of the SpEC
code: its ability to efficiently evolve neutron star binaries over many orbits,
for sufficiently smooth equation of state models. As a result of this project,
dozens of waveforms for neutron star binaries will be made publicly available.
Particular attention will be paid to error estimates, in order to facilitate the
use of the simulations for the calibration of analytical waveform models, and to
the automation of the simulations. A secondary objective of this project will be
the development of smooth approximations to the equation of state, as the SpEC
code is significantly more efficient when evolving smooth equations of state
than for the discontinuous approximations that are more commonly used today.
Finally, this project will lead to the development and use in merger simulations
of a recently proposed algorithm for neutrino transport, which combines the
currently used "two-moment" transport formalism with a more advanced Monte-Carlo
transport algorithm. In this hybrid scheme, the use of Monte-Carlo transport
removes the need to use approximate analytical prescriptions to close the
equations of radiation transport. This new scheme will be particularly powerful
to determine the role of neutrinos in the production of relativistic polar
outflows after a neutron star merger, and their impact on the composition of
matter outflows and the properties of kilonovae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.