* 1806612
* Physics at the LHC with CMS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Paul Sheldon, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,548,698.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been a remarkably successful theory,
agreeing with several decades of experimental observations involving weak,
electromagnetic, and strong interactions. The LHC discovery of the Higgs boson
in 2012 was further confirmation of this success. However, the Standard Model
remains an incomplete theory as it fails to explain dark matter and it does not
provide an explanation for the mass of light neutrinos. Interestingly, these
insufficiencies appear to be part of an intriguing overlap in the sciences
describing the largest and smallest scales of the universe: proposed extensions
of the Standard Model also shed light on our understanding of the evolution of
our universe and the dark matter relic density measured by astronomers. This
work exploits the rich particle physics program at the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN in Geneva, Switzerland to search for dark matter and other physics beyond
the Standard Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expanding LHC data set collected by
the CMS experiment offers significant opportunity for new discovery, providing
greater sensitivity for new physics signatures which would address questions in
both particle physics and cosmology. This research program is aimed at questions
motivated by the synergy between these two disciplines, for example, by using
events produced through vector boson fusion processes to search for dark matter
and supersymmetry. In addition, this effort leverages searches for TeV-scale
particles using tau lepton reconstruction and identification, which combined
with other technicques, enables targeted searches for interesting new physics
such as dark matter, compressed spectra SUSY, heavy neutrinos, leptoquarks, and
new heavy neutral gauge bosons such as Z-prime. This research is also enabled by
hardware operations and development work on the CMS pixel detector and on
development of advanced machine learning data analysis techniques. In addition,
the group will undertake multiple education and outreach activities, including
the national initiative Quarknet, research experiences for Vanderbilt
undergraduates, hosting intern days for local secondary school students, and
hosting a "Dark Matter Fest" for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.