* 1806251
* New Experimental Techniques for Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Joseph Formaggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 02/28/2022
* USD 659,972.00

Neutrinos are amongst the most abundant particles in the Universe, they are keys
to many astrophysical processes, and they may hold the key to explaining the
matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Universe. They are known to occur in nature
in three types, or "flavors." It has also been observed that neutrinos could
switch flavors through a process known as neutrino oscillation. From such
oscillation experiments, it is found that neutrinos must have a non-zero mass.
This is the first known indication that there is physics beyond the very
successful Standard Model of Particle Physics. Neutrino mass remains one of the
most important open questions in physics and experiments are searching for ways
to determine it since with their abundance they could play an important role in
the evolution of our Universe. Direct laboratory determinations based on the
precise measurement of the beta spectrum have been expanding over the past 80
years due to increasingly powerful electron spectrometry techniques. In 2009,
the PI proposed a new technique by which the energy spectrum of low energy
electrons can be extracted. The technique, known as Cyclotron Radiation Emission
Spectroscopy (CRES), relies on the detection and measurement of coherent
radiation created from the cyclotron motion of electrons in a magnetic field.
Knowledge of neutrino masses has broad implications for the scientific
community, particularly in the fields of nuclear physics, particle physics, and
cosmology. The CRES technique, being a general spectroscopic technique for low
energy electrons, has broad applicability. The use of metallic superconducting
bolometers for recoil detection also has broad reach, with potential
applications in nuclear reactor monitoring and direct dark matter detection.
Research engagement with undergraduate students is facilitated by MIT's
Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program (UROP), which connects students and
faculty and allows students to engage in basic research throughout the academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2009, the PI proposed a new technique by which the
energy spectrum of low energy electrons can be extracted. The CRES technique
relies on the detection and measurement of coherent radiation created from the
cyclotron motion of electrons in a magnetic field. Such a frequency-based
technique has the capability of overcoming many of the limitations imposed by
traditional spectroscopic techniques used in direct neutrino mass experiments
using tritium. The Project 8 experiment, of which the PI is the spokesperson,
has now successfully demonstrated how the CRES technique is effective in
precisely measuring the kinetic energy of electrons emitted from a radioactive
gas. With the proof of principle firmly established, this award provides
continued support of the next stage of Project 8's R&amp;D program, moving
toward a neutrino mass measurement from tritium beta decay. In particular, the
next phase is to make a first measurement of a tritium beta spectrum in order to
determine the scalability of the technique. Research will also continue to
determine the technique's ultimate capability: to probe the inverted neutrino
mass scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.