* 1806557
* Light Axion Dark Matter Search Using Toroidal Ferrite
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Alexander Sushkov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2021
* USD 384,999.00

Dark matter is arguably the most compelling evidence of physics beyond the
Standard Model. Since dark matter has only been observed through its
gravitational effects, there is a wide range of possible dark matter candidates,
and a large number of direct and indirect searches for dark matter interactions
with standard model particles. Axions and axion-like particles are prominent
dark matter candidates: they are predicted to exist by string-theory-inspired
extensions of the Standard Model, are hinted at by a number of astrophysical
phenomena, and, in the case of the QuantumChromoDynamic axion, offer an elegant
solution to the strong-Charge-Parity problem. In addition, discovery of light
axion-like dark matter may provide insights into the earliest epochs of the
universe, specifically the energy scale of inflation. The experimental search
funded by this award has the potential to shed light on these important puzzles.
This award integrates research and outreach by developing a program designed to
spark interest in science among young students and the general public, and to
teach problem solving skills and strategies that are better-suited to complex
real-world challenges. This program will include creating a collection of non-
standard conceptual physics problems that will be made available to physics
educators and the broad public via the world-wide-web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will provide funds for a direct experimental search for light axion dark
matter, via the axion-photon interaction. This interaction between axion dark
matter and the azimuthal magnetization of a magnetized ferrite toroid creates an
axial magnetic field, oscillating at the axion Compton frequency. A SQUID
magnetometer is inductively coupled to the sample in order to detect this field.
Both non-resonant and resonant coupling schemes will be explored, in order to
find the optimal search strategy for this experimental design. The apparatus
will be placed inside a liquid helium cryostat, and superconducting magnetic
shielding will be used to screen external electromagnetic interference. The
experiment targets a very broad range of axion masses between ~ 10^-16 eV and
10^-8 eV. The experimental sensitivity reach extends several orders of magnitude
beyond existing bounds on axion-photon interaction, exploring the range of
couplings that are favored by a number of astrophysical observations, such as
the transparency of the universe to TeV photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.