* 1806983
* EAR-PF:  The scaling properties of river-lake networks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2020
* John Gardner, Gardner                 John           R
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2020
* USD 174,000.00

This post-doctoral fellowship awarded to Dr. John Gardner and carried out at the
University of North Carolina will examine how properties of lakes and river-lake
networks affect sediment patterns in inland waters.Rivers are generally thought
of as linear veins transporting sediment and water from mountains to oceans
across continents. Lakes are often conceived as closed systems. However, most
lakes have a river outlet or inlet and are part of the river network. Too much
sediment in rivers and lakes may be a pollutant, while too little sediment in
rivers may cause destructive erosion of riverbanks and starve coastal
communities of sediment needed to maintain elevation and ecosystems.
Understanding river-lake networks as systems and suspended sediment
concentration (SSC) lake footprints at the continental scale will advance our
knowledge of hydrologic scaling laws; how rivers are shaped; and how water,
sediment and materials are transported from continental interiors to coastal
oceans. Understanding the structure and scaling properties of river-lake
networks, lake footprints in river networks, and how natural and artificial
lakes differ in their controls on sediment transport requires a data-intensive
approach that combines geospatial, remote sensing, and in-situ data across the
entire continental United States. Relationships for scaling the number, size,
and spacing of in-network lakes with river size will be derived, and lake
footprints and proxies for sediment trapping efficiency will be estimated using
remote-sensing data calibrated with in-situ suspended SSC data. Lake footprints
include the recovery of SSC downstream of lakes and the attenuation of SSC above
and within lakes. Web applications and visualization tools will merge satellite
and field observations of inland waters to help connect people to their local
watersheds. End users will be able to explore the structure of river-lake
networks in their watershed to increase awareness of river-lake connectivity;
integrate satellite data into education and research; and conceptually merge
rivers and lakes. Sediment content of rivers and lakes will be shared with water
resource scientists and managers, and the public. This research will advance of
our understanding of U.S. watersheds in three main areas: 1) the development of
a physical template for river-lake network models and analytical expressions of
lake distribution within river networks; 2) identification of the type, size,
and location of lakes that impact river geomorphology; and 3) signatures of
anthropogenic impacts on sediment transport in rivers networks by comparing
natural and artificial lakes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.