* 1806053
* High-Speed, High-Resolution Diagnostic System for a Plasma Wakefield Accelerator
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Tobin Munsat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 220,000.00

This project is aimed towards development of a new diagnostic that will measure
the physical processes underlying an advanced particle accelerator concept, a
so-called plasma wakefield accelerator (PWFA). PWFA research has the ultimate
goal of reducing the footprint, energy consumption, and cost of future particle
accelerators by several orders of magnitude for applications ranging from X-ray
free electron lasers to high-energy particle colliders. Currently, no suitable
diagnostics for the accelerator plasma source have been developed, and the
problem approaches a research bottleneck for the field. The characterization of
the plasma source must be non-intrusive and accurate to the few-percent level in
order to avoid spoiling the quality of the accelerated electron beam. This
necessitates the deployment of diagnostics capable of probing a macroscopic and
transient plasma source with percent-level resolution, or better, which lies
outside of the application of conventional plasma diagnostic systems.

This project will lay the groundwork for the development of an advanced,
integrated system of diagnostic techniques intended to non-intrusively resolve
the plasma source density profile (typical density range: 10^15 to 10^18 per
cm^3) at the percent level in a single shot, with a spatial resolution of ~mm
and a temporal resolution of ~ps. The individual diagnostic sub-systems will be
based upon known and proven techniques that are run in tandem with one another
to significantly reduce the systematic errors of the full system. The three
primary diagnostic sub-systems rely on the principles of Stark broadening,
Thomson scattering, and optical emission ("plasma glow"), respectively. The
goals of the project are 1) to build detailed models and simulations of the
expected signals for each of the diagnostic systems, 2) to test and optimize
each system individually using a small, well characterized test plasma source,
3) to integrate all systems and perform simultaneous measurements of the test
plasma source, and 4) to develop the analysis framework that combines the data
collected by all of the diagnostic systems and minimizes the systematic errors
in the recovered plasma density profile. The success of this project will point
the way forward for an intended future project that incorporates an imaging
spectrometer to provide a single-shot, spatially resolved plasma filament
density profile. This will be combined with the use of an ultra-short laser
probe pulse, and a fast-gated CCD camera to provide the best possible temporal
resolution and signal-to-noise ratio.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.