* 1806572
* Novel Spontaneous Four-wave Mixing Techniques for Photon-pair Generation and Hyperentanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Virginia Lorenz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 290,000.00

Entanglement plays a crucial role in many quantum information protocols. This
project will help researchers understand and control the generation of
entanglement, and hyperentanglement, using novel spontaneous four-wave mixing
techniques. The researchers' work on hyperentanglement generation in an optical
fiber will also enable a new type of quantum information encoding, which is a
step towards enhancing the information capacity carried on a single photon and
thus allowing faster secure communication. Their development of an efficient
technique for probing hyperentanglement will enable other investigators to
quickly and precisely engineer photon-pair sources for quantum applications.
This research on photon-pair generation via Raman interaction is expected to
clarify the process in which the photons are created, towards the realization of
a new type of photon-pair source that is better suited for quantum applications
such as quantum computation, quantum communication and precision sensing. To
help inform the public about the quantum nature of light, the investigators will
develop a display illustrating the concept of wave-particle duality for the
University of Illinois physics building lobby and engineering open house. They
will also present public outreach lectures and introduce course material that
gives undergraduate students insight into the quantum properties of light. The
research will also provide professional training to graduate and undergraduate
students in quantum optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the ubiquitous use of
photon-pair sources in quantum research and quantum applications, there have
been major efforts to develop novel sources that produce photons in specific
application-required quantum states. The investigators will develop a new type
of photon-pair source based on the Raman interaction in crystalline materials,
wherein the emission of photons is mediated by resonant excitation of a phonon,
thus affecting the photon spectral properties in a way that differentiates this
process from the traditional techniques of spontaneous parametric downconversion
(SPDC) or spontaneous four-wave mixing (SFWM). Specifically, the researchers
expect this process to naturally reduce spectral intra-correlations within the
photon-pair, as opposed to SPDC and SFWM, for which special engineering
techniques must be used that often result in unsatisfactory outcomes. They
anticipate the research community will find further use for the newly developed
principles in other Raman systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.