* 1806911
* Modified Plasma Mirrors to Maximize Efficiency of High Harmonic Generation in Solids
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Julia Mikhailova, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 513,004.00

Plasma mirrors -- microscopically small, momentary light reflectors formed by
high-power laser beams irradiating and ionizing solid surfaces -- are powerful
photonic devices for manipulating light that is too intense to be handled by
conventional optics. Not only can plasma mirrors redirect and focus high-power
light, they can also serve as ultrafast nonlinear filters suppressing unwanted
noise in pulsed laser beams, and as generators of frequencies from terahertz to
x-rays for applications that are beyond the reach of current light sources.
Using micro- and nano-structures as well as ultralight materials as a base for
transient plasma mirrors can potentially make them more efficient, enhance their
light modification properties, and add new functionalities to advance x-ray
biomedical imaging and ultrafast metrology. This project investigates how novel
material structures can affect intense laser-plasma interactions and the
efficiency of frequency up-conversion by plasma mirrors to produce higher
energies of the radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of high-order-
harmonic emission from overdense relativistic laser-produced plasmas scales with
the ratio of laser field strength to plasma density as a result of the balance
of forces that produces emitting relativistic electrons. Condensed-phase
materials that are fully ionized by ultrahigh-contrast laser beams tend to be
too dense for all but the most powerful laser systems to reach the condition of
high efficiency. One way of reducing the effective density of the plasma, while
keeping a steep density gradient, is to make plasma thinner by using a free-
standing nanometer-scale foil, such as multi-layer graphene, as a base material;
another way is to use an ultralight nanoporous material. The aim of this project
is to study the behavior of femtosecond light pulses at multi-terawatt peak
powers focused down to a few micrometers in the interaction with dense
relativistic laser-produced plasmas. These plasmas will be created in materials
with micro- and nanoscale structure, such as v-grooves, free-standing nanometer
foils, and aerogels. Experiments and numerical simulations will be developed for
a variety of material structures. This research will achieve fundamental
understanding of frequency up-conversion in plasma mirrors and the potential of
structured and ultralight materials to maximize its
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.