* 1806440
* Rare Event Searches at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Lindley Winslow, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2021
* USD 711,641.00

Despite its successes, the Standard Model of particle physics cannot be the end
of the story. There are too many features that the model does not explain,
including the origin of dark matter, why neutrino masses are so light, how the
matter-antimatter asymmetry arose, and why Charge-Parity-violation only appears
when weak forces are concerned. These are the questions that motivate the Rare
Event Search Group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). This
award provides support for two beyond-Standard-Model searches: the axion search
ABRACADABRA, and the neutrinoless double-beta decay (NLDBD) search KamLAND-Zen
and related R&D project NuDot. ABRACADABRA will undertake a search for axions,
which are one of the particles postulated to form dark matter. A demonstration
of neutrinoless double-beta decay would address the questions of why neutrino
masses are so light and what produces the matter-anti-matter asymmetry in the
universe.

The program will deliver several beneficial aspects to society through its
integration of undergraduates into the program. The multidisciplinary aspects of
the projects are appealing to students across a range of majors, exposing
students to particle and nuclear physics when they might otherwise have missed
the opportunity. The NuDOT and ABRACADABRA detectors are being developed in
close association with scientists at local companies. This exposes the
undergraduates in the group to alternative career paths as well as promoting
strong ties between academia and industry

KamLAND-Zen will be the first ton-scale NLDBD experiment. NuDot, which is a
potential upgrade path, can open the door to even large scales. On the other
hand, ABRACADABRA is leading the way in a new wave of "table top" beyond-
Standard-Model experiments. This is a largely unknown experiment, because it is
about to bring out first results. ABRACADABRA brings discovery-level particle
physics back to the university. The high intellectual merit of the proposed
studies is demonstrated by the excellent alignment of the physics questions with
the "science drivers" identified by the Particle Physics Program Prioritization
Panel (P5). This proposal addresses: 1) the pursuit of the physics associated
with neutrino mass; 2) the identification of the new physics of dark matter; and
3) the exploration of the unknown for new particles, interactions and physical
principles. This work is similarly well-aligned with the Long Range Plan of the
Nuclear Science Advisory Committee (NSAC), which made the call to move quickly
on NLDBD experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.