* 1806447
* Research on Gravitational Waves and Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Charles Evans, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 165,000.00

The exciting observations by the LIGO and Virgo detectors of merging neutron
stars and stellar-mass black holes over the past several years have opened up
the era of gravitational wave astronomy. These events have revealed new
astrophysics, including confirming the process through which heavy elements are
created and discovering a new class of heavy stellar-mass black holes, and are
providing novel tests of general relativity theory. They also herald eventual
gravitational wave observations of extreme-mass-ratio inspirals (EMRIs), where a
stellar-mass black hole or neutron star spirals into a supermassive black hole,
such as those now known to exist in the center of virtually all large galaxies.
Surrounded by dense star clusters, these supermassive black holes will
frequently capture compact stars (e.g., neutrons stars or stellar mass black
holes) into highly eccentric orbits. As these compact stars orbit, they radiate
gravitational waves, causing the orbit to decay and the compact object to
eventually be swallowed by the supermassive black hole. The emitted
gravitational radiation is potentially observable with LISA, the future space-
based gravitational wave detector. The theoretical work funded by this award
will provide improved predictions of the expected signals from highly-eccentric
compact merging binaries. Detection of gravitational waves from such EMRIs will
provide unique strong field tests of gravity and probe the nature of black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue this effort, development of new techniques
in black hole perturbation theory and gravitational self-force methods will be
made, along with writing associated advanced computer codes. High precision
results from perturbation theory and self-force calculations will be studied to
uncover high-order terms in the post-Newtonian expansion of eccentric binary
motion and associated gravitational wave emission. Perturbation theory and self-
force findings in the extreme-mass-ratio, post-Newtonian overlap region support
and reinforce broader efforts to advance post-Newtonian theory to higher orders
and provide calibrations for effective-one-body models of merging binaries. The
PI's group is extending self-force calculations to generic motion on Kerr
backgrounds, using a scalar field model initially, with primary focus to make
these computations more efficient. New self-force techniques will be combined
with osculating elements codes to build long-term inspiral models for eccentric
EMRIs. Some parts of this work will be conducted in external collaboration with
several former students and with colleagues at University College Dublin.
Numerical and analytic results, as well as some computer codes, will be made
available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.