* 1806303
* Rapid Response Research: The political and moral economies of recovery from Hurricanes Irma and Maria in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2017,12/31/2018
* David Griffith, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 35,995.00

Natural disasters challenge human communities in multiple ways that go well
beyond the obvious problems associated with large scale destruction of property
and loss of life, some of them subtle but no less important for building
sustainability, reducing vulnerability, enabling families to survive and
reproduce, and decreasing dependence on external economic assistance. By
destroying power grids, communication and transportation infrastructure,
hospitals, water and sewer systems, and other public and private resources,
Hurricanes Irma and Maria left the peoples of the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto
Rico heavily dependent on external aid. This project explores a set of economic
behaviors emerging in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico following
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, with the aim of improving scientific understandings
of creative resilience, and identifying the principal sources of extreme
vulnerability. Findings will be disseminated to organizations that explore and
manage the causes, consequences, and complexities of disaster management and
recovery. Funding this research also trains researchers from underrepresented
groups in social science research. Findings from this have the potential to
establish patterns for how people develop new economic organizational principles
in the wake of catastrophe that are more sustainable than the current methods of
continued debt and debt service that has plagued Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award supports the collection of critical
but ephemeral data in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. A team of
researchers led by Dr. David Griffith of East Carolina University will explore
the relationship between local moral economics, vulnerability, and resilience in
post-disaster recovery zones. Observational, transect walk, and comparative
photographic methods will take place across five impacted communities, and a
stratified (by socio-economic, educational, and other variables) sample of
individuals will be interviewed, with the objective of documenting variations
and similarities in labor arrangements, common facility, land, and resource use,
distribution patterns, and marketing and exchange locales. how perceptions vary,
how they develop over time, and how they affect the eventual mitigation and
prevention plans that are produced. The research will produce a baseline for
future research on vulnerability and resilience in the wake of anthropogenic
disasters. Research has established that moral economies tend to emerge in
response to recession, depression, austerity programs, and economies disrupted
from war, environmental degradation, and natural disaster. Such systems are
often critical for long-term resilience. Research conducted on the social and
natural sources of vulnerability following Hurricane Mitch, for example,
established that vulnerability could be linked to a social system that had
encouraged deforestation and other environmentally degrading economic practices.
The project will enable us to understand what variance there is with respect to
the efficacy of these economic behaviors in mitigating vulnerability and
improving resilience.