* 1806664
* IGE: Interdisciplinary STEM Graduate Student Learning Communities
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Amanda Diekman, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 433,997.00

While Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) graduate students
receive specialized training in their respective fields, many STEM graduate
students lack the basic skills necessary to transition from doctoral education
to employment. This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) award to Miami University will pilot and test a Graduate Student
Learning Community (GSLC) model aimed at closing that gap. This innovative
approach to STEM graduate student mentoring synthesizes knowledge from the
scholarship of teaching and learning, psychology, and chemistry education to
build a robust year-long experience. The goals of the project are to develop the
STEM graduate students' sense of identity, sense of community, and ability to
communicate with non-scientists. Beyond positively influencing the participants
in the GSLC, the project will advance graduate education in a number of ways.
First, the members of the GSLC are themselves actors within their specific
research groups, departments, and professions; greater identity clarity,
community, and communication skills among these students can in turn positively
impact their broader cultures. Second, the curriculum in this project can be
implemented and tailored to meet the needs of graduate students at other
universities. Finally, the focused attention on communicating to non-specialists
will increase the potential reach of STEM topics to scientists outside of one's
own specialty and to the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop an interdisciplinary Graduate Student Learning Community (GSLC). In two
cohorts, each one year in length, this project will mentor and enhance the
skills of STEM graduate students in chemistry and psychology. As part of the
GSLC, the two cohorts of STEM graduate students will develop individualized
professional development plans; receive regular career mentoring; and
participate in an evidence-based curriculum designed to explore their
professional identity, build community, and improve their ability to communicate
with non-specialists. The project will specifically test the effectiveness of
the GSLC model to foster professional identity, sense of community, and
communication skills. Evaluation will involve comparison within cohorts using
pre-and post-assessments, as well as against a control group of non-
participants. The curriculum developed in this project will be transferable
across disciplines and universities thereby broadening the impact on STEM
graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.