* 1806172
* Beyond the Standard Model Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Henry Lubatti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2020
* USD 468,437.00

This award will provide support to a group working on the ATLAS experiment at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in
Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle detector
facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and other
agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the Higgs
Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM)
that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics.

The investigators from the University of Washington are searching for the new
BSM physics through two approaches. The first is through the study of pair
production of Higgs Bosons, with each Boson decaying into b-quarks. This work
emphasizes specialized analytical techniques for identifying b-quark decays and
for background estimation. The second approach is a search for neutral long-
lived particles that decay in the ATLAS detector volume far from the LHC
interaction point, where the high-energy beams collide. This search uses custom
triggers developed by the group to select decays displaced from the collision
point and will search for long-lived neutral Higgs bosons as well as a broad
range of other BSM phenomena.

The group supports a broader impact program through public dissemination of the
results from ATLAS, with emphasis on training students from underrepresented
groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.