* 1806190
* Singularity Formation in Geometric Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Simon Brendle, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 212,337.00

This project is concerned with questions in differential geometry, which is the
study of higher-dimensional shapes and their curvature. These objects play a
central role in general relativity where gravitation is reflected by the
curvature of space-time. Geometric objects can often be improved if we evolve
them by a differential equation, so that the curvature dissipates in a way
analogous to heat dissipation. However, one important difference is that, while
heat dissipation is a linear phenomenon, all the geometrically interesting
equations are nonlinear. This project is aimed at understanding these nonlinear
phenomena. Of particular interest is the process of singularity formation: That
is to say, what happens when a surface is about to break apart and the curvature
becomes very large? Understanding these questions is an important problem within
mathematics. In addition, discrete versions of these equations are used in
engineering and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important
example of a geometric evolution equation is Hamilton's Ricci flow, which is a
key tool in Perelman's proof of the Poincare and Geometrization conjectures, as
well as in the proof of the Sphere Theorem. Another important example is the
mean curvature flow for surfaces in Euclidean space. One of the main concept is
that of an ancient solutions. Ancient solutions are solutions which can be
extended infinitely far backward in time. They often arise as models for a
solution to a geometric flow right before a singularity forms. As such, they
play an important role in understanding singularity formation. One of the goals
here is to classify all ancient solutions in low dimensions, subject to a
noncollapsing assumption. This is analogous to the problem of classifying entire
solutions to elliptic equations. The PI is also planning to study singularity
formation in higher dimensions, under suitable curvature restrictions. In
another direction, the PI is interested in studying problems related to minimal
surfaces and free boundary value problems, as well as applications of partial
differential equations to general relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.