* 1806607
* IGE: Impact Indicators and Instruments for Individual Development Plans
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Jodi Wesemann, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 04/30/2023
* USD 598,989.00

An Individual Development Plan (IDP) is a career-planning tool that has been
widely used in industry for decades to facilitate individual professional growth
along various career trajectories. In recent years, IDPs have been adapted to
support the career and professional development of graduate students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Despite an
interdisciplinary consensus that IDPs, when used properly, provide a framework
for helping graduate students achieve their career goals, there is little
alignment among STEM disciplines and institutions about the specific, measurable
outcomes of IDP use. This knowledge gap inhibits the availability of reliable
effective practices for IDP use and its wide adoption among educators. This
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
American Chemical Society will help define core goals for the IDP process used
across STEM disciplines and help develop tools that measure the impact of IDPs
on the professional development of graduate students in STEM. The project
outcomes will catalyze the generation of evidence for effective use of IDPs -
evidence that is needed to scale the use of the IDP process, support and inform
additional investments in career planning and graduate education, and foster
growth of the field of PhD career development. Ultimately, results from this
project have the potential to improve educational outcomes in graduate education
and to better prepare the U.S. workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will work nationally across STEM disciplines to align activities associated with
implementing and measuring the impact of the IDP process, fulfilling three
project objectives: (1) define core goals and measurable outcomes for the IDP
process; (2) develop and test a set of instruments for demonstrating changes in
student actions and attitudes resulting from use of the IDP process; and (3)
recommend strategies for building a base of evidence on how and why the IDP
process works in various contexts. The innovation of this project will be a
tool-kit - a collection of standard impact indicators, a set of validated
instruments, and guidance on their use - to be used across the STEM graduate
education community. Initial drafts of the instruments will be created based on
prior research, interviews with a range of STEM stakeholders, and feedback from
career planning professionals and assessment experts. The collection of
psychometric surveys and other tools will be pre-tested using cognitive
interviews, field-tested with students from various graduate programs and
backgrounds, and pilot-tested at selected campuses with a statistically relevant
number of graduate students from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups.
Stakeholder interviews, input from gatherings of subject matter experts,
insights from and surveys of those attending discussions with and presentations
to the STEM graduate education and career development communities, focus groups
of graduate students, and results from use of the tool-kit will be among the
methods used to test two project hypotheses: (1) a set of instruments can be
developed to measure the impacts of the IDP process as it is used in different
ways to guide students with different backgrounds, experiences, and career
goals; and (2) engaging a range of stakeholders, nationally and at academic
institutions, in developing and testing this set of instruments will form a
cadre that is interested and invested in using the project findings, resources,
and recommendations to build a broader and more robust research base on the
effective use and impact of the IDP process on graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is
focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test
and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to generate the
knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.