* 1806219
* Studies of Singularities, Black Holes, and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* David Garfinkle, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 153,397.00

This project will study two aspects of gravity: gravitational collapse and
gravitational radiation. When an object's gravity becomes strong enough to trap
light, the object becomes a black hole. Inside the black hole the object
continues to become smaller and smaller under the influence of its own gravity
until it becomes a point with infinite density and infinite gravitational field
called a singularity. This project involves working out the properties of the
singularities formed in gravitational collapse, and in particular the forces
felt by any observer who approaches the singularity. Just as the electric
currents in a radio transmitter make radio waves, so moving masses make
gravitational waves. One of the most exciting recent developments in physics is
the direct detection of these gravitational waves using huge laser
interferometers as the detectors. One interesting aspect of gravitational
radiation is something called gravitational wave memory: even after the wave has
passed, there is a permanent change in the gravitational wave detector. This
project will study the causes and properties of this gravitational wave
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational collapse results in the formation of
black holes and spacetime singularities, and the emission of gravitational
radiation. This project will study all of these aspects of gravitational
collapse, and in particular will concentrate on the approach to the singularity,
gravitational wave memory, and critical behavior at the threshold of black hole
formation. The project will study the formation of small scale structure in the
approach to the generic spacelike singularity. In addition, simulations will be
done of the collapse of vacuum, asymptotically flat spacetimes in order to test
the conjecture that both strong spacelike singularities and weak null
singularities form in this case. In previous work, this group developed a
treatment of gravitational wave memory that uses a perturbative approach in
which the Weyl tensor is the basic variable and thus has manifest gauge
invariance in first order perturbation theory. This project will extend this
approach to treat the memory of gravitational radiation (Christodoulou memory)
using second order perturbation theory. Simulations will be performed of
critical gravitational collapse to develop a better understanding of the
Choptuik critical solution, in particular the structure inside the horizon of
the slightly supercritical case, and the spacetime near the Cauchy horizon for
the critical solution. Einstein-Aether theory will be studied to see whether
some of its black hole solutions are unstable. In addition an initial value
formulation of this theory will be developed for the general case of no
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.