* 1806579
* Measurement of the Higgs Sector Through Decays to B-quarks
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nicola Giacinto Piacquadio, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 575,000.00

This award will provide support to a Stony Brook University group working on the
ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle
detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and
other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the
Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model"
(SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to study the properties and characteristics
of this newly discovered particle as a laboratory to see if it behaves as the SM
predicts or if there are deviations suggesting evidence for new physics Beyond
the Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of
the mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe.
The LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics from the current run and by means of further upgrades of the
LHC and ATLAS to follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, to facilitate a
detailed study of the Higgs Boson and search for other new states of matter, the
Stony Brook group will be studying final states containing b-quark jets, with
focus on advancing the identification of b-jets with ever high transverse
momentum. On the technical side, the group is engaged in the Phase II upgrade of
the ATLAS inner tracker, called the ITK, for the high luminosity LHC. The work
concentrates on two areas: simulation studies of the b-tagging performance for
high transverse momentum jets with the upgraded detector, and development of the
data acquisition system for the ITK strip detector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this work, the Stony Brook group's broader impacts
efforts include development of state-of-the-art software and computing tools,
and the direct participation of undergraduate and graduate students, and post-
doctoral researchers in cutting edge scientific research and instrumentation
development. Such efforts help to lay the groundwork for future innovations in
other areas, and for general economic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.