* 1806494
* Production and Exploration of Rydberg Highly Charged Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Joan Marler, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This project will advance knowledge about the formation and decay of Rydberg
highly charged ions (RyHCI). Highly charged ions are atoms in which all or most
of their electrons have been stripped and the remaining electron(s) exist in the
extremely large electric field of the nucleus. Measurements of electronic
transitions in these systems provide stringent tests of physics predictions in
extreme conditions. Rydberg highly charged ions, in which the remaining electron
is in a highly excited state, will be the focus of this project. These systems
provide test beds for measurement of fundamental constants, quantum information
processing schemes, precision tests of quantum electrodynamics, and precision
X-ray wavelength standards. The formation of such extreme electronic states is
not straightforward, due to excitation energies that are many orders of
magnitude higher than that of ordinary laser accessible transitions. The
research activity also involves training of next generation scientists in atomic
physics, spectroscopy, data analysis, scientific research, and scientific
communication. In addition to graduate students, this team will mentor
undergraduate students through Clemson University's on-campus research
initiatives such as the Creative Inquiry program for current students and the
Eureka! program for incoming undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this research is to create and investigate Rydberg highly charged ions
(RyHCI) in which a single electron occupies high principle quantum number
states. Single electron capture from colliding neutral atoms into the Rydberg
levels of bare nuclei will be employed as a production mechanism for these
unique H-like systems. The charge exchange process that leads to the formation
of these one-electron ions is far from being fully understood, and therefore the
results will also contribute to the understanding of this important problem in
atomic physics. This team will create HCI beams of different kinetic energies at
the Clemson University Electron Beam Ion Trap (CUEBIT) facility and intersect
them with different neutral atoms of a gas jet target. High-resolution and
broadband X-ray spectrometers will be used to observe transitions directly to
the ground state simultaneously with alternative cascade channels. Spectral
lines in RyHCI will serve as signatures for the initial (n,l) distribution of
the electron capture. Additionally, this team will collaborate with
theoreticians to use a collisional cascade model to determine the site
distribution of the initial capture and compare their findings with theoretical
calculations including classical trajectory Monte Carlo
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.