* 1806194
* The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) International Project Office (IPO)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Megan Melamed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,274.00

This project supports the International Project Office (IPO) of the
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Project, a project of the
international Commission on Atmospheric Composition and Global Pollution and a
Global Research Project under the umbrella of Future Earth. The three focal
areas of IGAC activity are (1) Fostering Community, (2) Building Capacity, and
(3) Providing Leadership. The IGAC IPO facilitates international scientific
collaborations, cultivates the next generation of scientists, builds capacity in
developing countries, and fosters a cohesive international community of
atmospheric scientists working together across disciplines and geographical
boundaries to address global change and sustainability issues.

IGAC's priorities and activities are determined and guided by an international
volunteer Scientific Steering Committee (SSC). The main responsibility of the
IGAC International Project Office's (IPO) is to implement these priorities in
collaboration with SSC members and other members of the international
atmospheric chemistry community. The responsibilities of the IPO include:
administering projects on a day-to-day basis under the guidance of the SSC;
supporting the SSC in planning and carrying out IGAC's mission and goals;
working with the SSC and the community on coordinating IGAC activities and
national and regional working groups; serving as a channel of communication
between scientists working in different countries on various aspects of global
change and sustainability; organizing events, workshops, and capacity building
activities; promoting IGAC activities and events via newsletters, email lists,
website, social media, presentations, etc.; interacting with relevant policy and
stakeholder communities; serving as liaison with scientific sponsors, funding
agencies and host institutions; and creating and maintaining an archive of key
core project documents. For developing country scientists, IGAC fosters the
creation of a strong cohesive community of atmospheric scientists in under-
represented regions of the world and also connects the scientists to the larger
IGAC community in order to foster international collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.