* 1806600
* Precision Studies of Neutrino Oscillations and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Nelson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,458,956.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact
with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and
were once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were
believed to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the
Standard Model predicted that there were actually three different kinds of
neutrinos that were distinguishable through the different interactions that they
did undergo whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have
totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a
mass and because they do, they can actually change from one type to another.
Detailed measurements of these changes as well as others form one of the most
promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The William and Mary Group is searching for evidence
of CP Violation (related to the imbalance of matter and antimatter in the
universe) with the NOvA experiment and is studying how neutrinos interact in
normal matter with the MINERvA experiment. The group is also engaged in R&amp;D
for DUNE, the next generation, long baseline neutrino experiment with endpoints
at Fermilab in Illinois which provides the neutrino beam and the Sanford
Underground Laboratory in South Dakota which is home for the detectors.
Presently under test are large detector prototypes called "ProtoDUNEs", which
are massive liquid-Argon based detectors called Time Projection Chambers. The
testing is underway at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, and will guide the development
of the massive detectors that will be built for DUNE in the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The William and Mary group is committed to engaging
undergraduates in research as a vital component of their undergraduate
education. Beyond promoting science education at the College, the group operates
a successful Emerging Scholars program at a local elementary school. This ten-
week, after-school program exposes students who are from communities
historically underrepresented in the sciences to practicing physicists and
exciting science activities. The program was developed in consultation with the
Coordinator for Gifted and Talented Students of the Williamsburg- James City
County schools and has grown and been strengthened based on feedback from
follow-up discussions with the students and notes from in-session observations
by specialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.