* 1806218
* Quantum Field Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Richard Woodard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Observational cosmology has provided the first-ever data on quantum gravity, and
this is catalyzing the difficult passage of the subject from speculation to hard
science. Conversely, quantum gravity has the potential to help resolve some of
the great puzzles which confront cosmology, including: (a) What caused the
initial spurt of expansion at the birth of the universe and how can it be
tested? (b) Can modifications of Einstein's gravity theory dispense with the
huge undetected and exotic contributions to the current energy density (95% of
the total!) needed to account for galaxies, galaxy clusters and for the overall
expansion of the universe? This project examines novel solutions to these
questions. It will additionally promote teaching, training and learning. The
PI's success in teaching has been recognized by awards at his own institution
and by the American Physical Society. More than half the PI's current and past
graduate students belong to under-represented groups, including two who are
filling vital STEM educational positions within the United States. The PI has
also been very active in outreach, with highly-cited review articles and
numerous popular colloquia.

The PI's group will continue their collaborations with Prof. Shun-Pei Miao
(NCKU, Taiwan), Prof. Tomislav Prokopec (U. Utrecht, Netherlands) and Prof.
Nikolaos Tsamis (U. Crete, Greece) to pursue analytical and numerical research
in four areas: (1) Phenomenology of perturbations --- exploit the newly-derived
functional dependence to reconstruct the geometry from data and to design new
statistics which maximize non-Gaussianity from features in the power spectrum.
(2) Quantum back-reaction on inflation --- extend the functional dependence to
Standard Model fields to study how their couplings to the inflaton would modify
inflation, and exploit recent progress in renormalizing nonlocal observables to
study how inflationary gravitons modify inflation. (3) Nonlocal models of
gravity --- study structure formation in the PI's nonlocal modified gravity
model which dispenses with dark matter, and resolve a paradox in how the PI's
nonlocal cosmology model contrives to describe structure formation better than
general relativity. (4) Quantum loop effects --- exploit recent progress in
removing the gauge dependence in calculations of how gravitons modify particle
kinematics and long range forces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.