* 1806849
* Experimental Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Heidi Schellman, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 665,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact
with practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and
were once thought to be massless. Like other elementary particles, they were
believed to have an antimatter counterpart, the antineutrino. Moreover, the
Standard Model predicted that there were actually three different kinds of
neutrinos that were distinguishable through the different interactions that they
did undergo whenever there was an interaction. But recent measurements have
totally changed our picture of neutrinos. We now know that neutrinos do have a
mass and because they do, they can actually change from one type to another.
Detailed measurements of neutrino interactions such as those in this project
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oregon State Group is studying how neutrinos and
antineutrinos interact with normal matter in the MINERvA experiment at Fermilab,
and are engaged in R&amp;D for DUNE, the next generation, long baseline neutrino
experiment with endpoints at Fermilab in Illinois which provides the neutrino
beam and the Sanford Underground Laboratory in South Dakota which is home for
the detectors. Presently under test are large detector prototypes called
"ProtoDUNEs", which are massive liquid-Argon based detectors called Time
Projection Chambers. The testing is underway at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, and
will guide the development of the massive detectors that will be built for DUNE
in the next decade. Principal investigator Schellman is co-coordinator of the
Computing and Software effort for the overall DUNE project. This includes
development and implementation of the experimental computing model and
assembling the international scientific and technical team that will be
responsible for processing the data from the ProtoDUNE
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create computing
infrastructure useful across the fields of Particle and Nuclear Physics and will
train young scientists in advanced computing techniques for analyzing petabyte
data samples which are valuable across the US economy. The PI supervises
scientific outreach activities through The Oregon State Physics Department that
reaches substantial numbers of people in urban and rural communities every year.
The OSU neutrino group attracts a large fraction of women and underrepresented
minorities to its research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.