* 1806145
* Laser Control of Quantum Evolution in Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Philip Bucksbaum, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,400,000.00

The motion of electrons and protons inside molecules when they are subjected to
strong forces is a fundamental issue in molecular and chemical science.
Understanding and controlling this internal motion is important: For example,
proton motion does much of the work in organic chemistry, energy storage, and
biomedicine, therefore controlling proton motion with external forces may be
useful in future implementations of chemical synthesis or quantum computing; or
even for splitting water to make hydrogen fuel. This NSF program will explore
new ways to create and control the motion of protons and electrons inside
molecules using external laser fields in the laboratory. The laser field
strengths must be large enough to overcome the internal fields that hold
molecules together, on the order of volts per Angstrom; and they must be able to
pulse on and off in well under a hundredth of a trillionth of a second as well,
to keep up with the natural pace of movement inside molecules. Research using
these laser tools will test basic models of molecular transformations, such as
conjectures that there are special atomic geometries where molecules become
especially susceptible to control by outside forces. The molecules to be tested
are water and acetylene, both proton-rich building-blocks for many chemical
processes. This research will also provide training for students and postdocs,
and thus prepare them to contribute technical talents that are needed to support
the nation's economy and security in the coming century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intramolecular motion is one of the core issues in
molecular physics, and the key to many important physical and chemical processes
such as chemical synthesis and energy production. This activity explores how
ultrafast laser-induced strong field interactions can change the motion of atoms
in molecules and therefore alter the path of chemical change. These paths are
complicated in part because the motion of every atom in a molecule generally
affects every other atom. The result is that motion takes place in a high-
dimensional space: three internal dimensions for a simple three-atom molecule
like water; but three additional dimensions for every additional atom in the
molecule. The high-dimensional topology of this space is difficult to visualize
and highly non-intuitive. It leads to special locations in this molecular
landscape -- seams or surfaces structures embedded in the higher dimensional
space -- where the interatomic bonds can rearrange without any energy penalty.
Here the objective is to understand how high-dimensional features in coupled
atomic motion can be altered by strong laser fields to enhance, suppress, or
modify atomic rearrangement, rapid ionization, multiple ionization, and even
Coulomb explosions. This tests a hypothesis that external strong fields coupled
to atomic motion can control and redirect these natural processes. Water and
acetylene have been selected for study because their internal motion is
dominated by hydrogen atoms, which move more rapidly because of the low mass of
their proton nuclei. This enhances the effects under study. The investigations
use infrared, ultraviolet, and vacuum ultraviolet coherent laser fields to both
excite and control these molecular systems. Results of the excitation and the
control are measured by recording the velocities of all of the molecular
constituents directly, either by allowing the molecules to fall apart or by
forcing them apart with a laser-produced Coulomb explosion. Understanding
molecular behavior in external fields has relevance for many practical
applications areas, including catalysis, proton medical therapy and photo-
initiated hydrogenase chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.