* 1806434
* Investigating Laser-Activation of Structured Polymer Materials for Drug Delivery
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 830,611.00

The PI recently discovered that laser-activation of certain polymers performs
effective cargo delivery. As polymers are biocompatible, cheap, and easily
integrated, the work in this project plans to leverage this recent (unexpected,
and as-of-yet not understood) discovery to fabricate and characterize laser-
activated polymers, with the aim of better equipping the biomedical field with
novel in vivo cargo-delivery methods that harness laser-activated materials.
While advancing discovery, the work will also contribute to the education and
the training of future multidisciplinary scientists and engineers through
research-based education of undergraduate and graduate students. Through the
Mazur Group's work with local high schools, NSF sponsored programs, and the high
representation of women in his research group, they will broaden participation
of underrepresented groups. Finally, using the group's well-established program
integrating outreach and public education with research, this work will be
broadly disseminated to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
for investigating the newly discovered phenomenon of laser-activation of
polymers with an eye toward developing light-activated polymer materials that
are flexible in structure, patterned, biodegradable, and easy to implant into
the body, unlike traditional metallic nanofabricated substrates, for the
delivery of payloads into cells. The goals of this project are to: 1) study the
fundamental physics of the light-matter interactions of these polymer materials
and cells; and 2) develop and apply these light-activated polymer materials for
biomedical engineering applications. Developing new approaches for cell therapy
and regenerative medicine, as well as studying modified gene expression,
requires efficient and safe introduction of genetic vectors into mammalian
cells. There is a biomedical need for gene delivery modalities that are
efficient and non-toxic and that and can treat a large number of cells in a
short amount of time. Being able to have a highly efficient cargo delivery
method while maintaining cell viability and medically relevant treatment
throughput would revolutionize nanomedicine and open the door to new cell
therapies and regenerative medicine. In summary, this project focuses on
studying the fundamental physics of light-matter interaction of various
structures composed of polymer and bioplastic materials and properties in a
liquid environment. The motivation is to create a flexible and biocompatible
platform for transfection in implantable materials. It is important to
characterize material properties to determine how biocompatible and viable these
materials may be for different sensitive cell types. Developing a strong design
and understanding of a new biomaterial will open avenues to trigger delivery in
a non-invasive manner using light-activation within a patient. Due to the ease
of fabrication and scalability of structured polymer surfaces to be used in this
project, there is great potential to maximize throughput for clinical
applications. This proposed research could be truly transformative to the field
of cargo delivery and provide an enormous opportunity for active implants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond demonstrating cargo delivery with laser-activated
structured polymer and bioplastic materials and their use in biomedical
applications, the work will also explore several fundamental topics as follows:
(1) identifying what effects govern successful light-polymer interaction for
cell poration; (2) characterizing the pressure wave perturbation and bubble
formation, when excited with different types of laser (pulsed and continuous
wave) on structured polymer materials through experimental measurements; (3)
establishing guidelines for designing a wide variety of structured polymer and
bioplastic materials; and (4) identifying properties that dictate favorable cell
attachment to these structured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.