* 1806422
* EAGER: Exploration of the Denali Basal Ice Core Archive
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Karl Kreutz, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2020
* USD 95,794.00

This award uses funds, under the auspices of the EArly Concept Grant For
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program, to explore the use of the basal ice from
the Mt. Hunter (Denali National Park) ice core for reconstructing hydroclimate
variability in Central Alaska through the Holocene. The approach employed in
this EAGER project will test the viability of dating constraints in the bottom
ten meters of the core and explore new approaches for paleoclimate proxy
measurement.

The researchers aim to address the following questions:

1) Are there conformable strata within the basal ice of Mt. Hunter?

The researchers will explore the feasibility of using novel high resolution
(laser ablation ICP-MS, micro-stable isotope analyses) and 14-Carbon
measurements to test the stratigraphic continuity hypothesis. If the measurement
techniques provide chronological information with appropriate errors and the
Denali ice core archive proves to have a continuous stratigraphic record, then a
large portion of the Holocene may be accessible in the archive.

2) What is the history of summer temperature in Central Alaska through the
Holocene?

The researchers will test a new approach to analyze compressed melt features
using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) that has the potential to significantly
expand our knowledge of past summer temperature variability.

3) How long has ice been present on the Mt. Hunter plateau?

Access to bed material contained in the lowest portion of the Mt. Hunter ice
cores provides an opportunity for investigation of this question in Central
Alaska. The researchers will test the validity of cosmogenic isotope analysis
(10-Berillium) on small pebbles and sediment contained in the basal core
sections. Such analyses are unique on lithogenic material recovered in an alpine
ice core.

If successful, cosmogenic isotope analysis of samples from basal ice will open
new research avenues for combining glaciological, paleoclimate, glacial geology,
and subglacial environment disciplines. Exploration of new measurements in the
Denali ice core archive will potentially provide scientific breakthroughs on
several important paleoclimate fronts such as: 1) improvement and extension of
existing ice core accumulation time series, and evaluation of hydroclimate
variability over the Holocene; 2) evaluation of the impact of various modes of
climate variability, particularly El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), on
regional climate in the North Pacific over the Holocene; 3) understanding
regional differences in the hydrological cycle particularly given the potential
societal impacts of ENSO-related variability on North Pacific hydrology; 4)
evaluation of regional hydroclimate variability and glacier response during a
documented warm period (Holocene climate optimum); and 5) reconnaissance effort
with cosmogenic isotope analyses may yield valuable initial information on ice
stability in Central Alaska over much longer time periods. This as an important
step towards designing and implementing a comprehensive research strategy
addressing long-term (e.g., Plio-Pleistocene) ice dynamics in Alaska. Such
results would have a broad impact across the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.