* 1806228
* RUI: Applications of 19F NMR spectroscopy to evaluate non-human bromodomain molecular recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Scott Bur, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 236,068.00

Scott Bur of Gustavus Adolphus College is supported by an award from the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to study the
malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum. The focus of the project is on
gene-regulating proteins that contain a molecular recognition site known as the
bromodomain. Because of its unique molecular structure, the bromodomain is able
to recognize specific molecular changes made to other proteins---histones---that
are involved in packaging and storing DNA within the cell nucleus. Histone
modifications can strongly affect gene expression. The bromodomain functions as
a specialized "molecular detector" for such modifications. This research has
implications for improving human health by developing potential treatments for
parasitic infection and cancer. Through this project, discovery-based research
is incorporated within the curriculum of this primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI). Undergraduate students participating in the course activities
gain experience in experimental design, state-of-the-art chemical techniques,
and communicating their research to other scientists. The skills are
transferrable to the chemical job market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known
about the roles that specific epigenetic-regulator proteins play in regulating
gene expression, especially in non-human systems. One such regulatory protein,
the Plasmodium falciparum homolog of General Control Non-repressed protein 5
(PfGCN5), is known to have an epigenetic regulatory role. This project is aimed
at discovering the natural histone acetylation mark preferred by the PfGCN5
bromodomain, and identifying synthetic ligands that selectively disrupt the
interaction of this domain with its natural ligand in the presence of other
bromodomains. NMR spectroscopy techniques are used to observe interactions of
the PfGCN5 bromodomain with peptides that simulate histone tails. These histone
tails, which contain specifically acetylated lysine residues, are produced using
solid-phase peptide synthesis. In the second part of the project, high-affinity
synthetic ligands for PfGCN5 are being identified using a fragment-based ligand
discovery strategy. Fragments are translated into larger ligands with higher
affinity using linking or growing strategies, and protein-fragment interactions
are then assessed via in silico fragment docking experiments, PrOF NMR
screening, and X-ray crystallographic analysis of the PfGCN5 bromodomain with a
bound fragment. This research provides a foundation for understanding the
requirements of selective interactions between the bromodomain and acetylated
histone, and molecular recognition events that are important for selectivity.
Structure-activity studies are embedded early in the undergraduate curriculum at
Gustavus Adolphus College, providing undergraduate students with authentic
research experiences and exposure to techniques for the production, isolation,
and analysis of biomolecular polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.