* 1806871
* RUI: Testing Spacetime Symmetry Foundations of General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Quentin Bailey, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 89,810.00

Modern physics rests on two widely successful theories: Einstein's General
Relativity (GR) and quantum physics. The former describes all known
gravitational phenomena on scales larger than micrometers, the latter describes
the atomic and subatomic world. Physicists widely conjecture that the two are
merged in an as yet unknown unified theory. Much recent work in the literature
has revealed the possibility that observable hints of such a unified theory
could arise as violations of the foundations of General Relativity theory,
including local Lorentz symmetry, which encapsulates the principles of Special
Relativity. These studies will investigate new types of signals for Lorentz
violation in experiments and observations ranging from Earth laboratory
experiments to distant pulsar observations and gravitational waves.
Undergraduate research projects and outreach opportunities are planned in this
proposal. The supported work will make use of an effective field theory
framework for describing generic spacetime-symmetry violation that has been
widely adopted in recent years. A significant part of the work will involve
phenomenology and analysis in precision Solar-system tests of gravity including
Earth-laboratory tests and space-based tests. Building on prior work, the PI
will also further develop the effective field theory framework in the area of
beyond solar-system astrophysics and apply the results to gravitational waves
and observations of pulsar systems. The PI will also investigate the match of
specific proposed models, used widely in the literature, to this test framework
with the goal of constraining these models with existing and future
measurements. By providing motivation and additional areas in which to search
for new physics beyond GR, this work will positively impact researchers involved
in precision tests of GR in Earth laboratories, solar-system tests, and those
working on gravitational wave observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.