* 1806182
* I-Corps: Tunnel FET-based transistor logic for ultra-low-power applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Yuping Zeng, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
project device has the potential to become the next generation of ultra-low
power devices. Tunnel Field Effect Transistors (TFETs), especially those with
type III-V heterostructures, are excellent candidates to overcome both size and
power scaling issue of Silicon metal?oxide?semiconductor field-effect transistor
(Si MOSFET). III-V heterojunction TFET can easily achieve low power consumption
by having high on-current and low off-current within a very short range of
applied voltage. One of the bottlenecks for III-V materials to become mainstream
is the lack of integration with current silicon manufacturing technology. The
proposed device demonstrates technology that is compatible with silicon
manufacturing technology which has the most commercial impact compared to any
other III-V materials devices as it does not require any changes in the existing
manufacturing process. By realizing this device, it will open the opportunity to
replace the current existing FinFET technology in cellphone and computers,
making a new generation of portable devices for logic applications and enabling
ever-connected internet of things applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project proposes to create a low power tunneling field effect transistor
(TFET) on a silicon substrate using novel fabrication techniques. The device
employs InAs/AlSb/GaSb junction as the tunneling junction. This unique junction
produces effective modulation of electron tunneling under control of the applied
gate bias. The tunneling barrier AlSb layer is sandwiched between InAs and GaSb.
This configuration allows the free band movements between InAs and GaSb. This
unique junction is combined with a fin type channel structure to allow effective
control over the active channel region by the surrounding gate metals. The fin
device architecture will allow excellent gate electro-static control, and
combining it with the tunneling mechanism will enable the fabricated devices to
achieve a subthreshold slope much smaller than 60mV/dec. Another unique aspect
of the proposed design is the use of elevated asymmetric T-shaped source and
drain.