* 1806854
* Multi-Messenger, Multi-Wavelength, and Multi-TeV Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Miguel Mostafa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2023
* USD 810,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high-energy
gamma-rays. This award supports scientists at Pennsylvania State University
doing research with HAWC. In addition to supporting HAWC operations, the group
will engage in software development and analysis efforts to extend HAWC's
capabilities at the highest and lowest energies. They will then utilize those
improvements for scientific analyses of the data. The group will engage in
education and outreach activities. The group is also developing an online data
repository and display where all the HAWC data will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The group will develop the event reconstruction
tools for the new outrigger detectors to extend HAWC's high energy sensitivity.
With these improvements they will conduct more sensitive searches for Galactic
Pevatrons and constrain Galactic neutrino emission through measurements of the
high energy isotropic diffuse emission. The group will also develop tools to
recover the lowest energy events to extend HAWC's low energy threshold. This
will enhance searches for very high energy emission from gamma ray bursts, the
measurement of the spectra of supernova remnants, and searches for
electromagnetic counterparts of gravitational waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.