* 1806672
* Dark Matter Search with Atomic Clocks Onboard GPS Satellites and Networks of Precision Measurement Devices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrei Derevianko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 455,000.00

This project will help answer the question, "What is the nature of dark matter?"
Dark matter is invisible, yet it is known to exist. Cosmological observations
indicate that dark matter makes up 85% of all matter in the Universe yet its
composition remains a mystery. Although the astronomical evidence of dark matter
is overwhelming, so far nobody has detected it in the laboratory, and physicists
know almost nothing about it. Many theoretical models for dark matter
composition have been put forward. It is important to either confirm or rule out
such models, particularly if this can be done cost-effectively. This project
will use the existing Global Positioning System (GPS) as a planet-sized dark
matter detector. This team will examine nearly two decades of publicly available
archival data from atomic clocks onboard GPS satellites and search for transient
effects of dark matter clumps on time kept by the GPS atomic clocks. Since the
GPS system and its network of atomic clocks is already deployed, this is a
relatively low-budget project with high potential payoff. If such dark matter
clumps exist and this project finds them, this would have an impact on the very
foundations of cosmology and elementary particle physics. On the other hand, if
dark matter clumps do not exist, it would be valuable to be able to rule this
out categorically, to help science focus on more likely explanations. Either
way, such investigations promote the progress of science. This research will
also contribute to improvements in the analysis of GPS data, and this can
provide a benefit for many other applications such as geodesy that are also of
value to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambitious programs have been searching
for dark matter (DM) in the form of heavy particles with no conclusive evidence,
yet DM could also arise from ultralight quantum fields that form macroscopic
objects. Such objects are predicted to cause apparent variations of fundamental
constants, leading to transient shifts in atomic energy levels. In its current
project, the GPS.DM project team uses the orbiting network of atomic clocks on
board GPS satellites as a 50,000-km-aperture detector to search for such DM
objects. As the Earth moves through the galactic DM halo, interactions with DM
could cause a sequence of atomic clock perturbations that propagate through the
satellite constellation at galactic velocities. Mining 16 years of archival
data, the current project of GPS.DM finds no evidence for DM in the form of
domain walls at current sensitivity levels, thereby improving the limits on
certain quadratic scalar couplings by several orders of magnitude. This project
will expand the search to several different classes of extended DM objects and
to dramatically improve data mining techniques. These techniques are anticipated
to extend the discovery reach of the GPS dark matter detector by four orders of
magnitude in the DM candidate mass parameter space and by two orders of
magnitude in sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported
by the Particle Astrophysics Experiment program and the Atomic, Molecular and
Optical Physics Experiment program. Both programs are in the Division of Physics
in the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.