* 1806425
* Quantum State Engineering with Novel Nonlinear Interferometric Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Zhe-Yu Jeff Ou, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 319,984.00

Classical physics underpins many of the technological advances in computers,
optical communications, and mobile devices that have made profound impacts in
daily life, the economy, and society. However, as technology pushes forward,
following Moore's law in computer engineering, it is gradually reaching limits
where classical physics will no longer suffice. At this point, electrical and
optical engineers will need to use quantum physics, which, up to the end of 20th
century, had been mostly the subject of fundamental study. A key component for
quantum technologies will be the ability to engineer quantum states of light, or
photons. This research project will address the problem of quantum state
engineering by exploring new ways to control the shape of single-photon quantum
states using quantum interference. Because single-photon states are a basic
building block for quantum technologies, this project will support the
development of practical and versatile quantum devices for applications such as
quantum information processing. The table-top experiments in this project are
also an ideal platform for training and preparing next generation quantum
physicists. Undergraduate students and graduate students will be involved in
this research program. This project will deepen their understanding of quantum
physics, which in turn will promote further applications using quantum
interference techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photon indistinguishability is
essential to achieve complete quantum interference, which is the key in many
protocols in optical quantum information processing with linear optical
elements. The achievement of photon indistinguishability in experiments is
through mode matching of photon states. While spatial modes of optical fields
are relatively easy to manage, the temporal modes are much more complicated,
especially for ultra-short pulses. In this research program, this team will
employ a recently developed nonlinear quantum interferometric technique to
achieve custom engineering of the spectral and temporal modes of the quantum
states produced from ultra-fast nonlinear optical interactions. The essence of
the technique is in the manipulation of the spectral phase shift that controls
the nonlinear interaction via quantum interference and leads to interference
filtering and eventually engineering of the spectral profiles of the output
states for single mode operation. This team will implement the technique
experimentally and demonstrate its effectiveness with a multi-photon
interference experiment to achieve the efficient production of transform-limited
single-photon states in single modes. Quantum state engineering is important for
experimental implementations of quantum information protocols. It can be used to
tailor the temporal modes of the optical fields to fit the experimental
requirement and thus has very practical significance in the study of quantum
information processing. This investigation provides a new approach for quantum
state engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Quantum Information Science (QIS) Program in the Physics Division in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and the Electronics, Photonics
and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems Division in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.