* 1806797
* Baseline Support of the University of Utah Cosmic Ray Physics Group Including Analysis of Telescope Array, TALE, and TAx4 Data
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,597,872.00

Cosmic rays are highly energetic sub-atomic particles from space that travel at
velocities near the speed of light. The origin of cosmic rays and their
acceleration mechanisms are unknown, but they likely originate in extreme
astrophysical phenomena both within and beyond our galaxy. The Telescope Array
(TA) is the largest cosmic ray observatory in the northern hemisphere. Located
outside Delta, Utah, and representing a joint US-Japanese effort, TA was
designed to study the nature and origin of the highest energy particles in the
Universe. This award to the University of Utah supports the scientific analysis
of data from TA and the TAx4 upgrade that is currently under construction. The
University of Utah is the host institution for TA and therefore plays a critical
role in scientific activities of the observatory. This award will also support
the University of Utah group's involvement in the Astrophysics Science Project
Integrating Research and Education (ASPIRE) program, which engages area
teachers, students, and the public through a web site of interactive educational
materials and visits to local schools. The group will also host associated
experiments in other fields that benefit from the TA location and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the TA experiment
are to measure the energy and spatial distributions, and the chemical
composition of the highest energy cosmic rays in order to address the nature and
origin of ultra-high energy cosmic rays. Through this award, the group will work
to substantially improve the event statistics of the anisotropy data set and
clarify the nature of the apparent "hotspot" in the northern sky. They will
improve the precision of the spectrum measurement in order to elucidate the
nature of the suppression in the cosmic ray energy spectrum at high energies.
With increased statistics from hybrid data they will improve and extend
measurements of the shower maximum depth to resolve the composition of cosmic
rays at the highest energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.