* 1806651
* Collaborative Proposal: Enhanced Gravitational Wave Search via Simultaneous Advanced LIGO/Virgo and Evryscope Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Stephen Eikenberry, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 59,877.00

The recent gravitational wave (GW) detection of the first binary neutron star
(BNS) merger by the LIGO/Virgo gravitational wave observatories and its
associated electromagnetic (EM) counterparts has ushered in a new era of multi-
messenger astrophysics. The GW170817 event has inspired a new GW search strategy
using simultaneous all-sky optical imaging measurements to provide improved
detection confidence as well as source identification/localization. This grant
will fund the development and testing of this improved GW search in Advanced
LIGO/Virgo (aLIGO/Virgo) operation run 3 (O3), with the potential to
substantially increase the number of confirmed GW detections. This will
significantly improve the progress of science in the national interest by
leveraging the existing investments in gravitational wave and optical
observatories to provide an estimated ~25% enhancement in the number of detected
systems during O3, and pave the way for future multi-messenger investigations
that could potentially quadruple the number of detected sources. The proposed
research is at the intersection of the multi-messenger astrophysics, general
relativity, digital signal processing and computing, which require young
researchers to develop a deep knowledge of modern astrophysical theories, and
understanding of gravitational wave instrumentation, and gives them opportunity
to get firsthand experience with sophisticated signal/image-processing
algorithms, computational methods, manipulation of large data sets and high
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel GW search proposed here is
based on combining aLIGO/Virgo sub-threshold triggers with simultaneous optical
imaging using the Evryscope technique. Evryscope images the entire observable
night-time sky simultaneously with 2-minute cadence. Scientists can then select
only those optical transient events in the aLIGO/Virgo error region which appear
within the same 2-minute window as the GW candidate - reducing the GW-only false
alarm probability by factors larger than 20,000. for any night-time GW events.
This enables improved detection confidence for marginal GW events and thus
enhanced GW detection volume. GW1708187's optical counterpart could be detected
by the current Evryscope out to D ~260 Mpc, and future Evryscope-style systems
to distances further than 350 Mpc. Analyses show that a future network of
Evryscope-style detectors would enhance the number of GW events detected by a
factor of ~2-4 compared to GW-only observations. Such a future network would
particularly benefit GW source population studies and cosmological applications
of GW events. This approach will also provide coverage of the brightest portion
of the optical lightcurve, and arcsecond-level localization for all of these
events, which will dramatically improve the EM followup response from the
community as a whole, leading to improved astrophysical context for interpreting
the implications of the GW event. The proposed work here is to carry out a sub-
threshold GW search in aLIGO/Virgo O3, using the Evryscope North and South
facilities for simultaneous optical coverage. Based on the properties of
GW170817's GW properties, optical counterpart, and analyses presented here, such
a search could add an additional ~25% more detections to the number of confirmed
BNS mergers in O3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.