* 1806971
* Exploring Ultracold Matter Along the Complexity Axis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* John Bohn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 269,014.00

Placing ordinary matter in extraordinary circumstances can create fascinating
new phenomena and applications in physics. For example, it was realized some
time ago that certain gases could be reduced to temperatures just a tiny bit
above absolute zero, but without condensing into liquid drops. This new
discipline of "ultracold" gases has led to a wealth of new understanding of
quantum mechanical behavior of collections of simple atoms. Now, a new set of
experiments seeks to enrich this discipline by introducing atoms and molecules
with internal complexity. Doing so will lead to unprecedented detail in
understanding and controlling chemical reactions, with applications yet to be
dreamed of. Amazingly, it will in certain cases also allow for a deeper
understanding of the fundamental rules of the universe than even the largest
particle accelerator can provide. To carry out such experiments, it is necessary
to thoroughly understand the dynamics of a complex, ultracold gas. This work
will explore the role of complexity in the gas, considering phenomena such as
basic thermodynamics, in which the propagation of heat or of sound can be
different in different directions, or may depend on (and thus reveal) chemical
reactivity. It will also consider the possibility, conjectured but not yet
demonstrated, that molecules in the gas can stick to each other for brief
amounts of time. Properties of this self-adhesive gas must be thoroughly
understood before ultracold gases can be harnessed for
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To do so, the work will investigate in
detail the role of quantum chaos in the two-body collision dynamics. Chaos has
already been demonstrated, or at least suspected, in ultracold collisions of
lanthanide dimer atoms as well as alkali dimer molecules. The first steps have
been taken, but a complete analysis, including the statistical distributions of
energy levels and resonance widths, as well as the influence of magnetic fields,
must still be undertaken. This analysis will be carried out using models of
various degrees of complexity, to reveal the essential physics of the phenomena.
Moreover, while the differential scattering cross sections of dipolar atoms and
molecules are known, their complete influence on the thermodynamics of the gas
remains largely unexplored. Dynamics of an ultracold dipolar gas will be
undertaken, using Monte Carlo calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.