* 1806084
* Relativistic Nonthermal Particle Acceleration in Kinetic Turbulence and Magnetic Reconnection:  Connecting Simulations and Theory
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mitchell Begelman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2022
* USD 646,762.00

Highly magnetized plasmas are implicated in accelerating charged particles to
very high speeds in astrophysical systems as diverse as pulsar wind nebulae,
accretion disk coronae, and relativistic jets. Much recent progress has been
numerical, but these large and complex simulations need to be connected to a
coherent theoretical picture, which also requires updating theories which
predate many of the insights gained from computation. This is exactly what this
project will provide, advancing our understanding of acceleration under various
physical conditions, extending to space and solar plasmas closer to home, and
thus helping to build intellectual bridges between plasma physics, astrophysics,
and heliospheric physics. The study includes training, support, and mentoring
for a graduate student as well as varied research opportunities for
undergraduates. Visually arresting graphics presented through collaboration with
the University of Colorado Fiske Planetarium will contribute to the public
understanding of modern science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relativistic charged
particles with extended power-law energy distributions are inferred to exist in
many astrophysical systems, but the mechanisms for non-thermal particle
acceleration (NTPA) are poorly understood. Only recently have first-principles
kinetic particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations suggested that reconnection and
turbulence in highly magnetized plasmas can efficiently cause relativistic NTPA.
The challenge of translating the accumulated numerical results into a coherent
theoretical picture is exacerbated by the size and complexity of modern PIC
simulations, and the fact that theoretical models predate the simulations and
have not been updated. Many theories of NTPA are tied to the Fokker-Planck (FP)
equation, but without numerical confirmation. This project will combine PIC
simulations with analytical theory, determine whether the FP equation approach
is applicable and measure the diffusion and advection coefficients, going beyond
FP if necessary, and elucidate the deeper connections between reconnection and
turbulence. This project will advance theoretical understanding of relativistic
NTPA in collisionless magnetic reconnection and turbulence under a variety of
physical conditions, and contribute significantly to understanding the
relativistic plasma environments around neutron stars and black holes. By
influencing thinking about NTPA in other space and solar plasmas, this work will
help to connect plasma physics, astrophysics, and heliospheric
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.