* 1806684
* Support for the 'Beyond Standard Model Physics with Driven Neutrino Sources' Workshop at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 11/30/2018
* USD 5,000.00

This award will provide support for the "Beyond Standard Model Physics with
Driven Neutrino Sources" workshop. It will be held January 18-19, 2018 on the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology campus. The primary intellectual merit of
the workshop is in its potential to find a new approach to Beyond Standard Model
(BSM) experiments.

With respect to benefits to society, this workshop will aid in developing a
diverse STEM workforce and encouraging multidisciplinary projects. The plan
involves inviting a high fraction of talks by under-represented individuals.
Also, the funding will be used to attract graduate students to this event. With
respect to the multidisciplinary nature, the workshop will bring together
members of the nuclear-, particle-astro-, experimental-particle-, theoretical-
particle- and accelerator-physics communities.

Funds are provided to support travel for attendees to a workshop that will allow
theorists and experimentalists to develop new searches for beyond-Standard-Model
(BSM) signatures using driven isotope decay-at-rest sources paired with existing
underground detectors. The driven isotope decay-at-rest sources offer high
intensity, very pure neutrino flavor sources. A driven source uses an
accelerator to produce an isotope which beta-decays-at-rest. This enables the
use of fluxes from very short lifetime elements, such as lithium-8. The short
lifetime isotopes have relatively high energy endpoints for the flux, typically
greater than 10 MeV. No such source has yet been produced, but the availability
of such a source would transform the field.