* 1806827
* Dynamical Laser Cooling of Ultranarrow Linewidth Atoms and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Murray Holland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,000.00

This theoretical research project explores a new and exciting idea where lasers
are used to cool atoms and molecules to temperatures more than a million times
colder than deep space. This innovative technique, dubbed SWAP cooling, employs
extremely coherent lasers whose pure color is periodically modulated. Starting
first as an accidental experimental discovery in the laboratory, this new
technique promises to push back the frontier of what can be achieved in
manipulating and controlling quantum gases, and to thereby have a broad range of
potential applications in science and technology. This is not the first laser-
cooling proposal; indeed the idea for using lasers to control and cool atomic
gases has been explored extensively over the past two or three decades, and has
led to the development of many methods that are used every day in atomic physics
laboratories. However, this new approach has the potential to massively expand
the range of atoms and molecules that can be considered for quantum science and
quantum computation applications, and offers to improve state-of-the-art atomic
clocks (used in such systems as GPS satellites for navigation).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel idea is based on the premise that the extreme
coherence offered by systems that have two valence electrons (group-II elements
and other similar atomic and molecular systems) offers a new and exciting
frontier for laser sciences. In these systems, the presence of extremely weak
dipole transitions causes the implementation of traditional laser-cooling
approaches to be difficult due in part to the demanding stability requirements
for the laser frequencies. The new idea here is that near-resonant laser fields
can be used whose intensity or frequency may be modulated in time. This may
amplify the effects of strong coherent forces while simultaneously reducing the
role of dissipative and spontaneous scattering of photons that would otherwise
increase the realizable temperatures. The aim is to achieve, say, a ten-fold
improvement in frequency standards that translates directly into potential major
improvements in current technologies, ranging from improved metrology, to
advanced communication, to the next generation of precision devices for
navigation and positioning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.