* 1806131
* Volatile budget of Yellowstone magmas: investigating eruptive triggers and environmental effects of the largest explosive eruptions on earth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Thomas Benson, Benson Thomas
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2019
* USD 0.00

Dr. Thomas R. Benson has been awarded an EAR postdoctoral fellowship to conduct
research and educational outreach at the American Museum of Natural History in
New York. The investigation will assess triggering mechanism(s) and
environmental effects of large supervolcanic eruptions through analysis of the
most recent three major eruptions at the Yellowstone Plateau Volcanic Field
(Wyoming, Montana, and Idaho, United States). The PI will collect field samples
and perform laboratory work on them to determine the abundances of volatile
chemicals (H2O, S, F, Cl) present in the magmas before the eruptions and
quantify the amounts lost to the atmosphere during the eruptions. This work will
inform hazard assessments of supervolcanoes to local and regional communities.
The resulting models will improve understanding on the effects of future
eruptions to the global environment. In addition, 360 degree virtual reality
videos of volcanic features at Yellowstone National Park will be created to make
the park more accessible to the public and utilize outreach programs at AMNH to
engage local high school and undergraduate students in scientific research.

This investigation will be the first comprehensive study of volatile systematics
in Yellowstone magmas, in particular those that lead to caldera-forming
eruptions. The work will involve analysis of apatite phenocrysts,
microphenocrysts, and inclusions within other minerals using SIMS to evaluate
equilibrium magma volatile concentrations. SIMS, electron microprobe, and FTIR
analyses of homogenized melt inclusions within quartz and pyroxene phenocrysts
will also be used to constrain the volatile composition of the magmas. Relative
crystallization or entrapment order of all analyzed phases will be determined
using thermodynamic constraints and petrographic relationships to assess how the
concentrations of volatile components changed in the magmas with time.
Concentrations will be compared to values measured in degassed matrix glasses
using SIMS, electron microprobe, and FTIR to quantify the amount of volatiles
that may have been lost to the atmosphere during these eruptions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.