* 1806262
* RAPID Opportunity for U/V band stellar imaging using intensity interferometry with the VERITAS Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2019
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 133,591.00

Interferometry is a method for combining the light from multiple telescopes to
generate an image with exceptionally high spatial resolution. Such acuity cannot
be obtained by either telescope alone. This challenging technique can resolve
stars outside our solar system, despite their very great distances. Such a feat
is impossible with any single telescope, for which even the closest stars are
still seen as unresolved points of light. Ordinary interferometry combines the
amplitudes of optical telescope signals to form an image. This project utilizes
another kind of interferometry that makes use of the quantum nature of light
(photons). This quantum approach was first demonstrated in the 1950?s. Kieda and
collaborators update this approach by using large, well-separated optical light
collectors and fast, modern electronics. They will form images of 35 bright
stars over the course of a one-year observing campaign. They will use the
VERITAS Observatory and their own dedicated detectors, electronics and data
connectivity. This project will serve as a technology pathfinder that may lead
to a new regime in ultra-high resolution optical
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will image stars in the UV/Optical
bandpass using the method of Hanbury Brown Twiss (HBT) interferometry. This
method utilizes the correlation between intensity fluctuations, also called
photon bunching, that occurs when different detectors observe the same source.
In this method, the intensity correlation time series is the interferometric
quantity upon which images are derived. The main advantage of this method is
that it is robust to atmospheric turbulence; however, its low inherent
sensitivity demands large-area light collectors. It also requires fast time
resolution and long integration times. Astronomical observations using HBT were
done in the 1960?s and 1970?s during which time the angular diameters of more
than 30 stars were measured with a resolution of 1 mas. This method was recently
demonstrated on several bright stars with modern detectors and electronics
operating in the photon-counting regime. Kieda and collaborators will use the
VERITAS gamma-ray observatory telescopes to demonstrate imaging with intensity
interferometry. They have validated key technologies for measuring spatial and
temporal bunching of blackbody radiation. They have demonstrated the ability to
reconstruct images using synthetic data. Their method requires sub-nanosecond
synchronization of the data acquisition from multiple detectors spaced at ~100+
meter baselines. This project has the potential to demonstrate a scalable
technology and open a wide, unexplored frontier for astronomical, optical
imaging with ultra-high resolution.