* 1806691
* Improving Student Understanding of Quantum Mechanics via Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Chandralekha Singh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2022
* USD 556,312.00

This award funds a project to develop materials that will help students
understand the challenging topics in quantum mechanics. The aim is to prepare
future scientists and engineers for the demands of the high-tech workplace with
its growing dependence on quantum phenomena through the continued development,
assessment, and dissemination of Quantum Interactive Learning Tutorials (QuILT)
and peer-instruction tools for undergraduate course. QuILTs and peer-instruction
tools use research as a guide and are based on a cognitive-apprenticeship model
emphasizing modeling, coaching and weaning. Guidance and effective methods of
education are critical in retaining students in science and in shaping their
career choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum features that make these
products particularly suited for the challenging task of teaching quantum
physics are: (1) They are based upon research in physics education and pay
particular attention to cognitive issues. (2) They consistently keep students
engaged in the learning process by asking them to predict what should happen in
a particular situation and then providing appropriate feedback. (3) They employ
visualization tools to help students build physical intuition about quantum
processes. (4) They attempt to bridge the gap between the abstract quantitative
formalism of quantum mechanics and the qualitative understanding necessary to
explain and predict diverse physical phenomena. (5) They are based on systematic
investigations of difficulties students have in learning various concepts in
quantum physics. (6) Many of the tools can be used in class by the instructors
as supplements to lectures or outside of the class as homework or as self-study
tool by students. (7) They consist of self-sufficient modular units that can be
used in any order that is convenient. These tools can also be used by graduate
students who may need to refresh concepts learned in undergraduate quantum
mechanics as a self-study tool. This award is co-funded by the Division of
Physics Integrative Activities in Physics Program within the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and by the Division of Undergraduate Education
within the Education and Human Resources Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.