* 1806457
* Precision Atmospheric Neutrino Oscillation Measurements with IceCube DeepCore
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Douglas Cowen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2019
* USD 201,000.00

Embedded deep in the Antarctic polar ice cap, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
is the world's largest and most sensitive high energy neutrino telescope. In the
past few years, IceCube has discovered neutrinos of astrophysical origin at
energies reaching the PeV scale, and its DeepCore extension has performed
measurements of fundamental parameters in particle physics through the
measurement of atmospheric neutrinos at energies as low as roughly 5 GeV. Within
the course of this project the group will pursue improvements in the simulation
and reconstruction of events to sharpen the energy resolution and the
identification of the direction from which the neutrinos reach the detector as
well as implement general improvements to reduce the interfering background.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opportunities are provided for young physicists at all
levels to become involved in particle astrophysics, with a particular emphasis
on encouraging participation among women and underrepresented groups. In
addition, the PI founded and continues to serve as the faculty mentor to the
Physics and Astronomy Women (PAW) student group. PAW provides a forum for open
discussion of the challenges facing women as well as their solutions, runs a
mentoring program for starting undergraduate and graduate women in physics,
increases the local visibility of women in science through outreach activities,
and provides networking and professional development opportunities in a friendly
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DeepCore, situated at the bottom center of
the IceCube array, benefits from its unmatched multi-megaton fiducial volume and
the availability of surrounding IceCube modules to veto atmospheric muon
background events, greatly enhancing the neutrino signal-to-noise ratio.
DeepCore has been used to measure muon-neutrino disappearance and tau-neutrino
appearance, as well as the flux of atmospheric electron neutrinos, at energies
an order of magnitude higher than previous observations, and with uncertainties
that are comparable to the world's best current measurements. With this award,
the Penn State IceCube group will continue to exploit the DeepCore data to
answer fundamental questions of neutrino physics, focusing on better and faster
event reconstruction and more effective background rejection to improve its
measurement of the tau neutrino normalization, to determine Delta (m_23)^2 and
theta_23 with greater precision, and to reduce systematic errors for these and
other similar analyses. It will also continue to provide strong support for the
use of neutrinos from IceCube and DeepCore to facilitate real-time searches for
multi-messenger astrophysical sources via the AMON network headquartered at Penn
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.