* 1806430
* Experiments with Kaons at CERN
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Philip Rubin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2023
* USD 502,602.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. An important area to search for answers to these and
other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it is the
way it is, is to study rare decays of kaons, as a probe of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Kaons are the lightest particles containing a strange
quark. The kaon physics program at the CERN Laboratory, Geneva, Switzerland
includes measurements of the ultra-rare decays of kaons, including precision
investigations of the weak interaction, and searches for violations of and for
signatures of physics beyond the Standard Model. This project will focus on the
study of ultra-rare decays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The George Mason University
group is a key participant and the sole U.S. group in the CERN NA62 experiment,
whose primary objective is to measure the rate of an ultra-rare decay of charged
kaons, through the flavor-changing neutral current to a charged pion and a pair
of neutrinos. The rate of this transition is predicted in the Standard Model,
while alternative models predict very different rates. Hence this challenging
measurement has the potential to provide important evidence for new physics
beyond the Standard Model. George Mason has been fully engaged in the
experimental design, construction, operations and analysis of data from this
experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the George Mason
program are extensive, providing extensive summer research experiences for
undergraduate students through the CERN Summer Research Programme, and in
providing leadership and mentoring for the Virginia QuarkNet Center, which
attracts high school teachers and students to the excitement of particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.