* 1806771
* Polarized Electron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 570,000.00

Electrons have the fundamental property of "spin," which is analogous to that of
a spinning toy top, and is associated with their angular momentum. This project
studies collisions between polarized electrons, which have their spins aligned
in one direction, and chiral, or "handed" molecules. Such molecules, of which
DNA is an example, are characterized by a spiral, or helical geometry. These
experiments address physics questions about the dynamics of electron-chiral
molecule scattering, particularly with regard to the role played by the electron
spins. They will also provide important clues about the origins of biological
homochirality - the fact that all naturally-occurring DNA spirals in the same
direction. Atoms of zinc are also being used as targets, to check the results of
an experiment done recently by another group in which zinc atoms excited by
polarized electrons emitted light in a way that is forbidden by all known
theories of atomic collisions. If that result is reproduced, much of the basic
theoretical knowledge about spin-polarized electron-impact-excitation physics
would need to be revised. Improved sources of polarized electrons are also being
developed in this project, with the goal of making "turnkey" components that
will be easily integrated into other experimental systems. Two particular ways
to make polarized electrons are being investigated in this project. The first
involves electron collisions with rubidium atoms in which spin is transferred
from the rubidium to the free electrons. The second uses multiphoton ionization
of semiconductors such as gallium arsenide (GaAs) to give the electrons a
preferential spin direction. This research to develop polarized electron
technology holds the promise of providing new analytical tools that can be used
for biological and materials research, and for industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments involving collisions between polarized
electrons and chiral molecules will extend previous work that showed chiral
sensitivity in both quasi-elastic and reactive scattering with halocamphor
targets. Now that such sensitivity has been observed, the goal is to demonstrate
such effects in molecules that have biological significance, such as cysteine,
and to study the effect of the maximum target nuclear charge and location of the
target's chiral center on the chiral asymmetries we observe. The goal in the Zn
experiments is to check whether the rather large value of canted linear
polarization (polarization fraction P2) observed in fluorescence from excited Zn
atoms is reproducible. No extant theory of electron-atom scattering, including
the state-of-the-art "R-matrix with pseudostates" approach, has been able to
confirm this result, even though they make quantitatively accurate predictions
of other collision parameters for this system. Source development work will be
based on the successfully demonstrated "Rb spin-filter" design by the group, in
which optically-pumped Rb undergoes spin-exchange collisions with an incident
unpolarized beam of electrons. This project will focus on improving the vacuum
system, the Rb target reliability, and the optical pumping protocol. It will
also study a variety of buffer gases to understand the complex physics of the
interaction between the electron beam and the Rb vapor. In the GaAs experiment,
unamplified pulses from a femtosecond Ti:Saph oscillator are used to photo-emit
electrons. First experiments will investigate the intensity and polarization of
the electrons emitted from bulk GaAs and tip-like GaAs shards. Then targets of
GaAs cusp arrays will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.