* 1806791
* EAR-PF The contributions of composition and length-scale to the peak strength of the lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Kathryn Kumamoto, Kumamoto                Kathryn        M
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kathryn Kumamoto has been awarded a postdoctoral fellowship to engage in
research and education at the University of Oxford, in the UK. The theory of
plate tectonics describes a set of stable, rigid plates (the lithosphere) moving
on top of a comparatively soft convecting medium (the asthenosphere). The
strength of the lithosphere compared to the asthenosphere determines how the
plates interact and is likely responsible for differences in tectonic styles
between Earth, Mars, and Venus. However, laboratory measurements of olivine, the
most abundant mineral in the oceanic lithosphere, indicate its strength is
significantly greater than plate strengths inferred from field observations and
numerical simulations of plate tectonics. This stark disagreement inhibits the
creation of predictive models for large-scale phenomena like the formation of
new plate boundaries, the uplift of Earth's surface after removing ice sheets,
and the stress evolution of seismogenic faults after an earthquake. This project
will use experiments to investigate three mechanisms that may lead to a weaker
lithospheric mantle than predicted by current laboratory data: a length-scale
effect (manifesting in terms of grain size), the presence of intracrystalline
water, and the role of secondary mantle phases (orthopyroxene and
clinopyroxene). The education plan focuses on (1) co-teaching undergraduate
tutorials on rock deformation, incorporating modern research techniques into the
curriculum, and (2) teaching an earth science course in an outreach summer
school aimed at the high school level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deformation
experiments will be conducted using state-of-the-art interdisciplinary
techniques, including nanoindentation and D-DIA to deform plastically natural
samples in the laboratory. The PI will establish the plastic behavior of
olivine, orthopyroxene, and clinopyroxene at room temperature while varying the
length-scale and water content of the experiments. Deformed samples will be
characterized using secondary ion mass spectrometry to measure water
concentrations and high-angular resolution electron backscatter diffraction to
determine the microstructures related to crystal deformation. Experiments will
then be conducted at high temperatures to develop low-temperature plasticity
flow laws for the three minerals. Finally, the behavior of multi-phase
aggregates will be examined to determine the best method for combining
monomineralic flow laws to understand the strength of tectonic plates. The
results of this project will provide constitutive constraints that can be
incorporated into models of mantle convection, plate flexure, and deformation at
the base of the seismogenic zone. Broader impacts include methodology
development: setting up NanoSIMS to measure water content in samples as well as
HR-EBSD for pyroxeme minerals. The interdisciplinary nature of this project may
provide new perspectives on Earth materials
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.