* 1806798
* Very High Energy Gamma-ray Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lucy Fortson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is designed to
perform high-sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic and extragalactic
sources. This award supports scientists at the University of Minnesota Twin
Cities in their research with VERITAS. The group will participate in both
technical operations in support of the observatory and scientific investigations
of high energy gamma ray emission from active galaxies. The University of
Minnesota group is engaged in citizen science efforts to classify gamma-ray data
through the Zooniverse.org platform. The group will also engage undergraduates
with VERITAS research experiences and participate in public outreach at local
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University of Minnesota group will implement
new analysis methods to improve the sensitivity of VERITAS to weak sources and
to address systematic uncertainties at the highest energies. With these
improvements the group will perform scientific analyses of both new and archival
VERITAS data to study Active Galactic Nuclei. They will focus on characterizing
new classes of very high energy emitting sources, including radio galaxies and
extreme blazars to study the "blazar sequence." They will also perform multi-
wavelength studies on blazars to probe the gamma-ray emission zone and to set
limits on the extragalactic background light through its effects on blazar
intrinsic spectra. In their work with Zooniverse.org, the group will crowd-
source classifications of camera images, providing important training data for
the improvement of image classification algorithms while at the same time
engaging the public in gamma-ray related science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.