* 1806383
* Investigating the scales of sustainability in groundwater extraction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Katherine Markovich, Markovich               Katherine      H
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,000.00

Katherine H. Markovich has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the University of Arizona. The key
goal of the research is to investigate the relationship of groundwater age and
sustainability. The two have often been conflated, but there has yet to be a
mechanistic study linking the distributions of groundwater age encountered in a
pumping well with the sustainability of extracting water from that well. This
work will bring together stakeholders in Tucson such as water managers, native
communities, urban residents, and industry representatives to establish mutually
agreed upon parameters for groundwater sustainability, such as acceptable
spatial and temporal scale of overdraft. The results of this stakeholder
engagement will be explored using a combination of age tracers for residence
time estimation and integrated hydrologic modeling. The study is important in
linking groundwater age to sustainability using advanced modeling and age-dating
techniques, as well as to advance national health and welfare, since access to
clean water is paramount for the prosperity of communities in semi-arid and arid
regions of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple age tracers will be
linked with a sophisticated integrated hydrologic model to explore the full
spatial and temporal scales of flow path and storage response to groundwater
extraction, using the Tucson regional aquifer system as a case study. Extraction
wells will be sampled for common age-dating tracers (Tritium-Helium and
Carbon-13) to estimate the fraction of young and old water encountered in Tucson
extraction wells, respectively, using a novel tracer (Argon-39) to estimate the
intermediate age fraction. The integration of these three tracers will reveal a
more complete distribution of flow paths contributing to a well, and thus
provide insight as to the recharge and hydrogeologic characteristics of the
regional aquifer system. These results will be used to validate an integrated
hydrologic model (ParFlow-CLM) of the Tucson area via a particle tracking code
(EcoSLIM). This step will result in a model that captures the dominant flow
systems contributing to Tucson extraction wells. The posterior model will then
be used to explore the relationship between groundwater age and sustainability,
and project this relationship forward under climate change and population growth
scenarios. This result will fill in the gaps in our understanding of flow path
distributions to wells using non-overlapping age tracers and link those results
to a sophisticated regional aquifer model that includes the upland recharge and
contributing areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.