* 1806634
* Optomechanics for Quantum Noise Reduction in Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Thomas Corbitt, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 410,000.00

The direct detection of gravitational waves emitted by a coalescing binary black
hole system by the LIGO detectors in 2015 marked the beginning of gravitational
wave astronomy. The detection of gravitational waves from a coalescing binary
neutron star system coincident with a gamma ray burst, with follow-up
observations by traditional telescopes, demonstrated the power of multimessenger
astronomy and the potential it holds. To continue making these discoveries,
improvements to the sensitivity of existing gravitational wave observatories
must be made, and the physics that will make the next generation of detectors
possible must be developed. Quantum fluctuations of the laser fields used to
measure gravitational waves will limit Advanced LIGO's sensitivity across most
of its frequency bandwidth once it reaches design sensitivity. This project is
focused on reducing the limitation of that quantum noise by exploiting the
coupling of light to mechanical motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
combines several of the key components that will make the next generation of
detectors possible. Optical experiments will be conducted with microfabricated
mechanical resonators with masses on the order of 100 nanograms. Specifically,
the group will study the interaction of non-classical, or squeezed, states of
light in an optomechanical cavity that is limited by both radiation pressure and
shot noise in a broad frequency bandwidth, as Advanced LIGO is expected to be
once it reaches design sensitivity. In order to achieve this goal, AlGaAs
mirrors will be cryogenically cooled and placed in a high finesse optical
cavity. Cryogenic operation will allow the Standard Quantum Limit to be
approached, or even surpassed. At that sensitivity, these devices are good
candidates for employing optomechanical interactions in filter cavities.
Optomechanical filter cavities manipulate the coupling between radiation
pressure and the mechanical degrees of freedom of the system to produce certain
effects in light passing through the cavity. In principle, these filter cavities
may be used to condition squeezed states of light to produce a frequency
dependence suitable for injection to gravitational wave
interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.