* 1806380
* Collaborative Research: Precision Tests of Physics Beyond the Standard Model with Antihydrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Francis Robicheaux, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this research, part of the ALPHA Collaboration, is to search for
differences between the properties of hydrogen and antihydrogen, the antimatter
counterpart to hydrogen. According to very general principles that underlie our
mathematical description of the physical world, the atomic physics of
antihydrogen should be identical to that of hydrogen. Any differences in the
atomic physics or gravitational dynamics between antihydrogen and hydrogen would
challenge the very basis of established mathematical descriptions of the world
around us. The collaboration's high-precision measurements may shed light on one
of the most important questions in physics, known as the baryon asymmetry, which
is the preponderance of matter over antimatter in the observable universe. This
award is made under the NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and
Engineering and will support the collaboration's effort at Purdue University and
an undergraduate student at University of California, Berkeley as complementary
to a DOE award made under the joint program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research, part of the ALPHA Collaboration, is to search for differences
between the properties of hydrogen and antihydrogen; such differences could only
result from Charge-Parity-Time (CPT) or Weak Equivalence Principle violation.
The ALPHA collaboration at CERN has progressed from trapping antihydrogen to
measuring its positron spin flip frequency, somewhat crudely its gravitational
properties, its charge neutrality, its 1S-2S spectrum, and its hyperfine
spectrum. Significant improvement in the precision of all these measurements is
expected during the duration of this funding period. In the near term, ALPHA is
constructing, and is expected to install, a new vertical experimental apparatus,
ALPHAg, to conduct an up/down gravity measurement. In parallel, it will continue
measurements on the optical and hyperfine spectra of antihydrogen. During the
upcoming two-year CERN shutdown, ALPHA will fully prepare ALPHAg and will build
a new atomic spectrum trap, ALPHA-III. During the final two years of funding,
plans call for carrying out high-precision measurements utilizing fine scale
magnetometry for gravity measurements at the 1% level; and applying laser and
adiabatic cooling for high-precision measurements of the Lamb shift, the anti-
Rydberg constant, charge neutrality, and the hyperfine spectrum. Moreover,
unlike many CPT tests, ALPHA's tests are model-independent and do not presume a
particular CPT breaking mechanism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.