* 1806680
* RUI: Search for Non-Newtonian Gravity Using a High-Sensitivity Torsion Balance at Seattle University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Woo-Joong Kim, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Gravity represents one of the four fundamental interactions in nature. But
unlike the other three interactions (electromagnetism, weak, and strong forces),
its theoretical descriptions based on Newton's universal gravitation, later
expanded by Einstein's General Relativity, are incompatible with the Standard
Model, a quantum-mechanical framework that unifies all of the other three
interactions. Faced with this dichotomy, some modern proposals in theoretical
physics have suggested a possible breakdown of the inverse-square law (ISL) at
experimentally-accessible sub-millimeter separations, thereby providing a
tantalizing prospect for unifying gravity with quantum theory. The proposed
research will utilize one of the most sensitive table-top instruments, a
torsional balance, to directly probe the ISL below 100 micrometers. Specific
results obtained from this research, in collaboration with undergraduate
students and the Eot-Wash group of the University of Washington, will thus
increase basic knowledge in fundamental research and have profound impacts
across broad areas of physics ranging from astrophysics to elementary particle
and nuclear physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to test
short-range gravity in the parallel-plane configuration by directly quantifying
the contributions from non-gravitational interactions. The strategy makes it
possible to conduct a high-precision experiment below 70 micrometers for which
the roughness and planarity of the interfacing surfaces are the only limiting
physical barriers. The approach will thus substantially improve the current
limits on the Yukawa space at the 10 micrometer range by a factor of four.
Another novelty of the proposed research is to probe gravity above one cm in the
Yukawa space, a previously unexplored range. From a technical perspective, with
an electrostatic screen inserted between the test bodies, probing gravity at
this scale would significantly reduce the near-field effects, such as the
electric patch effect and the Casimir force. Finally, the proposed research will
provide on-campus, hands-on research opportunities for students, enhancing an
existing research program in the area of precision force measurements in the
PI's lab. Examples of the laboratory techniques routinely taught in
undergraduate research in the past include: low-noise lock-in measurements,
design and construction of electronic circuits, interferometric techniques, such
as fiber-optic and Michelson's interferometer to perform precision displacement
measurements, various scanning probe microscopy techniques, such as STM, AFM,
and KPM, that are accessible at the NSF-funded Washington Nanofabrication
Facility (WNF) at the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.