* 1806653
* Rydberg Electrons as a Probe for Ultracold Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Robin Cote, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 160,000.00

This project seeks to utilize Rydberg excitations, promotion of an electron in
an atom to a very high energy level, to probe novel properties of ultracold
gases. Rydberg atoms within an ultracold gas move very slowly, resulting in long
collision times and large cumulative effects of even very weak interatomic
forces. The large spatial extent of the Rydberg electron also renders the
Rydberg atom sensitive to local field environments. The combination of these two
factors, slow speed and large spatial volume, makes ultracold Rydberg atoms
ideal probes of delicate correlations and other novel phenomena within the
ultracold environment. During the past few years, experimental progress in
preparing and manipulating ultracold Rydberg atoms has led to many new
developments in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical (AMO) Physics. For example,
Rydberg atoms have made possible the detection of a new class of long-range
molecules, the so-called "trilobite"-like molecules, and of fast quantum gates
relevant to the quantum information revolution. They are now utilized to make
small regions of an otherwise opaque gas transparent, using what is known as
electromagnetically induced transparency. Rydberg atoms can also generate single
photon sources and mediate photon-photon interactions. Accordingly, ultracold
Rydberg atom research bridges AMO, condensed matter and mesoscopic physics, and
quantum information science, as well as ultracold chemistry. This theory project
models the interactions of Rydberg electrons with their environment in order to
better understand and predict observed spectra, which are expected to depend
sensitively on the distribution of atoms in the gas, and enhance their
utilization in the range of areas mentioned above. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program explores how Rydberg electrons can be used to investigate few-
and many-body phenomena. Rydberg electrons provide a low-energy and well-
localized probe for AMO, condensed-matter, and chemical systems. While their
wave function extends to large volumes, Rydberg electrons, being excited near
the ionization threshold, have a small kinetic energy that minimally perturbs a
system to be investigated. Rydberg electrons can scatter from one, two, or many
ground-state atoms depending on the density of neighboring atoms. The effect of
those scatterers on the Rydberg electron wave function can be used to study the
properties of the ground-state atoms, such as their distribution and
correlation, including in degenerate Bose or Fermi gases. In particular, the
special case of two scatterers can shed light on Efimov physics, a three-body
system with peculiar properties introduced in nuclear physics. To carry out this
research, accurate wave functions are essential ingredients that current methods
struggle to provide. Here, a non-perturbative approach based on Green's
functions to compute wave functions and potential energy surfaces for Rydberg
trilobite-like dimers, trimers, etc., will be developed. These accurate wave
functions will then be employed in the calculation of photo-association (PA)
spectra whose detailed lineshapes will unlock the information about the ground-
state atoms, including their correlation (from two, three, four, or N-body).
Finally, together with the computation of the Efimov wave functions, the probing
of those elusive states with spectroscopic accuracy will be made
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.