* 1806923
* Leveraging Novel Complementary Variables to Boost the Sensitivity of Ultra High Energy Neutrino Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Amy Connolly, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 06/30/2024
* USD 638,046.00

Ultra-high-energy neutrinos are unique astrophysical messengers as they interact
only weakly with intervening matter and can therefore be used to probe high
energy sources and extreme conditions throughout the universe, and to test
physics at energies beyond the Standard Model. This award will support a group
at Ohio State University in their work to develop new technology and techniques
to study high energy neutrinos through the radio emission generated as the
neutrinos traverse dense ice. The group's effort focus on the Askaryan Radio
Array (ARA), an experiment located at the South Pole Station in Antarctica. The
group engages students at all levels in the research activities. They conduct a
biannual workshop for high school women, ASPIRE. Through this award, they will
add more research projects to the program and introduce research mentors for
interested ASPIRE participants. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Ohio State group will
focus on new strategies and techniques to process signals from current Askaryan
radio neutrino experiments, with a focus on ARA. The group will study circularly
polarized components of signals to complement current measurements of linear
polarization and explore variations in time and directional windows to reduce
background levels. They will carry out sensitive searches in existing data sets
and in new ARA data for coincident detections with the IceCube observatory. They
will also search for evidence of gamma-ray bursts as well as gravitational wave
events in the neutrino data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.