* 1806165
* Searches for Gravitational Wave Transients: Data Analysis for Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Sergey Klimenko, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,003.00

Gravitational waves are the ripples in the fabric of space-time created by
moving masses, which travel through the universe at the speed of light.
Predicted by Albert Einstein's 1915 theory of General Relativity, gravitational
waves eluded detection for a hundred years, until on September 14, 2015, shortly
after the major upgrade, the advanced LIGO detectors observed a gravitational
wave signal from two colliding black holes. For the first time, LIGO detected
ripples in the fabric of space-time arriving at the Earth from a cataclysmic
event in the distant universe. This confirmed a major prediction of General
Relativity and opened an unprecedented new window onto the cosmos.
Gravitational-waves provide a direct probe of complex astrophysical systems and
provide a unique astronomical tool to study the Universe. In the next few years
hundreds detections of sources are expected as advanced LIGO reaches its design
sensitivity and the other instruments join the world-wide network of
gravitational wave detectors. The experiments with these detectors will address
key research questions, including the formation and evolution of black holes and
neutron stars, the role of compact objects in high energy emission, the
properties of nuclear matter, the nature of gamma-ray-bursts, and the existence
of intermediate-mass black holes, probing the structure and evolution of the
Universe and physics beyond General Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will reinforce success of the LIGO data analysis effort and
support new innovative research projects that have a potential to produce
transformative results. It targets the most extreme astrophysical events, such
as recently discovered mergers of neutron stars and black holes, and holds a
promise for discoveries of entirely new astrophysical phenomena. The proposed
searches utilize the detection and reconstruction algorithms that use minimal
model assumptions and that are capable of detecting gravitational-wave
transients in a wide range of source parameters, including yet unknown sources.
Among the primary detection targets is a core collapse supernovae (CCSN), which
will address a number of open questions in astrophysics, such as the role of
neutrino in CCSN and the neutron star equations of state. Also, the proposed
activities will extend the most promising advanced LIGO searches for compact
binary sources into the binary parameter space not yet explored by the existing
template algorithms. The proposed searches have a potential to establish the
existence of intermediate mass binary black holes and test the theory of general
relativity at the high field regime by comparing the reconstructed signal
waveforms with the numerical relativity predictions. Novel methods are proposed
for studies of the compact binary post-merger signals, including quasi-normal
gravitational waves emitted by the remnant black holes and post-merger
signatures of the binary neutron star systems. Rapid source reconstruction and
sky localization will enable joint observations with the electromagnetic
telescopes and neutrino detectors, advancing the field of the multi-messenger
astronomy. This award will also support the planned upgrade of the baseline LIGO
data analysis algorithms for the future LIGO runs and increase the scientific
potential of the proposed gravitational-wave
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.