* 1806622
* Beyond the Standard Model Higgs Boson: Exploring the Higgs sector at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Corrinne Mills, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 01/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

With the discovery of a Higgs boson at the LHC, the Standard Model appears to be
complete although profound questions remain unanswered. One such mystery is the
origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe (baryogenesis) and the
nature of dark matter. This program of research is centered on the CMS
experiment currently running at the proton-proton Large Hadron Collider (LHC)at
CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. This research will deepen our understanding of the
Higgs boson using data from the CMS experiment to elucidate the connection
between the physics of Higgs bosons and new physics beyond the Standard Model.
This work will also support the upgrade of the CMS forward pixel detector for
the high-luminosity LHC, with a focus on the design, selection, and testing of a
read-out chip. In addition, a study will be carried out to understand the
reasons why students decide to leave or remain in a physics major at
UIC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Standard Model, about one out of sixty Higgs
boson events produced at the LHC is produced in association with a Z boson.
Measuring this rare process will be potentially sensitive to the influence of
new physics. Further, this final state can be produced by the decay of an
additional, heavier Higgs boson with different symmetry properties from the
observed one. Such particles are predicted by many theories and can potentially
answer the question of baryogenesis. Dark matter particles may also be produced
at the LHC, but their experimental signature would be ambiguous. Associated
production of a Higgs boson may be a unique way to flag these interactions and
discover this elusive particle. This effort will develop new experimental tools
and analyses for a decay channel of the Higgs boson, and will have other
applications in collider data analysis. The second aspect of this research is to
upgrade the CMS forward pixel tracker, focusing on readout chips that exceed
current capabilities for high bandwidth, low threshold, and radiation tolerance.
The work will focus on testing prototype chips and contributing to the design of
the CMS pixel readout chip, so that the new detector will be ready for
construction. In addition, through data collection, interviews, and comparison
with other universities, understanding of the reasons affecting students'
decision to stay with or leave the physics major will be
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.