* 1806205
* EAR-PF: The Mechanics of Turbulence and Sediment Transport: Physically-Based Numerical Modeling of Flow, Sediment and Bed Evolution in the Bedrock Canyons
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Laura Alvarez, Alvarez                 Laura          V
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Laura V. Alvarez has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a research and education plan at the University of
Oklahoma and Simon Fraser University. The proposed work will make substantial
contributions to our capability to numerically understand and predict the
physical phenomena that control sediment transport and morphodynamic evolution
of river networks. Gains in the knowledge of the role played by macro-turbulence
events in sediment dynamics will allow us to obtain a deeper understanding of
what determines the geomorphologic changes and will lead to the development of
more efficient models.This model can also serve to investigate to what extent
information obtained from well-controlled experiments and numerical simulations
conducted at laboratory scale can be used to understand the physics of sediment
transport at larger scales and to provide predictions about river network
changes. The fellow will engage education and outreach by developing a six-week
summer course in fluvial modeling, integrating many of the proposed research
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eddy resolving three-dimensional simulations
combined with field and laboratory observations allow elucidation of key
elements of fluid dynamics and sediment transport in fluvial environments. These
models can resolve the time-dependent, energetically important, turbulent
structures of the flow capturing the interactions between these eddies and the
loose bed boundaries where sediment entrainment and deposition can occur. This
research study proposes a compelling strategy for applying state-of-the-art
computational fluid mechanics to the study of sediment transport and
morphodynamic processes in fluvial systems. The main objective of the proposed
research is the development and testing of a fully three-dimensional turbulence
resolving model using Dettached Eddy Simulation techniques that can simulate
turbulent flows under a broad range of spatial and temporal scales and their
effect on sediment transport, entrainment and deposition and channel/river reach
evolution. The numerical model will then be used to (1) understand the role
played by the plunging flows, secondary flows and velocity inversions on
sediment transport, entrainment and deposition in river reaches and (2) explain
morphodynamic changes based on the dynamics of the macro-turbulence effects and
velocity redistribution inside the river reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.