* 1806046
* Continuation of Three-Dimensional Numerical Experiments on High-Intensity Particle and Laser Beam-Matter Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Warren Mori, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 628,680.00

This project will use computer modeling to investigate and understand a possible
new technology for developing compact particle accelerators. Particle
accelerators are some of the most complex and expensive tools used for
scientific discovery. They are used to discover the most fundamental particles
in nature, to understand fundamental processes in biology, to probe and develop
materials, and to treat cancer. A plasma, or ionized gas, is sometimes called
the fourth state of matter. When a short pulse of very bright light or a short
pulse of a high current of electrons are sent through a plasma a wake is
created. The crests and troughs in this wake move near the speed of light.
Charged particles such as electrons and positrons can then surf this wake, and
if they surf for a long time their energy keeps increasing. In a plasma wake it
takes a shorter distance to achieve high energies than in existing accelerators.
Complex computer models using the nation's most advanced supercomputers can
model what would happen in a laboratory experiment. This helps to determine if
it makes sense to build a large and expensive experimental facility to further
study this new technology. This research also leads to new discoveries and
better understanding of fundamental processes that occur in plasmas. This can
generate new concepts for new technologies and applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particle-in-cell (PIC) method will be used to simulate
how intense and short-pulse particle beams interact with a plasma. The PIC
method follows the individual trajectories of individual electrons and ions in
the plasma as they interact through their self-consistently generated electric
and magnetic fields and any externally applied fields. The project will study
how the intense laser and particle beam creates a nonlinear plasma wave
wakefield as well as how it self-modulates from the wakefield. The project will
also explore how charged particle beams are injected into the plasma wave and
how the six-dimensional phase space of the beam evolves as it is accelerated.
These highly accurate simulations provide a testbed for theoretical ideas and
new concepts, as well as a method for guiding ongoing and near term experiments.
High-fidelity full-scale modeling also provides a means to extrapolate
parameters into regimes that will not be accessible to experiments for years to
come. The PIC software will continue to be developed so that it can continue to
effectively utilize the largest and fastest computers in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.