* 1806629
* EAR-PF: Using noble gas techniques to benchmark feldspar thermoluminescence (TL) thermochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Nathan Brown, Brown                   Nathan         D
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 02/28/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Nathan Brown has been granted a postdoctoral fellowship to carry out
research and an education plan with at the Berkeley Geochronology Center. The
main goal of this project is to develop feldspar thermoluminescence (TL) for use
as an ultra-low-temperature thermochronometer. Once validated, this technique
will allow geologists to: infer recent temperature perturbations caused by
geomorphic agents acting within the upper kilometer or two of Earth's surface;
resolve local Holocene uplift rates and better evaluate seismic risk in
tectonically active regions; and survey sites for their potential geothermal
energy resources. Dr. Brown will also interact with and train undergraduate and
graduate students in the sample preparation and data analysis techniques
necessary to implement this novel technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial
and temporal scales over which rivers and glaciers erode bedrock are largely
inaccessible to thermochronologists. Feldspar TL thermochronology, however,
shows sensitivity to near-surface and atmospheric temperatures and can be used
to constrain continuous thermal histories at timescales ranging from about 100
to 1,000,000 years. This study will calibrate feldspar TL results against
results obtained with the more established techniques of paleothermometry from
cosmogenic 3He in quartz and apatite 4He/3He thermochronology. Bedrock samples
that will be analyzed come from the Yucaipa Ridge tectonic block, adjacent to
the San Andreas fault; the Klinaklini glacial valley in British Columbia; and
the Pensacola Mountains of Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.