* 1806206
* RUI: Photoionization, Time Delay, Positronium Formation, and Ion Impact Studies of Fullerenes, Endofullerenes, and Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* HIMADRI CHAKRABORTY, Northwest Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

By shining the laser light on an atom or by colliding the atom with charged
particles one can probe the atom's response to such external stimuli. These are
powerful scientific methods to learn fundamental properties of materials. Using
these techniques to systems more complex than atoms and of direct applied
interest is therefore beneficial for the advancement of basic science and
technology. The systems to be studied in the current research are Buckminster
fullerenes and other larger fullerenes, including atoms/clusters caged inside
these molecules, called endofullerenes. These materials hold the promise of
exciting applications in areas including quantum computations,
superconductivity, biomedical fields, drug delivery research, magnetic resonance
imaging, and organic photovoltaics. Hence, understanding the physical and
chemical structure and response properties of these systems, including the
influence of the fullerene cage on the behavior of the confined species, are
matters of great scientific interest. Using large scale computer simulations the
program aims to investigate how electrons inside the systems collectively
interacts with each other to move internally or to exit the system and how much
time they spend to reach the detector. How do the structure and geometry of the
system play roles in the mechanism? This will be investigated both for light and
fast-ion impact. By choosing exotic antiparticles like positrons to impact on
fullerenes the study of the formation of electron-positron pairs, the
positronium, is a novel direction of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical
methods to be employed to model the systems and their response are based on
Density Functional Theory. These methods will also be used to calculate the
intensity of the emerging electron flux from the system along a specific
direction and/or in all directions. From the complex variation of the detected
electron flux as a function of the laser energy or the ion-impact energy
researchers will extract valuable information about the system. Furthermore, the
time of flight of the electrons from the irradiated target to the detector will
be computed and the variation in this flight-time as a function of laser
frequency will enable further insights into the scientific processes. Following
the impact of positrons, the formation of the positronium (Ps) is a vital
process in nature, although no attempt of Ps formation using gas-phase fullerene
systems has been made until recent research that came from this program. The
science to be learned from the study of Ps formation should be universal for Ps
formation from nanosystems ushering new directions of Ps spectroscopy. In
general, results are expected to motivate experiments and induce collaborations
with experimental groups. Students and postdoctoral researchers will be involved
for excellent experience in education and opportunities to become expert
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.