* 1806362
* Single-, Few- and Many-Body Physics in Optical Superlattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 677,297.00

This project will use an ensemble of neutral atoms cooled to temperatures lower
than anywhere else in the known Universe, held in a crystal formed by
intersecting laser beams, superbly isolated from the outside world, and detected
with highly sensitive imaging methods, to model and understand the properties of
solid-state materials. The broad goal of this work is to promote the progress of
science in two specific areas that are presently of high scientific and economic
interest. First, experiments on these ultracold atomic gases will unravel
central mysteries in materials science, specifically those pertaining to
materials with strongly correlated electrons and frustrated magnetic
interactions, both of which lead to novel phases of matter. These novel phases
may enable advances in information storage, information processing, or high-
temperature superconductivity. Second, this project advances capabilities in
preparing and controlling complex quantum systems. These capabilities are
expected to fuel the development of new quantum technologies. In fact, the
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers conducting this work will gain
valuable skills and be positioned to make significant contributions to the
nascent quantum technologies sector, as well as in academic and other research
positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project focuses on the
quantum properties of itinerant particles in two new non-primitive two-
dimensional crystal structures: a trimerized Kagome lattice and a hexamerized
honeycomb lattice. In the current experimental setup, the itinerant particles
are rubidium atoms and the crystal structure is formed using a bichromatic
optical lattice. In both lattice structures, strongly bonded multi-site
plaquettes are coupled weakly to one another. In the limit of zero coupling
between plaquettes, the lattices are composed of many fully isolated, few-site,
few-particle quantum systems. Measurements will probe the single-body and few-
body quantum states of these plaquettes, advancing our capabilities in quantum
state engineering and realizing minimal representations of bosonic Laughlin
states. In the regime where coupling between plaquettes is introduced, many-body
physics emerges in a controlled manner. Measurements will be performed to reveal
interesting orbital-magnetism states and characterize rapidly rotating lattice-
trapped quantum gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.