* 1806135
* OP: Mechanisms and Phase Matching of Below-Threshold High-Order Harmonic Generation in Solids
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Chini, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 353,608.00

The purpose of this project is to study the fundamental response of electrons in
solid crystals to intense laser pulses, which results in the emission of high-
frequency "harmonic" light flashes lasting only a few hundreds of attoseconds (1
attosecond is a "nano-nanosecond", or 0.000000000000000001 seconds). The
mechanisms of the light emission have been studied in gaseous materials over the
previous two decades and are now fairly well understood. This understanding has
enabled widespread adoption of gas-phase harmonics to time-resolved studies of
electron motion and high-resolution imaging applications. In solids, however,
the mechanisms of harmonic emission can be hidden from experiments, since both
the low-frequency laser and the high-frequency harmonics have to travel through
the crystal. In this project, the group will use innovative laser techniques to
extract the ultrafast electron motion in solid crystals from measurements of the
emitted light and use the knowledge we obtain to develop more efficient harmonic
light sources based on thin film materials. The results of the research will
advance scientific knowledge of intense laser interactions with materials and
will be important to future development of high-speed electronic devices based
on laser-driven currents. Students involved in the project will learn advanced
optical, electronics, and computational techniques, gaining the experience
necessary to develop and advance these next-generation technologies from high-
tech industries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;High-order harmonic emission from solid
crystals was first observed in 2011 by irradiating bulk zinc oxide (ZnO)
crystals with mid-infrared femtosecond laser pulses. Since then, several models
describing the electron dynamics underlying solid-state high-order harmonic
generation have been proposed. One highly successful model which has been used
to interpret experiments in ZnO and other wide-band gap semiconductors involves
a semiclassical "generalized recollision" process similar to gas-phase high-
order harmonic generation: charge carriers are first excited via tunneling in
the strong laser field. The electrons and holes are then accelerated in their
respective bands by the laser field, until they re-encounter one another,
recombine, and emit a high-frequency photon. The group will: investigate the
physics of high-order harmonic generation in wide bandgap semiconductors driven
by mid-infrared laser pulses, with the goals of classifying the mechanisms
through which high-order harmonics are generated and phase matched in solids;
identify signatures of the generalized recollision and other proposed mechanisms
which will be tested through spatially- and spectrally-resolved measurements of
the high-order harmonics generated in a variety of crystals using a two-color
laser field; focus attention to both the above- and below-threshold harmonics,
with respective photon energies larger and smaller than the material's band gap,
since the recollision picture which has been used to describe above-threshold
harmonic generation is expected to break down for below-threshold harmonics; and
investigate the role of propagation of the intense laser pulses and generated
harmonics in the crystal, through experimental studies and simulations, with the
goal of enhancing the harmonic emission through phase
matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.