* 1806824
* Extending the Reach of Continous Gravitational Wave Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* John Whelan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

With the direct detection of Gravitational Waves (GWs) in Advanced LIGO's first
and second observing runs, the era of Gravitational Wave Astronomy is upon us.
Gravitational waves, distortions of the geometry and space and time predicted by
Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, provide a new window on the universe,
allowing us to supplement the range of information available from different
parts of the electromagnetic spectrum and from cosmic ray and neutrino
observations. The GW signals observed so far have been short-lived, and from the
final stages of black holes and neutron stats orbiting into one another. This
project is aimed at detection of long-lived GWs from rapidly spinning neutron
stars, extremely dense objects more massive than the Sun and the size of a city,
spinning tens to hundreds of times every second. The main targets for this
search are neutron stars in binary orbits with lower-mass stars. The neutron
stars attract material from their companions, which powers their rotation and
emits X-rays, allowing a multimessenger analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will involve faculty and students of the Rochester Institute of
Technology, who will broaden the multimessenger effort to search for GWs from
low-mass X-ray binaries (LMXBs) in several ways: 1) ensuring the search for
Scorpius X-1, the brightest LMXB, is as sensitive as possible with algorithmic
improvements and mock data validation, 2) expanding the search to other LMXBs,
and 3) implementing a hierarchical followup to existing searches for unknown
neutron stars in binary systems. The group will also enhance the sensitivity of
a variety of continuous-wave searches by incorporating an improved detection
statistic into the LSC algorithm library. The search for the Sco X-1, as well as
accreting binaries J1751-305, Cygnus X-3, and 4U 1636-536, is considered a
highest priority by the LIGO scientific collaboration, and this award will be
instrumental in maximizing its success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.