* 1806209
* Coherent Control and Precision Spectroscopy of a Polyatomic Molecular Ion
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* David Leibrandt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 265,519.00

This project is motivated by the opportunity to achieve coherent control of the
quantum state of a single polyatomic molecule, and to exploit this control for
precision measurements. This project will focus on trapping and controlling the
molecular ion N_2H+, but the approach can be generalized to many other molecular
ions. The N_2H+ molecular ion will be co-trapped and sympathetically cooled with
a calcium ion to near the ground state of their shared motion. Pure quantum
states of the molecular ion can then be initialized by projective measurements
using quantum-logic spectroscopy, as recently demonstrated on the calcium
hydride ion CaH+ by the investigators. This is important because this approach
can advance quantum chemistry and may impact materials science and the chemical,
biological, and pharmaceutical industries. In addition, new and superior
reference spectra for astronomical observations could lead to a better
understanding of interstellar gas clouds and the universe, including stringent
tests of physics beyond the standard model. Ultimately, controlling molecules at
the quantum level may enable precisely orchestrated collisions and fully
controlled quantum chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While laser cooling,
trapping, and precision measurements of diatomic molecules are making tremendous
progress, polyatomic molecules have eluded precision studies due to their
complicated level structures and vast number of populated states. This project
will extend the technique of quantum-logic spectroscopy to prepare pure quantum
states of polyatomic molecules, and to manipulate and detect their states with
minimal perturbations such as Doppler or pressure shifts. Precision spectroscopy
will ultimately only be limited by the lifetime of the states and can therefore
be pushed to levels that have only been reached previously in optical atomic
clocks. The molecule N_2H+ was one of the first ions observed in interstellar
clouds and remains one of the most important tracers in astrophysics. Improved
spectroscopic precision might enable improved constraints on possible spatial or
temporal variations of fundamental constants. This work will also train a
student at the University of Colorado in techniques needed for quantum logic
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.