* 1806585
* Collaborative Research: Expanding Access: Furthering a Network of Diversity-Focused Programs in the Physical Sciences
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Daniel Reinholz, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2021
* USD 22,543.00

This award supports the Access Network, a project aimed at substantially
improving equity and inclusion in the physical sciences. Formed in 2014, Access
is a national network that brings together nine programs that all leverage best
practices for serving underrepresented students in Physics and other physical
sciences. This award would expand the network from 9 to 15 sites and begin to
scale up network activities by identifying and recruiting new sites
(particularly from Minority Serving Institutions), building capacity within new
sites through an "onboarding workshop", intensively mentoring new sites in their
first year, maintaining existing Access Network activities to support a strong
intersite-community, and planning and conducting internal and external
evaluation to document successes and support sites' sustainability. These
activities will enhance the capacity of the network to support both old and new
sites, thus allowing the network to reach considerably more students in more
effective ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access sites are modeled on the nationally-
recognized Compass Project at UC Berkeley. Driven by a set of shared principles
(e.g., student voice, authentic disciplinary engagement) and a suite of
programmatic offerings (e.g., mentorship, model building courses, community
events, early research opportunities), each site is tailored to the needs of its
unique population, ranging from a large number of Deaf and hard of hearing
students at the Rochester Institute of Technology to Black commuter students at
Chicago State University. The network supports each site by providing relevant
expertise, community support, mentored leadership opportunities, and a set of
shared resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.