* 1806889
* IGE: Developing Reflective Engineers
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Danny Reible, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,856.00

While engineering provides basic infrastructure and is a major source of
technological innovations, its work is embedded in complex social, cultural, and
environmental contexts. Graduate education in engineering typically produces
engineers who are highly competent technicians, but who may lack the ability to
understand and successfully navigate those contexts. Important skills that may
help engineers bring contextual perspectives into their problem solving include
the ability to integrate across disciplines, to devise solutions to poorly-
defined challenges, and to recognize and address broader societal and global
issues. This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
award to Texas Tech University will test an approach designed to change the way
graduate students in engineering conceptualize and reason about their work to
better prepare them for real-world complexity. The project will use innovative
methods, informed by arts and humanities education and grounded in the learning
sciences, to help students become more reflective thinkers who have greater
awareness of the complex, broader contexts of their work. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ arts- and humanities-informed learning
activities within the engineering curriculum to help students better understand
the social and community aspects of engineering by becoming more reflective
thinkers. The curriculum will include activities such as visual thinking
strategies to develop observational skills, computer-simulated ethical/moral
dilemmas to prepare for real world complexity, and team projects to practice
reflective engineering. The purpose of these techniques is to enhance reflective
reasoning and connect that reasoning to engineering. This project will assess
how the curriculum changes the student's ability to think reflectively, how the
curriculum changes the way the student thinks about the role of engineers within
a societal context, and what factors limit or enhance the ability of the student
to benefit from the curriculum. A mixed-methods approach will be used to assess
the effectiveness of the intervention including surveys, formative peer
assessment, interviews, narrative inquiry, and textual analysis. The teaching
and learning techniques that are the most effective in building reflective
reasoning will be identified and refined and the results will be used to
strengthen and broaden the impact of the curriculum. Publications and workshops
conducted for other faculty and teaching-assistants will be used to disseminate
the key findings from the project and aid translation of the research to other
settings and institutions. The ultimate goal of the research project is to
create an impactful, evidence-based curriculum that educates future engineers
who are committed to serving the public not only with technical engineering
skills but with a mindfulness of the complex social, cultural, and environmental
contexts impacting their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals
of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate
education and to generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.