* 1806417
* RUI: Double Photoionization to Probe Electron Correlation in Molecular Targets with more than Two Electrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Frank Yip, California Maritime Academy
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 115,289.00

The behavior of electrons in atoms and molecules is fundamental to our
understanding of material systems. From the basic chemical bonds that hold
molecules together to the bulk properties of macroscopic matter, electrons are
largely responsible for the chemical makeup and physical properties of liquids
and solids. Quantum mechanics has informed us of the true nature of matter at
the small scale of the atom, but accurately representing even the simplest
molecule is challenging. Still, there is much to be learned from studying matter
at the most fundamental level, including a better understanding of the
consequences of electron correlation that govern so much of how matter behaves
at all length scales. Electron correlation goes beyond the fact that electrons
repel each other; electrons continually notice each other in fundamental ways,
like spin interactions, and learning about those interactions better informs us
of the fundamental construction of our universe. Double photoionization studies,
where a photon of sufficient energy can remove two electrons from a material in
a single event, directly probes electron correlation. This research will advance
precise methods to describe double photoionization in molecules with many
electrons, like water (H2O). The purpose is to better understand electron
correlation in these more-complicated targets and gain further general insights
into the fundamental interactions of electrons in molecules. This understanding,
once developed, informs multiple technological applications involving chemistry
and materials that are essential to a high-tech
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate electronic
correlation for two electrons removed by single-photon absorptions (double
photoionization) for simple molecules with more than two electrons in order to
better understand the ways that multi-electron targets are influenced by
additional complexity (beyond H2). Theoretical calculations describing these
events from first principles will be applied to targets with many electrons that
continue to interact with the fully correlated electrons before, during and
after the photoionization event. Theoretical support is needed to help inform
and understand recent experimental measurements of double photoionization of
water. It is hoped that this project can further elucidate the broader
consequences of how all of the electrons bound to a molecule can affect those
that will be moved into the continuum and how consequences of molecular symmetry
and electronic structure impact the outgoing electrons from a molecular
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.