* 1806665
* Maximizing Scientific Outcomes of Gravitational Wave Experiments with Rapid, High-Fidelity Numerical Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Scott Field, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 193,437.00

The direct detection of gravitational waves by the Advanced Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) has realized a long-awaited promise to
open a new window on the Universe. These waves typically originate from other
galaxies through the merging of two black holes or neutron stars. The
gravitational waves then travel galactic distances to reach detectors located on
Earth, and the recorded gravitational-wave datasets can reveal information about
black holes, spacetime, and Einstein's theory of general relativity. To realize
the full scientific potential of current and future gravitational wave
experiments, a model of the expected gravitational wave signal must be both
highly accurate and very fast to evaluate. This award will support a multi-
disciplinary approach to gravitational-wave science, drawing on collaborations
with physicists, mathematicians, and data scientists to produce new algorithms
and computer programs aimed at maximizing the scientific output of gravitational
wave observations. This award, and more generally discoveries made with
gravitational waves, will continue to engage the public through outreach
efforts. Students funded through this award will be trained with a strong STEM
background and will be well prepared for careers that require technical and
computational skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the
development, implementation, and use of numerical techniques designed to
overcome some of the most urgent challenges in gravitational wave data science.
Crucially, the interpretation of gravitational wave datasets requires access to
a model which is both fast-to-evaluate and faithful to the relevant physics.
Using traditional techniques, these two requirements are often at odds with one
another. Recently, a set of targeted numerical tools has emerged as a means to
ameliorate, or in some cases overcome entirely, these bottlenecks. For large-
scale relativistic astrophysics simulations, the key developments have been
towards accurate and robust numerical methods and novel parallelization
strategies that will afford unprecedented simulation accuracy. A different set
of tools has been developed to construct surrogate models that are able to
accurately reproduce numerical relativity waveforms at arbitrary parameter
values within a fraction of a second. The goal of this project is to build on
these recent successes and to (i) continue the development of these numerical
methods by extending them to handle more challenging cases, (ii) implement these
methods and models within existing public codes so that they are widely
available, and (iii) carry out high-impact scientific studies made possible by
the rapid, high-fidelity numerical models and simulation codes that have been
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.