* 1806792
* General Strategies Toward Mechanically Robust Biobased Polymers and Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Chuanbing Tang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2024
* USD 752,725.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable polymers from renewable
natural resources have gained much momentum in recent years given their
importance to a sustainable economy and society. Natural polymers, such as
cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, starch, proteins, and chitin, have been
utilized in composites, plastics, biofuels and other applications. The
development of synthetic polymers from molecular biomass, such as plant oils,
rosin acids, terpenes, terpenoids, and furan, is a fast-growing area. However,
there are many mounting challenges in increasing the component of biobased
polymers in the commercial market, in contrast with dominant petrochemical-
derived counterparts. To promote sustainability and national prosperity, this
project will develop next-generation renewable polymers by designing general
strategies based on wrapping of macromolecules on polymers from natural
resources to improve their physical properties, especially addressing critical
hurdles on inferior mechanical properties involving a variety of biomass. A
central goal is to understand how macromolecular chain wrapping via
supramolecular interactions dictates thermal and mechanical properties of these
materials and to establish structure-property
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable biobased polymers from natural
resources are facing a lot of compelling challenges. Among them, many polymers
suffer inferior mechanical properties, largely due to their inherent low chain
entanglements (thus, they have very high chain-entanglement molecular weight).
Macromolecular architectures and compositions play vital roles in dictating
these properties. The planned research is aimed to provide an economical,
robust, and general approach to enhance mechanical properties of biobased
polymers. The central idea is to wrap bulky biobased polymers with a flexible
and highly entangled macromolecule via supramolecular interactions. The overall
goal of the proposed research is to simultaneously maximize the use of biomass
and enable biobased bulky polymers with high tensile strength and desirable
elongation under stress by incorporating minimal levels of macromolecular
wrapping. This project includes the development of macromolecular engineering
protocols through parallel efforts on: (1) polymers containing bulky biomass
such as fatty acid, resin acid, isosorbide, guaiacol, pinene, tulipalin, and
glucose; and (2) biocomposites based on lignin and cellulose nanowhiskers. An
essential goal is to understand how macromolecular chain wrapping via
supramolecular interactions dictates thermal and mechanical properties of these
materials and to establish clear structure-property relationships. The planned
research program seeks to explore potentially transformative concepts to address
sustainability issues by maximizing the use of biobased polymers with enhanced
thermomechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.