* 1806357
* Theoretical AMO Studies for Enhanced Understanding and Control of Emergent Quantum Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Erich Mueller, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 02/28/2022
* USD 354,244.00

The quantum mechanical behavior of individual particles (such as atoms,
molecules, or photons) is well understood. The collective behavior of many such
particles, however, is more complicated. The latest generation of Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical experiments have revealed a number of open questions
about such "emergent" physics. This theoretical physics project aims to answer
some of these questions. In particular, it asks: "Can noise be used as a tool to
control the behavior of quantum systems?" and "How does order develop in quantum
systems?" Answering these fundamental questions would have wide impact on the
development of materials, novel electronic devices, and quantum information
processing technology, all of which rely on the behavior of collections of
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two primary systems considered in
these studies: (a) Light confined in optical cavities and (b) neutral atoms
trapped in magnetic or optical potentials. The former system is ideal for
exploring questions involving quantum dissipation: the central noise source,
photon loss, is under experimental control. The broad question of using
dissipation for quantum control will be addressed by systematically developing
protocols which produce ever more complicated non-classical optical states. The
neutral atom systems are ideal for studying ordering and kinetics. The project
involves developing new computational tools (a generalization of the Density
Matrix Renormalization Group), and combining these with the traditional tools of
many-body physics to explore dynamics, equilibration, and ordering in isolated
quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.