* 1806184
* Resilient and Extreme-Event-Aware Microgrid-Based  Distribution System Architecture and Power Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Hashem Nehrir, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,004.00

The goal of this project is to improve the resiliency of power distribution
systems and make them more reliable. To reach this goal, it is proposed in this
project to break the distribution system into many small power systems (e.g.,
the power system of a neighborhood), each called a micro-grid (MG). Each MG of
the multiple-MG distribution system architecture can have one or more power
generation sources (including renewable generation) and loads. Each MG and the
components of the MG have an intelligent agent (i.e., a computer). These agents
will have local information about the MG and its components, and they can
communicate with their neighboring MGs and collectively will determine the best
operating scenario of the generating sources and loads within the MG, based on
the availability of resource and the market price of electricity they receive
from the utility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Under normal condition, the MGs are
interconnected and together they form the power distribution grid. However, in
the event of an electrical fault, the MGs can separate from one another, and the
isolated faulty MG can go under repair while the healthy MGs will continue
operating and be controlled independently and connect in network. When the
faulty MG is repaired, it will return to service, and the MGs will form the
original interconnected architecture and return to normal operation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The fundamental issues the project seeks to address through the
proposed approach is: it is much easier to monitor and control each MG compared
to the large power system. The proposed approach will be implemented on real
distribution system models to show that the resiliency and reliability of the
system are improved. Clearly, improving the resiliency and reliability of the
power grid advances the power engineering field as well as serving the national
interest, thus benefiting the society. Moreover, the exploring of the proposed
scientifically-based approach promotes the progress of science. And, finally,
the project supports education. The opportunity for the students to work on the
project gives them invaluable experience in the important field of power
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.