* 1807999
* Understanding the Influence of Low-Frequency Vibrations on Energy Relaxation Through Layered Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 375,733.00

Quantum-confinement occurs when an object's dimensions are small compared to the
size of electron motion. Many modern electronic devices, which range from
medical diagnostics and therapeutics instruments, to high-resolution optical
displays and flexible electronics, rely on quantum-confined nanostructures.
However, realization of their full potential requires a fundamental
understanding of their interactions with light. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Kenneth Knappenberger from Pennsylvania State University
(PSU) is developing advanced magneto-optical measurement capabilities to probe
quantum-confined structures. Professor Knappenberger and his students are using
the unique capabilities of this instrument to understand the behavior of
electrons in transition metal dicholcogenide (TMD) materials, and how they
interact with vibrations in the crystal lattice. The insights gained from the
work could impact existing optoelectronic and photonic technologies, as well as
emerging quantum information and sensing applications. The project is also
providing training opportunities for future scientists in advanced experimental
techniques. As part of this project, Professor Knappenberger has established a
local student section of the Optical Society of America at Penn State. This
activity facilitates a weekly brown-bag optics club lunch, hosted in the
Millennium Science Complex at PSU. Students are able to present their research
progress in an informal setting that includes faculty, postdoctoral, graduate,
and undergraduate students. The program also includes a component for a high
school volunteer student. This student acquires skills in data analysis and
processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is developing and using
novel variable-temperature, variable-magnetic field (VTVH) spectroscopy methods
to characterize the electronic structure of a series of two-dimensionally
confined quantum materials, including multi-component structures featuring
combinations of 0-D/1-D/2-D systems. The overall objective is to understand how
electronic carrier coupling to low-frequency phonon modes affects the relaxation
dynamics of these systems. In order to achieve this fundamental research goal,
the team is developing VTVH ultrafast two-dimensional spectroscopy (VTVH-2DES)
capabilities, and using them to characterize key parameters of transient exciton
states, such as Lande g factors, zero-field splitting energies, and electron-
phonon coupling strengths. Monitoring transient signal amplitudes from these
excitons in the time- and energy-domains provides insight into phonon-mediated
energy relaxation and transfer in quantum materials. The research activities
include 1) understanding the optical properties and electronic structure for
single and multi-layer 2-D confined TMDs, 2) development of VTVH-2DES
infrastructure of characterizing TMD transient states, 3) quantitatively
describing quantum-state-specific electron-phonon coupling and carrier dynamics
for TMDs; and 4) understanding fundamental mechanisms of phonon-mediated energy
transfer in multi-component quantum structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.