* 1807320
* Topics in Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Richard Schwartz, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 383,157.00

This project concerns research in geometry and dynamical systems, some of which
uses computer experimentation to study simply-stated questions about which
little is known. The idea is that new and powerful computing tools will provide
insight that was not available to earlier generations of mathematicians. One
such question, known as Thomson's problem, asks how some number of electrons
will arrange themselves on the sphere so as to minimize their total potential
energy. Such a problem has wide-ranging applications because in many scientific
fields it is quite useful to know how to evenly distribute points or sensors or
energy sources in a space. The principal investigator recently resolved a large
part of the story for the case of five points on the sphere and plans to
continue to develop this theory. Another problem asks about the stability of the
solar system in a highly simplified model of celestial mechanics called outer
billiards. It is known that there exist initial conditions for which the
corresponding orbits are unbounded; this project aims to further develop a
theory that provides detailed theoretical pictures of these orbits in a special
case. Another problem under investigation in the project is the famous square
peg problem, which asks if every loop in the plane has four points on it that
make the corners of a square. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical terms, the
project focuses on the following areas. First, it is planned to extend results
related to a phase-transition conjecture for the 5-electron problem. The
principal investigator proved that there exists a constant c such that the
triangular bi-pyramid is the energy minimizer for the Riesz s-potential if and
only if s is not greater than c. It is conjectured that some pyramid with square
base is the energy minimizer for the Riesz s-potential if and only if s is not
less than c. Second, the project aims to continue developing the plaid mode, a
combinatorial construction that assigns to each rational number a collection of
polyhedral surfaces contained in a cube. When the model is sliced in one
coordinate direction, it gives loops which accurately model certain orbits of
outer billiards with respect to the kite with the same parameter. When the model
is sliced in the other two coordinate directions it gives loops that are
combinatorially isomorphic to those found in Truchet tilings and in corner
percolation. Third, the principal investigator plans to continue an ongoing
study of the space of inscribed rectangles in a Jordan loop. He has established
that every Jordan loop has associated to it a connected set of rectangles such
that every point of the loop, with at most 4 exceptional points, is the vertex
of one of the rectangles in the set. This result leads to a question of how a
rectangle can slide continuously along a pair of arcs, a problem akin to
studying the solutions of a differential equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.