* 1807676
* Predicting and Controlling the Coupling Between Dyes and Plasmonic Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Julie Biteen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 695,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Biteen at the University of Michigan is developing a
microscope to measure position and motion of biomolecules in living cells with a
super high resolution (at the nanometer scale). This super-resolution microscope
combines emerging high-resolution microscopy techniques and the unique
properties metal nanoparticles where metal nanoparticles strongly affect the
fluorescence emission from nearby dye molecules. Professor Biteen works on using
the high-sensitivity microscopy to understand the interaction between metal
nanoparticles and the dye molecules and to control coupled emission. She is
working toward a real-time, non-perturbative, biocompatible microscope for live-
cell imaging. Professor Biteen works closely with undergraduate women students
and students from other under-represented minority groups. She is promoting
science as an exciting field to a broad audience by supporting public lectures
and developing hands-on demos for middle school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-molecule, super-resolution microscopy enables
direct investigations of physical and optical effects far below the half-micron
diffraction limit of light, but this technique is restricted in practical
applications by the limited brightness of probes relative to the background,
especially in cellular samples. Plasmonic nanoparticles (NPs) readily produce
over hundred-fold field intensity enhancements to brighten proximal dyes, but
the modified dye emission also yields localization biases that have not yet been
fully characterized due to the limitations of conventional experimental
approaches. Professor Biteen is improving the resolution of single-molecule
imaging with NP plasmonics. State-of-the-art single-molecule fluorescence
experiments on dyes coupled to metal NPs can directly measure the effects of
plasmonic NPs on proximal dyes. Therefore, the single-molecule readout can
inform models of dye-NP interactions, while at the same time, plasmonic
enhancement can improve the single-molecule fluorescence brightness. Professor
Biteen is working toward high-accuracy, nanometer-scale, plasmon-enhanced super-
resolution microscopy by: (1) measuring the changes in dye molecule intensity,
spectrum, direction, and polarization of emission produced by a plasmonic NP,
(2) controlling the dye-NP coupling by tuning the excitation polarization and
frequency according to the relationships determined in objective 1, and (3)
super-resolving the positions and movements of membrane proteins in living cells
prepared on plasmonic surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.