* 1807654
* Probing the structure and electronics of self-assembled carbene monolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2022
* USD 537,620.00

Professors Xavier Roy and Latha Venkataraman of Columbia University are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to generate self-assembled monolayers of carbene
molecules on metallic surfaces, and to investigate the structure electronic
properties and stability of the resulting self-assembled monolayers. Coating
metallic surfaces with molecules having tunable properties imparts the surface
with special functionalities suitable for a variety of practical applications,
including sensing, nanoelectronics, nanofabrication and electrochemistry. The
usefulness of traditional self-assembled monolayers made with thiol chemical
groups on gold surfaces is limited due to the poor chemical, electrochemical and
thermal stability of the metal surface coating. This research on carbene
monolayers has the potential to significantly improve the stability, tunability
and metal compatibility of molecular monolayers on surfaces, thus positively
impacting their potential practical applications. The project integrates
research with educational and outreach activities. Graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds are involved in the research; research topics
are integrated in Chemistry and Applied Physics curricula; and middle-school
minority students from Central Harlem in New York are exposed to nanoscience
concepts. In addition, the students involved in the research are provided with
an international research opportunity through collaboration with international
groups in Italy and the Czech Republic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
project the research team study the formation, stability, structure and
electronic properties of self-assembled carbene monolayers on metallic surfaces
through an interdisciplinary effort that includes chemical synthesis, x-ray
spectroscopy, electrochemical characterization, electron transport measurements
and theory. Carbenes are promising candidates for creating thermally and
chemically ultra-stable self-assembled monolayers. Being exceptionally strong
sigma-donors with unusual electronic structures, carbenes bind much more
strongly to metal surfaces than traditional thiols, thus opening the door to
novel applications as tunable platforms for (bio)sensing, lab-on-a-chip,
electrochemistry, electrocatalysis and nanoelectromechanical systems. Carbenes
could also potentially passivate nanoelectrodes and modify metal work functions
while serving as novel ligands. Despite these promises and the vast scientific
literature on metal-carbene complexes, the assembly and conformation of carbenes
on surfaces is poorly understood, and the electronic structure and properties of
the resulting monolayers are largely unknown. To address this knowledge gap,
this research project focuses on three research objectives: (1) Designing and
synthesizing carbene monolayers with varying electronic and steric
characteristics, (2) Probing the structure and electronic coupling of carbene
monolayers to metal surfaces using x-ray spectroscopy and scanning tunneling
microscopy, and (3) Developing room temperature and solution-based methods to
prepare carbene monolayers on metal surfaces, and characterizing the structure
and electronic coupling using electrochemical and scanning probe
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.