* 1807545
* Multiscale Computational and Experimental Analysis of Deformation Mechanisms in Amorphous-Crystalline Metallic Materials with Microstructure Complexity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ashraf Bastawros, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Enhancing the strength of a material is always
at the expense of its ability to be purposely deformed or shaped, referred as
ductility. Recently, inspired by biological materials, like nacre and dental
enamel, a novel metallic composite which combines amorphous alloys (called
metallic glass) with crystalline metals, such as copper or aluminum, is shown to
have an appreciable strength improvement without sacrificing its ductility.
However, up to date, the development of such materials is still at a 'trial and
error' stage because: (i) the integration of metallic glass with crystalline
metals leads to a complex material microstructure spanning a wide range of
length scales from nanometers at the atomic scale to microns; (ii) many existing
techniques, which either resolve the material as a collection of atoms or
approximate it as a deformable body without considering its internal structure,
are incapable to provide a full-scale interpretation on how such material
responds to a mechanical forces like tension, compression, or shear. This
project supports research addressing these problems through a combined
computational and experimental analysis of the deformation in metallic
composites over a range of length scales. This research will link the atomistic
deformation physics with its overall mechanical performance. Two fundamental
questions to be answered are: (a) how does the interface between the amorphous
and crystalline phases contribute to their co-deformation? (b) how to architect
the metallic composite microstructure such that its failure can be delayed? This
research will advance the field by providing researchers with a platform that
can be used in a rational design of high-performance materials for a variety of
engineering applications such as biomedical implants, aircraft structures, and
energy infrastructures. It will expose the next-generation workforce to a broad
range of knowledge and skills related to mathematics, physics, mechanics,
supercomputing, materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. Moreover,
several kits of metallic composites will be developed for illustrating how
little changes of the volume amounts of each phase in composites can
significantly change its properties. These kits will be presented to science
teachers at Gilbert middle and high schools in Iowa for promoting science and
engineering to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In the search of strong and ductile metallic materials, one
strategy is introducing interfaces, such as grain boundaries and twin
boundaries, to resist dislocation motions. This strategy is usually accompanied
by a decrease in ductility although it does lead to an enhancement in strength.
By contrast, instead of blocking dislocations, the amorphous-crystalline
metallic composites utilize the amorphous phases to absorb dislocations, and may
fundamentally change 'the strength-ductility dilemma'. Nevertheless, a
methodical engineering approach for developing such composites is not achieved
so far due to a knowledge gap in correlating its multi-level microstructure with
the overall mechanical performance. This project supports research to fill this
gap. The mechanical behavior of amorphous-crystalline metallic composites with
microstructure complexities will be analyzed from the atomistic to the
microscale. Concurrent atomistic-continuum models that resemble the
microstructure of the amorphous-crystalline metallic composite fabricated at the
Department of Energy-Ames Laboratory will be developed. Multiscale simulations
of plastic flow in such material will be conducted to gain the insight into the
interplay between dislocations and shear transformation zones. The intrinsic
difference in mechanisms for the deformation in magnetron sputtered orthotropic
nano-laminates and ball-milled polycrystalline aggregates will be identified.
This research opens up the possibility of architecting the metallic composites
microstructure for a desired property. Many aspects of this research will not be
limited to metals but are readily extendable to other classes of materials, such
as biomimetic ceramics, metallic glass-based composites for electromechanical
devices, corrosion-, and radiation-resistant materials for nuclear power
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.