* 1807278
* Plasmon-Driven Chemistry as Revealed by Ultrafast SERS, Single Molecule SERS, and Electrochemical TERS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 01/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Van Duyne at Northwestern University is conducting
studies to better understand how molecules behave and chemical reactions happen
in the presence of a strong electromagnetic (EM) field induced by nearby
plasmonic nanoparticles. Surface plasmon is a phenomenon from the oscillation of
electrons on the surface of plasmonic nanoparticles collectively. Many factors
affect how strong the EM field (i.e. the plasmonic field) is and how a molecule
closely behaves. Professor Van Duyne plans to investigate the fundamental
mechanisms of plasmon-driven chemistry, study the chemical enhancement
contribution to single-molecule using a technique called surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SM-SERS), and develop an electrochemical tip-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (EC-TERS) to interrogate how charge transfer across interfaces
during chemical reactions. Fundamental insight gained from his study could
enable new technological applications including photocatalysis,
electrocatalysis, energy conversion and advance a wide array of technologies in
multiple sectors including biosensing, defense, and healthcare. Professor Van
Duyne works close with his graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, many
women students, in his research group. He also plans to continue his outreach
efforts to the public by hosting high school teachers in summers and interact
with kids and their parents at an All Scout Nano Day on campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface-enhanced femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy
(SE-FSRS) is applied to yield reaction mechanistic information across multiple
time scales. In order to generalize single molecule surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy to small molecules, chemical enhancement contribution is
investigated to provide additional signal enhancement to boost the sensitivity
of SMSERS. Professor Van Duyne plans to develop Electrochemical tip-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (EC-TERS) to elucidate the mechanisms of heterogeneous charge
transfer reactions. EC-TERS can provide chemical information with spatial
resolution down to the single site limit. Both fundamental understanding and
novel applications of plasmonics on the nano and molecular scale is anticipated
to be advanced through the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.