* 1807382
* Bridging the Gap Between Observables from Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometry and the Structures of Native Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Matthew Bush, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2022
* USD 412,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, Professor Bush and his group at the University of
Washington are developing new methods to characterize the structures of
biological molecules. State-of-the-art techniques being developed in the Bush
lab enable new approaches to these measurements, addressing unmet needs for
rapid characterization of the structures, assembly, heterogeneity, quality, and
similarity of biological molecules. New theoretical and statistical methods are
also being developed and applied to gain insight into the relationship between
the gas-phase measurements and the solution-phase structures of the proteins
studied. This knowledge will help answer important questions about the structure
and function of proteins and protein complexes, which is important for
understanding the molecular basis of life and disease. Students working in the
Bush lab are trained in measurement science, data science, and communication,
preparing them for success in a wide variety of careers, thereby increasing the
economic competitiveness of the United States in the fields of analytical
instrumentation and biotechnology. The group is also developing teaching modules
to enable exposure of a wide range of students to the concepts underlying their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although ion mobility (IM) mass spectrometry (MS)
has many attributes that make it well positioned to fulfill unmet needs in
structural biology and biophysics, concerns about the fidelity of solution- and
gas-phase structures have inhibited the broader adoption of IM-MS technologies
and reduced the confidence in structural models based on IM-MS. The Bush group
is working to (1) characterize the effects of charge state on the structures of
protein ions; (2) characterize the dynamics of protein ions rearrangements; and
(3) increase the information content of current IM experiments and calculations
using modern statistical methods. The outcomes of this research will address
urgent needs in the IM-MS community by providing detailed knowledge of the
structures and dynamics of native-like ions, developing more accurate methods
for translating observables from IM-MS experiments into restraints for
structural modeling, and developing a general method for translating structural
models into accurate predictions of observables. This in turn will enable IM-MS
to play a greater role in hybrid structural biology projects and initiatives.
Virtual labs will be developed to enable exposure of students to IM-MS
techniques even where IM-MS instrumentation is not
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.