* 1807683
* Collaborative Research: Next Generation Rigid Rod Polymers through Combined Computation and Experimentation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Daniel Lambrecht, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 12/31/2019
* USD 255,000.00

Polymers impact nearly every part of daily life - from the bristles on a
toothbrush to the packaging that protects food. The chemical composition of a
polymer dictates its properties including strength, flexibility, recyclability,
etc., which define applications. In this research project, Prof. Pentzer at Case
Western Reserve University and Prof. Lambrecht at University of Pittsburgh
explore the use of ketenes, a class of under-utilized monomers, for preparing
novel polymers with high mechanical strength, and yet high solubility for facile
processing. Computational prediction is integrated with synthesis and
characterization to enable cost- and time-efficient discovery of such new
polymers. This multidisciplinary project provides research training to
undergraduate and graduate students, preparing the future generation of skilled
workforce in science and engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team studies the chain growth polymerization of silyl ketenes, (R3Si(H)C=C=O),
which form solution processable polymers with variable backbone and side groups
that behave as rigid rod polymers (RRPs). Since silyl ketenes can yield three
different polymer backbone chemistries as well as mixtures thereof, the
challenge addressed in this work is formation of materials with specific
structure and rigidity. The Lambrecht group develops computational approaches
for predicting the contributions of "synthons" on reaction energetics and
polymer properties from first principles; computational prediction informs
synthesis performed in Pentzer's laboratory by proposing rational modifications,
including solvent polarity and counterion choice. The Pentzer group evaluates
the impact of experimental conditions on polymerization, synthesizes and
characterizes new polymers, and closes the feedback loop by generating empirical
data to validate and refine computational approaches of Lambrecht. The research
activities include 1) identifying the fundamental reactivity patterns of silyl
ketenes as relevant to chain growth polymerization, 2) controlling the formation
of well-defined oligomers, and 3) preparing each of the new polymer chemistries
individually and establishing their properties and applications. Further,
Pentzer and Lambrecht offer annually a two-day workshop on how to successfully
combine two relatively siloed areas of research- computation and
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.