* 1807983
* Protein-Piperazine Polymer Conjugates as a New Platform for Oral Protein Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Kathryn Whitehead, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 524,129.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research plan will enable
patients to take protein medications orally. Although patients are most willing
and able to take their medications by mouth, this is not currently possible for
protein therapeutics like insulin. The most significant challenge preventing
oral protein delivery is that the protein drugs are too large to exit the small
intestine and enter the bloodstream where they take effect. This research will
overcome that challenge by creating chemically modified proteins that
temporarily make the intestines more porous so that the protein drug can be
absorbed. The chemical modification will consist of polymer chains extending
from the surface of the protein. We will learn how the chemistry of the polymer
improves the transport of the medicine into the bloodstream and optimize the
chemistry for the maximum therapeutic effect. Results will be published for
public dissemination. The proposed outreach plan will benefit students of all
age levels, including over 1500 K-12 Pittsburgh students who will learn from
hands-on science demonstrations. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained as the next generation of engineers, with an emphasis on research
opportunities for women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research plan will establish a new paradigm for oral protein delivery
therapeutics. Oral protein delivery is one of the most pressing unmet needs in
medicine today, and its realization would have dramatic effects on patient
compliance and the accessibility of protein therapeutics. Unfortunately, oral
protein delivery has not yet been realized due to several challenges, the most
significant of which is the inability of therapeutic proteins to cross the
intestinal epithelium into the bloodstream. This work will enable oral protein
delivery through the engineering of protein-polymer conjugates that selectively
enhance intestinal protein permeability. Polymers containing permeation-
enhancing side chains will be grown from the surface of the therapeutically
relevant enzyme, asparaginase. The side chains will contain piperazine
derivatives, a class of molecules previously shown by the PI to offer excellent
permeation enhancement without cytotoxicity. The proposed research will
determine structure-function relationships to aid in rational design and
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of permeation enhancement. At the end of the
NSF grant period, this first-of-its-kind platform technology will be well-poised
for application to additional therapeutic proteins, including enzymes and
antibodies. Results will be published for public dissemination. The proposed
outreach plan will benefit students of all age levels, including over 1500 K-12
Pittsburgh students each year who will learn from hands-on drug delivery
modules. Undergraduate and graduate students will be groomed as productive,
influential future engineers through technical training in biological transport
and drug delivery mechanisms, with an emphasis on research opportunities for
women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.