* 1807802
* Ionic Transport in Ion Containing Copolymer-Grafted Nanoparticle Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Pinar Akcora, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 404,637.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental understanding gained
from this project will provide the scientific basis for designing new materials
for next-generation energy devices such as batteries, fuel-cell membranes,
supercapacitors, and electroactive actuators. The project aims to synthesize
polymer-functionalized spherical magnetic nanoparticles known as "polymer-
grafted nanoparticles" by growing polymers with asymmetric composition onto
these nanoparticles. A special feature of their molecular architecture is the
presence of ion-containing molecules in the end of the polymer chains. These
functional, particle-based nanomaterials will be studied as solid-state
electrolytes, which can be used in fuel-cell electrolyte membranes. The PI aims
to understand the relationship between nanoparticle structures in "ionic
liquids" (which are salts in a liquid state) and ionic conductivity. The
resulting nanomaterials are leak- and vapor-free and non-flammable solid
electrolytes with ion-conducting network structures. Furthermore, they also hold
various advantages such as high mechanical stability since the material is
composed of inorganic particles; they also have low ionic content in the polymer
chains and low water uptake. The nanomaterials are designed so as to control ion
aggregation, enable study of confinement of ionic liquids within nanostructured
particles, enhance ionic mobility, and unravel ion transport mechanisms. The
project will train graduate and undergraduate students and schoolteachers in the
broad area of materials for energy applications. A Nanoscience Educator Workshop
will be organized for high-school science teachers in the New Jersey/New York
area, aiming to help teachers to integrate nanoscale science concepts and
applications into their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore ion transport in
nanoparticle-based polyelectrolytes. The PI proposes a comprehensive research
plan to underpin the fundamental mechanism of conductivity in the nanoparticles
grafted with poly(methyl methacrylate-b-styrenesulfonate) chains with low
sulfonation amounts in ionic liquids. It is hypothesized that ionic aggregation
and ionic cluster sizes can be controlled by the organization of ion-containing
copolymer-grafted nanoparticles into strings, percolated and dispersed systems.
The PI will study segmental chain dynamics and ion transport of the synthesized
grafted nanoparticle films using the quasi-elastic neutron scattering
experiments. The measured chain and ion mobility will be combined with the
structural information obtained from X-ray scattering, transmission electron
microscopy, and tomography. The major objectives of the project are to
understand the assembly of poly(methyl methacrylate)-grafted iron oxide
nanoparticles in various solvents and ionic liquids under confinement; and to
determine the effect of styrenesulfonate chain end groups on the assembly of
poly(methyl methacrylate)-grafted particles and measure its impact on chain
dynamics and conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.