* 1807514
* Creating Dynamic and Adaptive Force-Producing Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Henry Hess, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 463,218.00

Creating dynamic and adaptive force-producing nanostructures

Non-Technical Abstract:

The heart muscle can operate reliably for more than a hundred years, but the
molecules which generate the force to contract are replaced every few days.
Muscle also responds to exercise with growth and will shrink if not used.
Clearly, nature has developed ways to produce force very reliably and
efficiently by dynamically organizing the molecules in this biological material.
The goal of the proposed project is to take the first steps towards creating
such materials in the laboratory. To this end, this project will investigate the
approaches used by nature in the construction of muscles, and translate them to
the engineering of man-made materials assembled from the same type of molecules
used in muscles. The goal is to show that structures can be created "similar to
muscle" that can be long-lived by automatically replacing their aging parts and
can adapt to changing conditions by adding and releasing parts as needed.
Compared to the traditional engineering approach where, for example, a long-
lasting car is assembled from even more durable components, this bio-inspired
approach may offer great benefits for engineering. At the same time it will help
us to better understand the natural way of constructing muscles and other
tissues. This understanding in turn can contribute to efforts to combat aging
and restore bodily functions in medicine. In addition to obtaining new research
insights, the aim is to inspire and train students at all levels. For example,
teams of high school and undergraduate students will be mentored to compete in
the BIOMOD biomolecular design competition.

Technical Abstract:

Future active materials that assemble molecular motors into structures with
macroscopic force output will have to be engineered based on self-organization
principles supporting the extraction of work, constant regeneration, and
adaptation. The goal of this project is to discover these principles and
investigate their application in a minimal model system utilizing motor proteins
as the force- producing molecular components. In order to maintain these active
nanostructures in a functional state beyond the limited lifetime of their active
molecular components, this project will abstract the mechanisms which allow
biological materials to maintain their function for a duration far beyond the
lifetime of the components. In particular the roles of self-organization and
continuous turnover, and the balance between desired structural stability and
ease of component replacement will be investigated. The specific objectives of
this research are (1) to create a structure in dynamic equilibrium where
microtubules are propelled by kinesin motors weakly and reversibly bound to a
surface, (2) to demonstrate that adaptation to changing loading conditions is
possible due to the dynamic equilibrium established, and (3) to demonstrate that
the dynamic recruitment of kinesin motors to microtubules lowers the number of
motors required for stable microtubule gliding relative to a static
configuration where motors are permanently adhered everywhere on the surface.
The insights from these experiments will in return assist in developing a
theoretical understanding of how biological materials both prevent and heal
damage, and will be generalizable for the design of novel synthetic and hybrid
materials. The project will integrate undergraduate and high school students in
the research process and aim to recruit graduate students from underrepresented
groups. Various outreach activities to local K-12 students are planned. The
outcome of the project will be potentially transformational in that it aims to
assist in a paradigm shift from durable man-made structures assembled from
equally durable nanoscale components to durable and adaptive engineered
structures composed of short-lived nanoscale components with continuous
replacement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.