* 1807865
* Mechanisms of Hydrogenase Function
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Brian Dyer, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 05/31/2021
* USD 405,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Brian Dyer from Emory University to investigate how
living systems efficiently store energy in chemical bonds using proton coupled
electron transfer processes. The most basic electron and proton transfer
reactions relevant to energy storage in chemical bonds are those involved in the
reduction of protons to molecular hydrogen. Man-made catalysts are not very
efficient at accelerating this process, despite its relative simplicity. In
contrast, living systems have evolved a class of enzymes called the hydrogenases
that catalyze the reduction of protons to molecular hydrogen at extraordinary
rates and with little energy loss. The hydrogenases serve as ideal models for
understanding the basic principles of efficient catalysis of multi-electron,
multi-proton chemistry, which is important for a wide range of applications
including generation of solar fuels. While the structures of hydrogenases are
well established, their mechanisms remain poorly understood; indeed, although
the chemical structures of the active site of the enzymes have been exactly
reproduced in synthetic mimics, these mimics fail as catalysts, highlighting the
importance of the protein architecture that surrounds the active site. The Dyer
group uses unique laser-based methods to elucidate the dynamics and mechanisms
of the electron and proton transfer processes and the role of the protein in
controlling them. This research helps students at all levels develop highly
interdisciplinary skills and a knowledge base focused on renewable energy
science. Training students in renewable energy science is accomplished through
the Emory Chemistry Intern Program (high school students) and the Emory SURE and
SIRE programs (undergraduates) with an emphasis on underrepresented minority
students recruited from the Historically Black Atlanta University Center.
Professor Dyer's laboratory has a strong record of dissemination of cutting edge
chemical techniques such as the laser induced T-jump methods now widely used in
protein folding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogenases exemplify the challenges
inherent to mechanistic studies of the highly efficient oxidoreductases. These
challenges are both practical, due to the difficulty of resolving the molecular
processes for enzymes with kcat &gt; 1,000 s-1, and conceptual, due to the
complexity of the structures and dynamics that orchestrate the electron and
proton transfer reactions. Because of the extraordinarily fast catalytic rates
of these enzymes, their mechanisms have been difficult to study directly. The
Dyer lab recently developed an approach that enables the study of the elementary
electron and proton transfer steps during fast enzyme turnover. The approach
combines a laser-induced redox potential jump with time-resolved infrared
spectroscopy studies of the enzyme active site. Using this unique approach, they
investigate critical mechanistic questions for the hydrogenases, including how
these enzymes move electrons and protons together to avoid high barrier traps
(testing the principle of electroneutrality), what are the proton pathways and
how are proton transfer and electron transfer gated, and what are the mechanisms
of the reaction of molecular oxygen with the active site, enzyme inactivation,
and reductive reactivation. Professor Dyer creates unique research opportunities
to broadly train high school, undergraduate and graduate students in this
research, and to help them develop highly interdisciplinary skills and gain a
knowledge base focused on renewable energy science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.