* 1807169
* RAPID: Effects of Hurricane Irma on shallow-water marine ecosystems: Assessing resiliency of sponge and macroinvertebrate communities in the Florida Keys
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Malcolm Hill, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2018
* USD 49,234.00

Hurricane Irma was a massively destructive storm that traveled directly over the
lower Florida Keys. While the above water damage was obvious, effects from the
hurricane on shallow benthic marine habitats in the Florida Keys is unknown.
Shallow water habitats, which are important nurseries for economically important
fisheries, likely experienced the strong effects from the storm. Sponge
communities in these ecosystems perform vital ecological functions due to their
feeding behavior, which involves pumping large quantities of water and filtering
material from the water column. The project tests important hypotheses about
sponge responses to ecological disruptions that are caused by hurricanes.
Sponges are abundant in many reef ecosystems, and play essential ecological
roles, so learning about system responses to sponge community disturbances is
important. The work trains undergraduates in field research, data management and
analysis, and science communication. Some of the activities developed as part of
this project are incorporated in the University of Richmond Integrated Science
Experience (URISE), and the first-year Science, Math and Research Training
(SMART) course, both of which are designed to increase participation in STEM
disciplines by individuals from underrepresented groups. Furthermore, the
research is presented in a variety of public forums to disseminate as widely as
possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponges represent a significant benthic-pelagic
coupling point in tropical reef habitats. The recently proposed sponge loop
hypothesis predicts that these animals release detritus as a function of their
biofiltering capabilities, which is then consumed by organisms at the base of
the food web. Hurricane Irma may have disrupted components of the sponge loop,
and the investigators are exploring four hypotheses related to the storm's
effects. First, the proposed work tests whether sponge damage from the storm was
non-random, disproportionately affecting larger sponges. The second hypothesis
examines the effects of the storm on macroinvertebrate communities in these
habitats. This work builds on sponge and macroinvertebrate surveys conducted by
the investigators in the years preceding the storm. Thirdly, the hypothesis that
the hurricane influenced bacterioplankton populations through disruption of
sponge feeding is tested. The PIs also compare pre- and post-hurricane plankton
structure via flow cytometery using inhalant-exhalent water samples collected as
part of an on-going study of sponge feeding behavior. Finally, inhalant-exhalent
water samples are collected from shallow-water populations of several sponges
from different size categories to determine if feeding behavior shows any
demographic shifts based on the size of the sponge. Samples are processed to
examine the retention efficiencies and prey selectivity of the host sponges
using flow cytometry. Initial surveys are conducted of sponges (size, density,
diversity) and macroinvertebrates in December, 2017. Preliminary sponge pumping
activity occurs then too. Extensive surveys take place again in May-July, 2018
with further monitoring to occur in subsequent years.