* 1807881
* I-Corps: Time-Resolved Sample Preparation for Single-Particle Cryo-Electron Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to propel the
development of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) into a
mainstream structural biology technique. The core technology is a research tool
that provides a reliable, reproducible, cost-effective method for scientists to
prepare their protein samples in the biomedical field. By studying proteins in
their natural environment using cryo-EM, researchers get a better understanding
of their structures and thus their functions within the cells. This new
knowledge will potentially facilitate as well as accelerate the development of
therapeutic treatments.

This I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of a stand-alone cryo-EM
sample preparation stage. The core technology in discussion is based on the
application of state-of-the-art microfluidic systems to deposit and vitrify
protein solution on EM grids in milliseconds. Furthermore, it offers scientists
the ability to control their sample thickness by adjusting the thickness of the
protein solution before it hits the grid. With this technology, a larger region
of the cryo-EM grids will have intact protein molecules and the right thickness
of vitrified aqueous layer and is thus usable for structural determination,
allowing researchers to save significant time and money in terms of image
collection as well as tedious protein extraction and purification. This way more
protein structures can be solved, and thus better therapeutics and drugs can be
developed.