* 1807140
* Conference:  2018 Thalamocortical Interactions GRC: Development, Function and Dysfunction of Thalamocortical Networks, Lucca, Italy, February 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Mary Baldwin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,200.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2018 Gordon Research Conference on
Development, Function and Dysfunction of Thalamocortical Networks. This five-day
meeting and the associated Research Seminar brings together researchers to
present results and engage in discussions on the cell and circuit properties of
thalamocortical interactions, and build on these to explore their roles in
cognition and behavior and how their dysfunction manifests in disease. This
conference represents a rare opportunity for neuroscientists interested in
thalamocortical interactions to exchange new results, hypotheses, and ideas at
many levels, from cellular through systems to cognitive and clinical. With
respect to broader impacts, this meeting will benefit the larger community in
multiple ways. First, it will help train and inspire the next generation of
scientists by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to exciting science and
scientists. Second, special emphasis will be given to junior faculty. Finally, a
concerted effort will be made to recruit scientists from under-represented
groups and targeted mentoring sessions will help the junior scientists in their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this meeting
derives from its small size, which promotes interactions between participants,
and the assembly of many top scientists whose research spans thalamocortical
interactions across multiple sensory modalities, emphasizing the commonalities.
This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses, raises new questions
about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new collaborations. By maximizing
both formal discussion and informal interactions, the Gordon Conference and
Research Seminar will highlight exciting new developments that have implications
both for a basic understanding of the emergent properties of neural circuits as
well as pathologies that involve thalamocortical disruptions. This is especially
timely because this field has been expanding significantly with the recent
appreciation that the thalamus plays an ongoing and critical role in cortical
functioning.