* 1807368
* NSF Workshop: New Vistas in Molecular Thermodynamics: Experimentation, Modeling and Inverse Design
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 30,000.00

The project will support a workshop on Molecular Thermodynamics that will be
held on the campus of the University of California-Berkeley, from January 7 to
9, 2018. The workshop will bring together technology leaders and junior
researchers to develop a roadmap for basic research in response to emerging
opportunities and challenges in the Chemical Process Industries. The workshop
will foster debate and discussion among scholars from different areas of the
Molecular Thermodynamics community to uncover fundamental research questions
whose answers will enable overcoming current technological challenges. It will
also will also cover topics related to modernizing Engineering Education.
Successful development and implementation of new tools for process design and
optimization will ensure sustained competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry
while also addressing environmental challenges and promoting energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent trends emphasizing environmental
sustainability and improved energy efficiency in the chemical process industries
have created new research opportunities in the field of Molecular
Thermodynamics. By connecting the physicochemical properties of matter at all
length scales, Molecular Thermodynamics has been an enabling tool to accelerate
scientific innovations, catalyze emerging technologies, and provide core
knowledge for design and optimization of diverse industrial systems, ranging
from energy production, materials synthesis, and chemical processing to
pharmaceutical and environmental applications. The rapid emergence of new
methods in computational algorithms, data science and artificial intelligence
provide a unique opportunity for innovation and interdisciplinary collaboration
by integrating experimental and computational methods into powerful tools for
process design and optimization. In addition to defining new research frontiers
in the field of Molecular Thermodynamics, the workshop will also address
curriculum development and workforce training issues to ensure continued world-
wide competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry.