* 1807687
* Probing the Mechanism and Morphology of Magnesium Deposition from High Anodic Stability, High Solution Conductivity Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bart Bartlett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 518,444.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Lithium batteries abound in
the portable electronic devices that are toted daily. However, the scarcity and
price of both lithium and the other metals used to create batteries provides the
impetus to move beyond lithium-based technology. By virtue of its position in
group I of the periodic table, lithium shuttles only one electron at a time
between the two electrodes. With this project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, the
researchers at the University of Michigan Ann Arbor develop materials for
magnesium ion batteries. Magnesium, a group II metal, can shuttle two electrons
at a time. In principle, doubling the number of electrons that react at the
electrodes doubles the amount of charge that can be stored in the same volume of
space. Storing more charge with the same-sized battery represents a significant
advance in energy storage for portable electronics and potentially for electric
vehicles. Magnesium also has the potential to yield safer batteries since this
metal is less reactive with air and moisture than is lithium. However,
developing this technology requires learning what chemical reactions occur at
the solid electrode/ liquid electrolyte interfaces of a battery and how these
reactions change the electrode surface over time, which is the focus of this
project. The goal is ensuring that both safety and high charge-storing capacity
are maintained over the entire battery lifetime. In addition to the advancing
scientific understanding, this project involves graduate students, undergraduate
students, and high school students from diverse backgrounds who collaborate to
combine different forms of spectroscopy and microscopy in order to interrogate
what magnesium molecules form in liquid solution and to observe how these
molecules transform to move electrons through lab-scale batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, addresses two critical
questions at the anode/electrolyte interface using Lewis-acid salts of magnesium
alkoxide electrolytes: 1) what are the structure and composition of matter at
the electrode/electrolyte interface? 2) what are the size, shape, and
distribution of defects at the electrode? To answer the first question, the
researchers employ electrochemistry using polished platinum single crystals,
solution NMR spectroscopy, and Raman microscopy to probe the electrolyte/bulk
solution interface. To answer the second question, they rely on electron
microscopy and scanning electrochemical microscopy to probe surface
reconstruction as well as macroscopic changes in the morphology of the solid
electrode under varied conditions. Although the lithium-ion battery field has
demanded answers to these questions to develop this familiar technology, the
chemistry of magnesium is quite different. One difference that is a major
advantage for magnesium is that its hexagonal crystal structure leads to metal
deposits in platelet form, not as dangerous dendritic wires that could short-
circuit the battery. That said, the relationship between the salt composition
(what ions are present and at what concentration) and the electrodeposition
growth mechanism is unknown in magnesium. The first aspect of this research is
composed of experiments to specify what ionic species reside at the
electrochemical interface starting from the traditional Guoy-Chapman-Stern model
of the electrochemical double layer (where excess charge accumulates adjacent to
the electrode). With the second thrust, the researchers study how the atomic
surface and the microstructure of magnesium and the underlying electrode change
with continued cycling that includes potential adsorption/desorption of ions.
Overall, this knowledge teaches the battery community to connect known
electrolyte design principles to long-term high current (i.e.-high power)
battery function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.