* 1807364
* GOALI: Ink-jet nanoparticle alignment layers for multi-responsive liquid crystal gas and vapor sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Torsten Hegmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

To interact and function in today's environment, the human nervous system has
developed specific sensory systems or organs, one or in some cases several
dedicated to each sense. The five familiar senses are sight, taste, hearing,
smell, and touch. Our senses create joy and pleasure, but also pain and sorrow.
In some cases they warn us from imminent danger, in other cases they do not or
only when it is already too late. This project focuses on liquid crystal-
nanoparticle sensors for the qualitative and quantitative detection of toxic
gases and vapors. These integrative sensors systems can display an unmistakable
warning in the form of text or an image in the presence of toxic gases and
vapors without any electrical power, and provide parts-per-million level
sensitivity. The active component of these sensors is based on reactive, ink-jet
printed nanoparticle alignment layers for nematic liquid crystals. In analogy to
omnipresent liquid crystal displays, an image (or readable pattern) emerges due
to the presence of specific hazardous toxic gases and vapors that could affect
the lives and health of firefighters, military personnel in conflict zones,
first responders, and workers in chemical manufacturing among others. Sensors
for volatile compounds exhaled by humans can also be used to monitor disease
states and disease progression such as in diabetes, liver disease, or
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed activities is to advance
recent findings that nanoparticles and particularly their surface
functionalization induce and alter the orientation of nematic liquid crystal
molecules in direct contact with them. By applying this concept, gold
nanoparticles in the size regime between 1 and 10 nm with reactive surface
ligands are synthesized and patterned via ink-jet printing to devise sensors for
multiple hazardous (chlorine, phosgene, cyanide, amines, dialkyl chalcogenides)
or less hazardous gases and vapors (ketones). The combination of nanoparticle
ink-jet printing and established concepts of optical and electro-optical
responses of nematic liquid crystals in contact with nanoparticles and other
surfaces enables the creation of highly sensitive and selective sensors, where
the sensing event produces a direct visual readout or warning without the use of
electrical power. The proposed research in collaboration with an industrial
partner offers new prospects for sensing harmful environments and monitoring
disease progression, both quantitative and qualitative, wearable and remote, and
with multiple detection modes. In conjunction with simulations, measurements of
light transmission and birefringence in the presence and absence of applied
electric fields provide unparalleled datasets for the development of liquid
crystal sensors for the simultaneous quantitative and qualitative detection of
multiple toxic and non-toxic gases and vapors. Overall, these activities create
knowledge for advanced sensor materials and foster strong advanced material
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.