* 1807017
* Electron Correlation Dynamics in State-Selected Triatomic Molecules Following Double Photoionization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joshua Williams, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Electrons can be ejected from molecules when they absorb energetic photons. This
can weaken the bonds and cause the molecule to dissociate into ionic fragments.
Studying ionization and dissociation processes in small molecules is important
for testing quantum theories and for practical reasons such as understanding
radiation damage. This research studies double photoionization of water
molecules in which a single photon ejects two electrons. A sophisticated
measurement method is used in which the ejected electrons and the ionic
fragments are detected in coincidence to determine how they share energy and in
which direction they move away from each other. The details of those
measurements will help theoretical physicists refine quantum mechanical models
of molecules that absorb ionizing radiation. Once the basic physics is
understood and included in the theoretical models, the calculations can be used
to understand how radiation interacts with larger molecules and
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The well-known COLTRIMS technique will be used
to study double photoionization of water molecules with 57 eV photons. The
initial momenta of the photoelectrons and ionic fragments will be determined. In
addition, the dication molecular state will be characterized prior to
dissociation. The data analysis methods will also be able to project the
electrons' momenta into the frame of the dissociated molecule. As a result,
state-selected, body-fixed differential cross sections for the coupled
photoelectrons can be determined, achieving as-yet unprecedented knowledge of
the dissociating molecule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.