* 1807328
* CAREER: Controlling Supramolecular Self-Assembly of Planar and Curved Polycyclic Aromatic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Steven Wheeler, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 02/28/2019
* USD 92,221.00

In this CAREER project, supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Steven E. Wheeler of
Texas A&M University and his students are studying the impact of substituents
and heteroatoms on pi-stacking interactions involving planar and curved
polycyclic molecules, developing a comprehensive understanding of these factors,
and devising ways to harness these effects to control supramolecular assembly.
These studies are being carried out in the context of organic electronic
materials, for which the precise control of intermolecular non-covalent
interactions is vital to achieve high charge carrier mobilities. Molecular
systems predicted to exhibit desirable properties and novel supramolecular
structures will be synthesized and characterized by experimental collaborators.

Precisely controlling the arrangement of individual molecules in the solid state
is fundamental to the development of next-generation organic electronic
materials. The proposed research aims to unravel the factors that control
intermolecular interactions in order to design novel electronic materials. The
educational component of the proposed work centers on the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in computational chemistry research and the
incorporation of computational chemistry into the undergraduate chemistry
curriculum. In addition, this CAREER award is opening the doors to computational
chemistry for undergraduate students through the development of an intuitive
molecular modeling application (IMMERSE).