* 1807612
* Modular CID-Cleavable Cross-Linkers for Proteomic Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Scott Rychnovsky, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Scott Rychnovsky from University of California Irvine to
develop new chemical tools to determine the structure of protein complexes.
Understanding the function of protein-protein complexes is fundamental to
understanding cellular processes. Although there are number of methods to study
protein complexes, they all have significant limitations. The method being
developed, chemical cross-linking, can be used under the widest variety of
conditions and can capture dynamic states of the complexes. The chemical
compound, a cross-linker, has two reactive ends that stick to parts of the
protein. When the cross-linker sticks to two different proteins, it tells us
that those proteins are close together in the complex. The important advance in
this project is to make it much easier to identify the precise location the
cross-linker sticks to in each protein. This information can be used to build a
detailed model of the complex to better understand its behavior. The protein
complex studied is the COP9 signalosome, which is important in the function of
all cells in the body and mutations of this protein complex have been identified
in important neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Down's
syndrome. The program provides training for graduate students and undergraduates
in chemistry and chemical biology. Promising undergraduate students are
recruited from a local community college to participate in summer research, with
the goal of stimulating their interest in scientific research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advent of Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID)
cleavable crosslinkers has dramatically simplified the sequencing of cross-
linked amino acids by liquid chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LCMS/MS). One
objective of this proposal is to develop a family of CID-cleavable cross-linkers
to facilitate the analysis of protein complexes. These new cross-linker reagents
are broadly useful in the field of structural biology. The second research
objective is to map out the dynamic structure of the COP9 signalosome (CSN). CSN
is an important regulatory protein that catalyzes the hydrolysis of the Nedd8
protein from the cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase. CSN is found in all eukaryotes;
the human form has eight canonical subunits, all of which appear to be required
for function. CSN is important in regulating the cell cycle, in neuronal
development and in DNA repair. Specific mutations in the CNS subunits have been
implicated in a number of brain afflictions, including Alzheimer's disease and
Down syndrome. A crystal structure was reported that provides a detailed static
model of CSN. A goal of this project is to define the dynamic structure of the
complete CSN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.