* 1807694
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Alisha Shah, Shah                    Alisha         A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Understanding
the environmental factors that allow species to survive in various environments
is an important goal of ecologists. Knowledge gained from such work can be used
to explain patterns of biodiversity, predict how species will respond to
changing environments, and enable society to make informed decisions about
conservation and management. Temperature is a prevalent factor that determines
aspects of life for ectotherms, i.e., animals that cannot produce their own body
heat. For example, an insect living underneath a leaf in a shady tree may
experience temperatures that are much cooler compared to the surrounding air.
How does this "micro-scale" temperature change from leaf to leaf? How does it
affect the growth and survival of the insect? How does it affect the
interactions between the insect and others? These questions will be answered
using leaf miners, small moths that live inside aspen leaves, and their wasp
predators. Answering these questions requires a large team effort, making such a
project ideal for teaching scientific methods to students. The Fellow will use
this opportunity to teach undergraduates from underrepresented communities,
especially Native American students, how to conduct a scientific experiment,
collect data, and interpret and share results.

To understand the thermal environment of leaf miners, the Fellow and her team
will first collect temperature data using thermocouples from several hundred
leaves located in various parts of aspen trees. Then, to record which
temperatures are optimal for miners, the Fellow and her team will construct
thermal performance curves using growth rate. Finally, the team will investigate
how interactions between wasps and miners are altered by experimentally
manipulating temperature in an experimental arena. The experiments are designed
to test multiple hypotheses about how leaf temperature affects leaf miners and
how it might alter predator-prey interactions. The Fellow will also teach Native
middle school children how to use basic biological monitoring techniques with
insects to assess the health of streams around the Flathead Indian Reservation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.