* 1807878
* RUI: Protein Bioconjugation Strategies for Next Generation Silk Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Amanda Murphy, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 388,946.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bombyx mori silkworms produce
cocoons made of a fascinating protein called silk fibroin. In recent years, silk
has become one of the most popular biomedical materials for applications ranging
from drug delivery to creating artificial tissues. Successful development of the
protein modification strategies described here will pave the way for researchers
to design the next generation of innovative, functional silk-based biomaterials
with enhanced performance and integration with biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Department of Chemistry at Western Washington
University, our core mission is to provide undergraduate students with
significant, in-depth research opportunities. The proposed research program will
involve a total of ~10-12 undergraduates and 2-3 master?s students over the
three-year grant period. Recognizing that community colleges offer critical
access to higher education for many underrepresented groups, this grant will
provide one additional research stipend per summer for a local community college
student. Overall, this work will give students a strong foundation in the skills
required to be successful in STEM-related careers, will foster further
collaborations between faculty both within and outside of WWU, and will continue
to build relationships between WWU and local community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silk produced by
the Bombyx mori silkworm has emerged as one of the most versatile biomaterials
for applications ranging from engineered tissues, to drug delivery, to optical
and electronic devices. Chemical modification of the silk protein provides an
opportunity to further customize the interaction between silk and living
systems, and endow silk with new functionality. Given the limitations in
selectivity and functional group tolerance of previously employed bioconjugation
methods, there is a need for complementary chemistries for silk modification,
particularly bio-orthogonal reactions that occur under mild, aqueous conditions.
To this end, the primary goal of this work is to develop new methods to
chemically-modify the unusually high number of tyrosine residues in silk by
employing 1) amino tyrosine modification strategies and 2) palladium-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions. While the methods developed here can be broadly
applied, we will focus on silk derivatives that will be valuable for in vitro
and in vivo imaging applications and targeted drug delivery. Overall, this work
involves fundamental explorations of silk protein reactivity, furthers efforts
to translate traditional organic reactions into aqueous environments, and
ultimately will result in new protein bioconjugation methods that can be applied
to silk and other tyrosine-containing proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.