* 1807154
* Polymers of Unusual Topology using Heterogeneous ROMP Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Robert Grubbs, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 617,243.00

Polymers are ubiquitous in our everyday lives. They are plastics, rubbers or
gels, and in living systems they serve a structural role as proteins, and also
the source of genetic information as DNA and RNA. Small chemical units
(monomers) are linked together to produce a polymer with any number of desired
functions. The characteristics of the polymer are determined both by the
monomer, and how the monomer units are connected. Professor Grubbs at the
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, CA develops new methods for
producing polymers, specifically on developing new types of polymers with
complex structures which generate new materials for important commercial and
academic uses. One important approach involves very long polymer chains where
the ends are connected, so that the resulting cyclic polymer does not have a
beginning or end. These polymers are challenging to produce. Many theories
suggest cyclic polymers will have different properties than identical polymers
where the ends are not connected. Polymers with enhanced properties are
anticipated to result from this work. This project provides an excellent
platform for research training of scientists and helps to prepare a skilled
workforce for academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ring-opening
metathesis polymerization (ROMP) is a critical tool in polymer synthesis and is
used to produce numerous model systems, as well as a number of commercial
materials. Most of the work to date in Professor Grubbs' group utilizes
homogeneous catalysts that are easy to control and are manipulated to produce
well-defined polymeric structures. Although less common, heterogeneous catalysts
are also used to provide new materials. In one case, the catalyst is covalently
linked to a silica support in such a way that cyclic polymers are selectively
produced. The heterogeneous system maintains the cyclic structure of the polymer
throughout the reaction, and releases the cyclic polymer from the support, which
provides a simple way to separate the product from the catalyst. The resulting
high molecular weight hydrocarbon polymers provide model materials for
verification of a variety of theoretical predictions. Additionally, large-scale
synthesis of such material enables previously unrealized commercial
applications. Another novel strategy uses a monomer which is introduced in the
gas-phase to a heterogeneous system, which produces polymers with different
properties than those formed in solution. This method provides hydrocarbon
polymers which are not accessible using homogeneous
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.