* 1807054
* Precision Measurement of 1S-2S Interval in Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 03/31/2023
* USD 827,798.00

This project will improve the accuracy of positronium (Ps) atom spectroscopy.
Spectroscopy is important because the colors of light (or "spectrum") absorbed
by atoms is a unique fingerprint that is useful for chemical identification in a
broad range of applications found in medicine, defense, and industry.
Spectroscopy can also reveal details about sub-atomic particles and their
fundamental interactions. Ps is a unique atom for this purpose. Ps is formed by
an electron bound with an anti-electron (positron). Because Ps does not contain
any protons or neutrons, spectroscopy of Ps atoms is an excellent test of bound-
state quantum electrodynamics, a cornerstone theory for modern atomic physics.
This project will thus promote the progress of science. This project will also
help expand the nation's high technology work force by training students from
diverse backgrounds to develop and implement high precision spectroscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purely leptonic positronium (Ps) atom is
uniquely well-suited for testing bound-state quantum electrodynamics (QED). High
accuracy Ps spectroscopy at the few parts per trillion level will provide
background information that can be used to extract non-QED physics out of
precision atomic measurements with heavier leptons and hadrons. In this way, Ps
spectroscopy can shed light on the proton charge radius puzzle. It can also help
constrain higher level recoil effect corrections in muonium. The previous
precision measurement of the Ps 1S-2S interval, 1,233,607,216.4 +/- 3.2 MHz,
performed by the coPI and S. Chu has stood for 25 years. The uncertainty in this
measurement came from positronium atoms spending too little time in the laser
beam (transit time broadening), atoms moving too fast (second-order Doppler
shift), laser intensity too high (AC Stark shift), and metrology limited at the
~1 MHz level. This project will implement several new techniques to improve
accuracy and precision. A position-sensitive time-of-flight detector will record
the trajectory and speed of every detected atom as it passes through a larger
laser beam profile, and thereby reduce the uncertainty due to second-order
Doppler shifts, AC Stark Shifts, and transit-time broadening. A frequency-comb
and a frequency-beat technique will be used to monitor the instantaneous laser
frequency as positronium atoms transit the excitation beam. These innovations
should reduce the uncertainty in the measurement by a factor of 300, with the
goal of reaching a 10 kHz uncertainty. This work will train graduate students in
a combination of atomic physics, positron science, laser spectroscopy, and
metrology. This training will benefit the students as well as the Nation by
providing highly skilled Ph.D.'s for the scientific workforce. UCR is a
Department of Education Designated Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with 30%
of Physics majors and 15% of graduate students from under-represented ethnic
minority groups. Several undergraduate researchers and a high school teacher
will also be involved in these experiments, and this will help to attract more
participants to STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.