* 1807101
* Cavitands and Self-Assembled Capsules as Supramolecular Reagents and Organo-Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 864,800.00

For several decades now, chemists have been learning from Nature how to harness
the intrinsic properties of molecules to "self-assemble" into complex arrays
that possess novel properties quite independent of the original components. This
research program of Prof. Bruce Gibb at Tulane University utilizes bowl-shaped
molecules in assembly processes that form novel chemical reactors. Although akin
to the familiar test-tube, these chemical reactors are exceedingly small. Much
like Nature's catalysts - enzymes - these reactors are capable of trapping one
molecule at a time to bring about novel and selective chemical transformations.
Additionally, the program of research is designed to improve our understanding
of chemical transformations using exceedingly mild conditions (e.g., room
temperature water). This research is important to society because it addresses
national needs in sustainability. The use of room temperature water helps to
reduce energy cost for production of chemicals and avoid environmental issues
associated with the use of organic solvents. Broader impacts of the research
include education and training of graduate and undergraduate students as the
next generation of productive members and leaders in the chemical sciences, as
well as outreach activities designed to promote chemistry within the local
community and to broaden participation in science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state-of-the-art of supramolecular chemistry
has now reached a point that the construction of (supra)molecular containers is
relatively facile. Building on this, a significant aim of this program of
research is to consider how electrostatic potential fields within nano-spaces
can be engineered, and in doing so, how it is possible to control guest
reactivity and catalysis within the nano-space. This program of research focuses
on three classes of chemical conversions (cyclization reactions, stereoselective
halogenation of carbon-carbon double bonds, and halogenation of aromatic
compounds) using cavitands and deep-cavity cavitands as scaffolds and hosts. All
of the chemical conversions being studied utilize water as the solvent and take
advantage of the hydrophobic effect to drive guest complexation and/or promote
turnover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.