* 1807260
* Computational Methods for Mixed-Integer Programs in Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Alper Atamturk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,001.00

The goal of this project is to design provably efficient computational methods
for the optimal operation of power systems and to facilitate their
transformation into sustainable systems. Since power systems are large-scale
interconnected networks with tens of thousands of devices connected to one
another via a physical infrastructure, power operators periodically solve a
series of highly complex optimization problems to be able to run these systems.
One major power optimization problem is unit commitment (UC), which optimizes
the production schedules of the participating generators and is the backbone of
the US electricity market with the value exceeding $300B annually. In addition,
the emerging problem of optimal transmission switching (OTS) enables a further
improvement of power systems operation by co-optimizing the interactions among
the resources in the infrastructure. Since these problems are highly nonlinear,
well-established optimization algorithms cannot efficiently solve them
consistently and suffer from major drawbacks. This project aims to address the
pressing need to develop effective techniques that are able to solve much larger
power optimization problems on a much shorter time scale with a higher accuracy,
compared to the current capabilities. This project leverages the underlying
structures of real-world systems to develop customized computational techniques
for power optimization problems with strong theoretical and practical
guarantees. The focus is on the UC problem (with binary variables at the nodes
of the system) and the OTS problem (with binary variables on the links of the
system), since other mixed-integer power problems mathematically resemble a
combination of UC and OTS. The proposed approach relies on advanced topics in
graph theory, conic optimization, valid inequalities, rounding techniques,
penalization methods, branch-and-bound techniques, robust optimization, and
algebraic geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the area of
nonlinear power optimization, and its findings will significantly impact the
energy management systems of power grids leading to major monetary savings and
environmental benefits. This project has substantial outreach components with
contributions to the programs "Engineering for Kids" and "Engineers without
Borders," as well as educational activities to foster undergraduate research,
engineering leadership for MS students, graduate curriculum enrichment, and
cross fertilization of knowledge among different
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.