* 1807225
* Determination of Activation Barriers for the Adsorption and Desorption of Self-Assembling Organic Molecules onto Gold and Graphite from Organic Solvents.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Electronic devices are playing an ever-increasing role in human life. Future
electronic devices will contain not only inorganic materials, such as silicon,
but also organic materials. While the inorganic components provide durability
and well understood electrical conduction, the organic components offer the
potential to easily and inexpensively tune their properties through synthetic
modification. However, creating devices that combine these two different types
of materials faces several challenges. The organic layer must be structured at
the molecular level to provide the desired electronic and photonic properties,
and the junction between the organic and inorganic parts must be formed to make
it easy for electrons to pass across the interface. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor K. W. Hipps at Washington State University is using
sophisticated microscopies that can see individual molecules to study the
factors that determine the ordering of organic molecules on inorganic surfaces.
The discoveries from the project could impact applications ranging from
electronics to sensor development, and catalysis. The research also provides
training opportunities for future researchers at all levels, and is thus
contributing to development of the national workforce in science and technology.
Professor Hipps actively reaches out to local high schools and engages students
in continued education in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Hipps and
his students are using a combination of surface plasmon resonance and high-
resolution scanning tunneling microscopy to understand and predict the
thermodynamic and kinetic factors that determine the structure of self-assembled
2-D organic films. The project's focus is on films formed from commonly used
organic monomers, inorganic substrates and solvents, with the goal of
determining the activation energies and entropies associated with adsorption and
desorption of monomers at the solution-solid interface. Molecular dynamics
simulations provide insight into the role of solvent, temperature, and pressure
in film formation. Observations from experiment and simulation are used in the
development of kinetic models that describe the various stages of the adsorption
and desorption of molecules from the self-assembled layer. In addition, the
project is educating undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
associates in the science of hybrid electronic devices, while outreach to local
schools introduces high-school students to single-molecule science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.