* 1807338
* Nuclear Physics Studies at Fermilab and PSI
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Wolfgang Lorenzon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,282,422.00

The main physics program supported by this grant is directed at the study of
those properties of nucleons and nuclei that are influenced by the size of the
proton. As the proton is a nucleon, and one of the principal components of
nuclei, knowing its size precisely is critical to understanding fundamental
nuclear structure. Yet measurement of the proton's size through two independent
means has yielded different results. The source of this difference has been a
10-year old puzzle that this project hopes to solve. Research will be carried
out at two places: one at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab)
near Chicago as part of a collaboration called SeaQuest, and the other at the
Paul Scherrer Institute near Zurich, Switzerland, as part of a collaboration
called MUSE. Education and training of both undergraduate and graduate students,
as well as outreach aimed at the general public, is an important aspect of this
research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment at Fermilab is focused on
Drell-Yan production of dimuon pairs to determine the light anti-quark
distributions in the nucleon. It will provide a better understanding how light
anti-quarks are distributed in unpolarized and polarized nucleons, and how
orbital angular momentum might contribute to the nucleon spin. This information
will provide direct input to theoretical models of the proton, and shed light on
the origin of the proton's spin. The MUSE experiment will simultaneously measure
elastic scattering with electrons and muons off protons which is afforded by a
beam that contains positively and negatively charged electrons, muons and pions.
The experiment aims to resolve the unexplained large discrepancy of the size of
the proton measured with electron and muon scattering. This discrepancy was
entirely unexpected, as the proton's size should not depend on whether it is
measured with electrons or muons. This approach has never been attempted before.
In addition, the Michigan group will lead the operation of a liquid hydrogen
target at the MUSE experiment, and lead the analysis effort at the SeaQuest
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.