* 1807216
* Multi-Domain Identification of Functional Network Dynamics at the Neuronal Scale
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Behtash Babadi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2023
* USD 329,999.00

Recent technological advances in neural data acquisition from a large number of
neurons across multiple brain regions have opened up a unique window of
opportunity to gain insight into the complex dynamic interactions among neurons,
within neuronal populations, and across brain regions at unprecedented
spatiotemporal resolutions. In order to exploit these data, computationally
efficient analysis techniques capable of simultaneously capturing the
dynamicity, task-dependence, and statistical characteristics of the underlying
functional networks are required. The research objective of this proposal is to
develop a system identification methodology to extract functional network
dynamics at the neuronal scale, and to apply it to large-scale recordings in
order to probe and reveal the neuronal mechanisms that underlie behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approaches are to identify the
temporal causal influences in neuronal ensembles in a robust and scalable
fashion, capture abrupt changes in the covariance structure of the neuronal
data, and extract the cross-frequency coupling of the network nodes with high
resolution. This project addresses several outstanding challenges faced by
existing methodologies, including loss of spectrotemporal resolution due to the
use of sliding windows, lack of domain-specific models to capture the network
dynamics, and ad hoc estimation procedures that result in highly biased network
characteristics. By employing electrophysiology and two-photon calcium imaging
data from the auditory systems of ferrets and mice, the proposed modeling and
estimation framework will be used to investigate several fundamental questions
pertaining to the functional organization of the networks involved in auditory
processing. The project is expected to impact technology by providing signal
processing solutions to be used in neural control systems. The research is also
integrated with education and outreach activities including high school level
workshops, undergraduate involvement, and course
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.