* 1807163
* Collaborative Research: Surface Exchange of Climate-Active Trace Gases in a Sea Ice Environment During MOSAiC
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Stephen Archer, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 771,184.00

This project focuses on understanding the exchange of trace gases across the
ice-sea-air interface during a large, collaborative field effort in the Arctic
Ocean. Investigators will collect data over an entire year and with
collaborators, reduce uncertainty in regional and global climate models. They
will measure carbon dioxide, methane, dimethylsufide, and ozone from the bow of
an icebreaking research vessel and from towers and portable instruments at field
camps established on sea ice. The study is an integral part of the year-long
Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC)
that will take place 2019-2020, bringing together an international team of
scientists to understand the causes and consequences of recent and predicted
changes in sea ice. The investigators plan a variety of outreach and educational
efforts to spark interest and build knowledge in science educators and students
about the Arctic and its climate system, and this study will provide education
and training opportunities for a postdoctoral scientist and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will improve understanding of
processes controlling exchange of climate-active gases between sea ice and
atmosphere in the Arctic. The investigators will participate in a year-long,
international field campaign in the high Arctic, Multidisciplinary drifting
Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC). They will conduct
continuous turbulent flux measurements using the eddy correlation method from a
tower on the bow of the German icebreaker Polarstern and from a tower situated
on a nearby ice camp. These will account for gas transfer over large, km-scale
areas of ice and open water leads. The investigators will also collect
measurements of direct gas emission and deposition over smaller areas of ice and
snow and a range of surface types using portable dynamic flux chambers. In
collaboration with members of the Biogeochemical Exchange Processes at Sea-Ice
Interfaces working group (BEPSII), observations of direct gas transfer will
inform and validate biogeochemical models of trace gas dynamics in sea ice. In
addition, a physical parameterization of air/sea gas transfer will be developed
as an extension of the Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment gas transfer
(COAREG) model, enabling regional estimates of net gas transfer in the sea ice
environment. Finally, results will be used to develop and evaluate of ocean-sea
ice-boundary layer exchange of climate-active trace gases in both 1-D and meso-
scale (Polar Weather Research and Forecasting) atmospheric chemistry-
meteorological modelling systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.