* 1807370
* I-Corps: Integrated Onboard Charger and Auxiliary Load Converter for Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
the commercialization potential of an integrated converter. The proposed
integration not only reduces the weight, volume and cost of onboard power
electronic interfaces, but also enhances their efficiencies, and enables
bidirectional operation. The team aims at not only fostering the widespread
adoption of electric vehicles through improving performance of onboard power
electronics, but also looking for other industries that could benefit from this
technology. The project has the potential to significantly reduce the cost of
electrified transportation systems while enhancing their performance. This work
will lead to exploring the commercialization potential of the first integrated
onboard charger/converter for plug-in electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is aimed at exploring market
development and commercialization opportunity of an integrated onboard charger
and auxiliary load DC/DC converter for electric vehicles. The proposed
technology utilizes silicon carbide (SiC) semiconductors to take full advantage
of wide band gap (WBG) SiC switches, to increase the operation switching
frequency, reduce the size of passive components, and reduce cooling
requirements, without sacrificing the operation efficiency of the converter.
This technology also uses a maximum efficiency tracking strategy to enhance the
efficiency of the charger not only at full loads but also particularly at medium
and light loads. A proof-of-concept prototype of the proposed technology has
been designed, developed and shown to have significant improvement in maximum
efficiency in small form factors.