* 1807451
* Quantum Spin Liquids in Correlated f-Electron Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Joseph Ross, Jr., Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 560,536.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Almost all materials will ultimately settle into an
ordered state at the lowest temperatures. The situation would be much different
in a universe that is one- or two dimensional, and where the exotic quantum spin
liquid state may emerge. Understanding the ways in which the transport of heat
and charge occurs in such a state is just beginning, and controlling it to
create practical devices and sensors has emerged as a central challenge. This
project will identify and synthesize new materials in search for a metallic
quantum spin liquid. Neutron scattering experiments will be carried out at
national facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and at the National
Institute of Standards and Technology. Both undergraduate and graduate students
participate in all aspects of these experiments, receiving thorough training and
broad experience in measurement techniques and applications that will prepare
them to become effective future users of these national facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Quantum Spin Liquids (QSL) occur when
magnetic order is overwhelmed by strong quantum fluctuations, giving rise to
massively entangled ground states with unusual excitations, often with
topological character. While metallic QSLs are expected to have a much richer
range of phase behaviors, the few QSL systems discovered so far are all
insulating. The discovery of intrinsically metallic QSLs where frustrated
moments are coupled to itinerant conduction electrons has the potential to
realize and to test theoretical predictions of exotic states and phases like
unconventional superconductivity, ferromagnetism, and Dirac metals where
excitations have photon-like dispersions. This project seeks to find the first
examples of metallic QSLs among the f-electron based heavy fermions, and to
explicate how the breakdown of conventional magnetic order or alternatively the
formation of magnetic moments via the collapse of the Fermi surface can be
generic routes to QSL formation in metals. The experimental program is based on
the metallic R2T2X (R=Ce,Yb) compounds, where strong quantum fluctuations arise
from competition between dimerization and magnetic order in both planar and
chainlike morphologies. The high quality single crystals required to support
this experimental program will be grown in our lab from metallic fluxes. Neutron
diffraction, magnetometry, heat capacity, and electrical transport measurements
will be primary tools for explicating the underlying magnetic and electronic
phase diagrams, supplemented by inelastic neutron scattering measurements that
will assess the corresponding development of magnetic fluctuations and
correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.