* 1807817
* Ultrasensitive Magneto-optic Imaging of Correlated Phases in Topological Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jing Xia, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 518,130.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Future quantum computers and quantum devices will likely
be based on materials that are protected from noise by their intrinsic features,
making the operation of these devices robust against environmental
perturbations. The fundamental physical nature of these complex materials and
their phases, however, is just starting to be revealed. The research team
focuses on two such phases: the chiral edge states found in the junction between
a superconductor and a magnetic topological insulator, and on the surface of a
slightly magnetized topological Kondo insulator, both holding promise for
constructing robust quantum computers. In this project, the PI and his team use
a set of experimental tools including precision magneto-optic imaging to
investigate these two chiral edge states. The results could provide a knowledge
base for topologically protected information processing, potentially operating
at room temperature. The science and education components provide integrated and
rigorous scientific training for graduate and undergraduate students, so
including students from underrepresented groups. Through an outreach program,
the excitement of science could be conveyed to minority and female middle school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Chiral edge states are
intricate topological structures that are potentially useful for quantum
devices. However, much of their physics remains unknown. In this project, the PI
and the research team utilize a newly developed mK-Sagnac interferometer-
microscope in their group to image and investigate two such topological
structures: the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) state and the related Majorana
chiral modes in a superconductor/QAH junction, and the magnetic chiral edge
states on the surface of the topological Kondo insulator SmB6. As surface and
bulk often have distinctively different physics properties in topological
materials, in this project, the research team performs simultaneous Sagnac,
torque magnetometry, and transport measurements to clearly distinguish the
contributions from bulk and surface states down to unprecedented low
temperatures. These measurements could resolve the intricate spin and
magnetization structures on the edge and bulk states of QAH states, chiral
Majorana edge mode, and SmB6 surface magnetic structure. This project can
potentially address important questions in the field of topological materials
and devices: 1. Can we stabilize QAH effect at temperatures close to ambient
temperature for practical device applications? 2. What are the spin structures
of the chiral Majorana edge mode? 3. What is the nature of the quantized
conductance found in the surface state of topological Kondo insulator? The
science and education components provide integrated and rigorous scientific
training for graduate and undergraduate students, so including students from
underrepresented groups. Through an outreach program, the excitement of science
could be conveyed to minority and female middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.