* 1807546
* SemiSynBio: Collaborative Research: YeastOns: Neural Networks Implemented in Communicating Yeast Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2022
* USD 457,818.00

Large, three-dimensional cell colonies grown inexpensively using simple raw
materials could be made into cheap, energy-efficient computers. A fundamental
challenge in using living cells for computing is that computation by cells is
error prone, and cells divide, die and reorganize inside a cell culture, making
it difficult to maintain a defined architecture. This research will explore the
design of yeast cell-based computing systems inspired by how computing is
performed by the animal brain cells. To develop new knowledge at the
intersection of electronics, computing and biology will require a new generation
of students familiar with each of these areas who can work in collaborative
teams. Building on work with organizations including the Freshman Research
Initiative at UT Austin and Women in Science and Engineering at JHU, the PIs
will develop programs to allow groups of undergraduate researchers to engage in
long term research programs in which students have the opportunity to perform
independent investigations as part of collaborative, inter-university
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine ideas from computer
architecture and systems neuroscience with new tools from synthetic biology to
develop yeastons - Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells that can collectively emulate
a feedforward neural network through engineered cell-cell communication
processes and programmable transcriptional logic. Crucially, yeaston networks
will be designed to tolerate the inherent noisiness of single-cell biomolecular
information processing and require no specific higher order spatial organization
or patterning. The project members will build new protein receptors for small
molecule signals and genetic logic systems that will enable single yeastons to
emulate nodes in a feedforward neural network. The input-output behavior of
single yeastons and yeaston networks will be quantitatively characterized,
making it possible to evaluate the potential for scalable computation in yeaston
systems. High-level models from neuroscience will be used to develop design
principles for assembling robust yeaston networks and to derive scaling laws for
yeaston computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.