* 1807768
* A Symmetry-Based Approach to Minimum Energy Pathways
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Venkatraman Gopalan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 419,915.00

Non-technical description: Symmetry is a powerful tool in all of physical
sciences. Distortions, often a collection of atomic trajectories, are important
for understanding a range of kinetic materials processes where atoms move under
external stimuli such as fields, temperature, and stress. Predicting which path
a material would take in undergoing a distortion is important for any
application which involves such atomic motion. However, predicting such paths,
called minimum energy pathways (MEPs), is currently stochastic in nature, and
one can never be sure of the final results. This project aims at developing a
new symmetry-based framework and computational tools through the introduction of
new ideas such as distortion-reversal symmetry and distortion groups; it
significantly improves the speed, numerical accuracy, and the comprehensive
nature of search for such paths. Experimental verification of the theory
predictions is the other aspect of this research. The growing need for
educational training in computation materials research is being addressed with
hands-on workshops in density-functional theory, active mentoring of
undergraduates in research including women and underrepresented groups, and
through active participation in STEM Academy of the Upward Bound Math and
Science Program, as well as Penn State Millennium Scholars Program that attracts
and guides talented STEM students to the undergraduate program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This is an integrated theory-
experimental proposal that develops new symmetry ideas and computational tools
to explore minimum energy pathways (MEPs) for distortions, and more
specifically, for ferroelectric domain switching and domain wall motion. The
MEPs are computed by the Nudged Elastic Band method (NEB); however, it currently
relies on a combination of stochastic process and user intuition to construct
initial paths. The principal investigators are focused on the concept of the
symmetry group of a path and are develop a code (to be made publicly available
when ready) to implement these ideas in Quantum Espresso, an open-source density
functional theory (DFT) software. Three model system classes are picked, namely,
in simple perovskites, in layered oxides, and in multiferroics, to make
predictions. The predicted MEPs with this approach are tested using the
experimental techniques that push in-situ dynamics with 2-5 picometers metrology
in electron microscopy, and ultrafast electron diffraction microscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.