* 1807743
* Vapor Phase Organic Chemistry to Deposit Conjugated Polymer Films on Textiles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Trisha Andrew, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2022
* USD 335,685.00

Professor Trisha L. Andrew at the University of Massachusetts Amherst is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to develop a novel approach to fabricate textile-
based electronic devices. Approaches for blending reactive vapor coating
techniques with traditional textile manufacturing routines, such as sewing,
weaving and knitting are explored. The aim is to transform familiar fabrics and
threads into electronic circuit components by coating the fabric surface with
conjugated organic polymers. Currently available methods for reactive vapor
coating are difficult, and not applicable to optoelectronic devices, such as
solar cells and light-emitting diodes. The project investigates the chemical
processes involved in the vapor deposition of conjugated polymers on fabrics and
the reaction conditions which enable the growth of a solar cell or light-
emitting diode directly on prewoven fabrics, thus creating robust, solar
harvesting textiles. Textiles capable of harvesting solar power can drive
renewable energy into innovative new applications, such as solar-harvesting
window curtains, and sewable solar energy-harvesting patches for outerwear and
camping gear. Minority and underprivileged students from Springfield Technical
Community College are recruited to pursue higher degrees in science, and
engineering and are afforded opportunities for summer research experiences in an
industrially-relevant project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the
range of electronic polymer films that can be created by reactive vapor coating.
The focus is on the chemical processes involved in the vapor deposition of Type
II donor-acceptor heterojunctions, which is the basis of most organic solar
cells (OSCs) and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The specific aims are:
1) to investigate the vapor-phase oxidative polymerization of select
heterocyclic monomers that create hole- or electron-conducting polymer
semiconductors, for example fused thiophenes, benzofurans, cyclopentadienones,
and thienopyrazines; 2) to develop strategies for the preparation of vapor
deposited donor-acceptor composite polymers with tunable band gaps across the
visible wavelength region; and 3) to explore the efficacy of post-deposition
functionalization reactions to achieve structure diversity and transform hole-
conducting polymers into electron-conductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.