* 1807934
* Energy materials based on single-ion conducting polymers mixed with zwitterions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 634,054.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications that will be enabled
by new materials in the energy arena simultaneously require maximal conductivity
of one and only one type of ion. This research on ion conduction and dielectric
constant of polymeric energy materials aims to understand the structure-property
relations in polymers that conduct only one type of ion, such as lithium for
advanced batteries and perhaps larger mobile ions for supercapacitors, sensors,
and mechanical actuators. A way to increase the mobility of the conducting ions
is to add "zwitterions", which are small molecules containing both positive and
negative charges, to single-ion conducting polymers. Although the method of
adding zwitterions to polymeric materials has shown promise, fundamental insight
is needed to design materials for specific functions for future applications. If
successful, the fundamental knowledge generated from this research will result
in the understanding needed to design polymeric materials for a variety of
specific energy applications, including advanced batteries, fuel cells, solar
cells, ionic actuators, supercapacitors, and energy harvesting devices (each of
which require maximizing ion transport). Each of those applications has the
potential to change current technologies and improve the lives of humans across
the globe. This project will also provide advanced scientific training and
exposure to interdisciplinary research to graduate and undergraduate students,
as well as opportunities for outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ionomers are an important class of energy
materials for applications that require single-ion conduction, yet their
structure-property relations are only beginning to be explored. In this
research, three novel types of materials are being made: (1) High molecular
weight polycations with conducting counter-anions that are homopolymers, random
copolymers and diblock copolymers, (2) high molecular weight polyanions with
conducting counter-cations that are homopolymers, random copolymers and diblock
copolymers, and (3) polar small molecule zwitterions that are non-volatile
plasticizers for both types of ionomers to boost ionic conductivity. A key
fundamental question is how mixtures of ionomers and zwitterions can be
optimized by careful molecular design of the two. If successful, this research
will reveal the design rules for the codesign of ionomer and zwitterion. By
fully understanding the dielectric response of these materials (including the
temperature dependence of dielectric constant and ionic conductivity) and using
X-ray scattering to detail their morphology, the effects of systematic
variations in zwitterion structure in such mixtures will be understood in
detail. By exploring the parameter space of ion content, counterion type and
polarity (dielectric constant) of the zwitterion, the potential of this class of
energy materials, in terms of highest possible dielectric constant and ionic
conductivity, will be determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.