* 1807845
* Chemistry of Iron-sulfur clusters in redox signaling
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Eunsuk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2022
* USD 465,988.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Eunsuk Kim from Brown University to elucidate the
chemistry of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters in redox signaling. There are many uses
for Fe-S clusters and cell signaling in the human body and thus, understanding
these compounds is critical to protecting and improving human health. For
example, living organisms exist in an environment filled with oxidants such as
the oxygen in the atmosphere and the ultraviolet light from the Sun. These
oxidants cause cell aging and sometimes diseases such as cancer. Cells rely on
redox signaling molecules to activate the antioxidants that counterbalance the
oxidants. The redox signaling molecules can also activate the immune system that
keeps bacteria and viruses in check. In response to environmental conditions,
bacteria, including human pathogens, use Fe-S proteins to adapt their gene
expression profiles, so that humans do not get sick. Humans also use Fe-S
proteins to sense iron availability and maintain a constant level of iron ions
in the cells, thus preventing anemia and helping brain activity. One of the
currently used type II diabetes drugs targets, mitoNEET, is an Fe-S protein that
regulates the use of energy by cells. The research of Professor Kim is based on
the synthesis of Fe-S clusters in the chemistry laboratory to understand how the
clusters can transmit messages throughout the body. Students in her lab have an
exciting and diverse research experience in chemical synthesis, structural
determinations, spectroscopic techniques and biochemical assays. The knowledge
and skills they acquire in the lab prepare them for productive STEM careers. Dr.
Kim and her students also participate in an outreach program that creates better
educational environments for students whose backgrounds are underrepresented in
STEM careers as well as for women scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common
theme in the regulatory activity of Fe-S proteins appears to be that the Fe-S
clusters respond to specific oxidants such as molecular oxygen, reactive oxygen
species, and nitric oxide. These regulatory proteins often contain the same
[2Fe-2S] or [4Fe-4S] units but respond to different signals; this fact suggests
that nature exploits the chemical versatility of Fe-S clusters to achieve a
diverse set of goals. Dr. Kim investigates the chemistry that underlies the
diverse reactivity of Fe-S clusters though a synthetic modeling approach,
wherein the reactions of Fe-S clusters prepared in her lab with discrete small
molecules allow unambiguous identification of the reaction products. These
studies reveal the reactivity patterns of Fe-S clusters under various reaction
conditions. The specific goals of the research are to establish the reactivity
pattern of Fe-S clusters with nitric oxide (NO) and, consequently, to delineate
how the environment leads to different reaction products. They also seek to
understand the interconversion of [2Fe-2S] and [4Fe-4S] clusters in cofactor
biosynthesis and in the sensing of oxygen by bacteria, and to synthesize model
complexes for the metal cluster in a recently discovered [2Fe-2S] mitoNEET
protein. Through the study of the reactions of these model complexes, they
increase understanding of the activity of mitoNEET in energy metabolism under
different pH and redox conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.