* 1807533
* RAPID: Tipping the Greenhouse C Balance: Hurricane Irma's Role in Increasing the Global Warming Potential in Everglades Ecosystems
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Gregory Starr, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2020
* USD 197,375.00

This RAPID research focuses on investigating the hurricane impacts on the carbon
cycling of Everglades wetland ecosystems. Hurricane Irma resulted in extensive
wind damage and the highest water levels recorded in over 20 years in the
Florida Everglades. The findings and predictions that result from this study
will directly address larger-scale questions about how wetland ecosystem
structure and function and aquatic productivity are altered in the face of
increased disturbance from hurricanes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Wetlands within
Everglades National Park have been seriously impacted by extensive defoliation,
disruption of periphyton mats, large inputs of carbon and nutrients into the
soil and water column, and a reduction in standing dead tissue of marsh
graminoids. Along with reductions in photosynthesis, these changes may alter
anoxic conditions, supporting greater rates of methane production and release.
This effort will focus on reductions in leaf area and how this contributes to
floating mats of dead material that cause anoxic conditions and 'hotspots' for
CH4 production and release of CO2 to the atmosphere. This project includes
additional chamber measurements necessary to interpret 'hotspot' carbon fluxes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research result from an
improved foundational understanding of how wetland systems respond to
hurricanes, and the effort will provide an initial vulnerability assessment of
the effects of extreme high-water levels on Everglades wetlands. This study also
affords research opportunities for junior faculty and technicians from
underrepresented minority groups.