* 1807785
* Quantum from Classical: Approaching the Single-Quantum Strong Coupling Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Alexander Rimberg, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 597,610.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well understood that the
physical behavior of macroscopic objects, like baseballs or planets, is
described very accurately by the laws of classical mechanics developed by Newton
and familiar to many from a course in freshman physics. It is equally well
understood that the behavior of microscopic objects, like atoms and molecules,
is described by the mysterious and counter-intuitive laws of quantum physics.
What is not clear is exactly where the boundary between classical behavior and
quantum behavior lies. In order to investigate this question, this research will
examine the behavior of mechanical systems that would normally behave
classically, with the goal of causing them to instead behave quantum
mechanically. This will be accomplished by using a superconducting device to
cause very strong coupling between light and a mechanical resonator; the light
will be used to both induce and read out the quantum behavior. Investigations of
this sort will better delineate the border between classical and quantum
physics, and help us understand the influence of quantum phenomena on the
everyday world around us. Two graduate students will be supported by this
project, and will be trained in such experimental techniques as microwave
measurement, nanoscale fabrication and low-temperature physics that are widely
used both in academia and in high-technology industry. The PI will also
collaborate with a local high school physics teacher to help enrich the local
curriculum and expose high school students to cutting-edge
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research supported by this grant will investigate the nature of the boundary
between classical and quantum physics by study of systems consisting of a small
mechanical resonator strongly coupled to a superconducting microwave cavity.
Coupling between the two will be mediated by a single Cooper pair transistor (a
superconducting device that transfers Cooper pairs one by one). The presence of
the Cooper pair transistor will allow a very strong, nonlinear coupling between
photons in the cavity and quantum lattice vibrations (phonons) in the mechanical
resonator. This coupling will be so strong, when properly enhanced, that it
should be possible to measure or influence a single phonon with a single photon.
By making use of this strong, nonlinear coupling, it should be possible to use
photons in the microwave cavity to induce highly quantum mechanical states of
motion in the mechanical resonator. A detailed study of this interaction could
lead to a better understanding of the interface between quantum and classical
behavior. Two graduate students will be supported by this project, and will be
trained in such experimental techniques as microwave measurement, nanoscale
fabrication and low-temperature physics that are widely used both in academia
and in high-technology industry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.