* 1807301
* Exploring the Impact of Backbone Flexibility on Folding Mechanisms of Protein Mimetics: Integrating Experiment and Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lillian Chong, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 541,600.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry is funding Dr. Seth Horne and Dr. Lillian Chong from the University of
Pittsburgh to characterize folding mechanisms in artificial, protein-like
molecules. Proteins, the intricate molecular machines that perform the majority
of functions necessary to sustain life, are made up of combinations of molecular
building blocks known as amino acids, arrayed in long chains. Nature provides
twenty different amino acid molecules, and variations in the sequence in which
they are chained together leads proteins to adopt diverse three-dimensional
folded shapes. These folded shapes, in turn, dictate protein function. In recent
years, researchers have shown that a variety of artificial protein backbones,
where some of the natural amino acids are replaced by different molecules of
approximately the same size, can fold to adopt complex protein-like shapes.
Artificial backbones have fundamental value in helping understand how proteins
work and also offer practical benefits over their natural counterparts. Small
proteins currently find widespread use as agents for the diagnosis and treatment
of disease; however, an important limitation to such application is rapid
degradation by enzymes that are abundant in the bloodstream. Changing the
backbone while keeping side chains intact can create a molecule that mimics the
folded shape and biological function of a prototype natural protein but is less
prone to degradation in the body. A crucial component in the design of
artificial backbones with predictable shapes is understanding how they fold.
This project seeks to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which artificial
backbones fold through closely-coupled experiments and computational modeling.
This work includes the development of a new force field---the mathematical model
describing interactions among the natural and artificial amino acids---for the
modeling component of the research. The force field will be disseminated as open
source through the widely-used AMBER molecular dynamics simulation package. This
interdisciplinary, collaborative project is providing a valuable training ground
for graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research, and is
supporting diverse educational and outreach activities, including a summer
undergraduate creative science writing workshop, guest lectures on issues
related to scientific research and science communication, and a three-week
workshop on Python coding at a local high school. The creative science writing
workshop is being designed and offered by the Chemistry, English, and the
History and Philosophy of Science Departments at the University of Pittsburgh,
and provides students with joint science and writing mentorship, culminating in
submission of one or more capstone pieces for publication in news outlets with
broad readership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key recent advance that pushed the
frontier of structural complexity possible in protein mimetics is the finding
that backbone connectivity can be substantially altered without compromising the
fold specified by a natural side-chain sequence. Compared to the growing body of
structural information on such "heterogeneous-backbone" protein mimics,
virtually nothing is known about how backbone alteration impacts dynamics or
folding pathways. Addressing this gap in knowledge has the potential to reveal
new insights into the folding behavior in artificial backbones, aid in the
design of more effective protein mimics, and provide insights into fundamental
issues related to natural protein folding. This project is determining how
protein backbone connectivity influences chain dynamics and folding mechanisms.
The research is guided by the central hypothesis that a combination of
experimental biophysical analysis and atomistic computer simulations can reveal
the complex interplay among backbone composition, folded structure, chain
dynamics, solvation, and folding pathways. The project includes the design and
parameterization of a modified AMBER force field for simulating folding and
molecular recognition events involving artificial protein-like backbones, and
the development of novel protocols for simulating protein folding processes
using the weighted ensemble enhanced sampling strategy. The force field is being
disseminated as part of the AMBER molecular dynamics package. The new simulation
strategies are being used to model the thermodynamic, structural, and kinetics
experiments performed on corresponding protein mimetics synthesized in the PI's
lab. This unique combination of experimental and computational research is
providing insights into the molecular origins of stability differences between
natural proteins and artificial counterparts, folding behavior in artificial-
backbone protein mimetics, and the fundamental role of backbone preorganization
in protein folding. The project is providing research training opportunities for
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in state-of-the-art protein
design and modeling. An undergraduate Creative Science Summer Program at the
University of Pittsburgh is being expanded, enabling students to develop
valuable writing skills in the sciences, to communicate the critical roles that
science plays in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.