* 1807241
* Structure, Dynamics, and Relaxation of Metallic Glasses at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 507,741.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project supports research into glasses and liquids
consisting entirely of metal atoms. In both glasses and liquids, the atoms are
arranged without order - jumbled up, like marbles in jar, not sitting in rows
like eggs in an egg carton. That disorder poses special problems for experiments
measuring how the atoms are arranged and how they move with respect to one
another. This project addresses those problems by studying how nanometer-
diameter probe beams of electrons interact with the atoms as the beam is moved
from place to place, which reveals how they are arranged, or with a fixed beam
position as a function of time, which reveals how the atoms move.

Understanding how the atoms are arranged and how they move will enable
researchers to understand fundamental questions in the materials physics of
glasses, including: (1) How does a liquid cool into a solid glass? Do some parts
of the liquid stop moving first, or do all the atoms slow down at once? If some
parts stop first, what is different about the atomic arrangements in those
regions? (2) How do the atoms in a glass rearrange when they are given just a
little heat energy ? not enough to melt, but enough to move around a bit? This
process is called aging, and it can make a flexible metallic glass brittle, but
it is currently poorly understood at the atomic scale.

Answers to these questions will lay the scientific groundwork for scientists to
design new metallic glass alloys with desirable properties like very high
hardness, high formability into parts, and high corrosion resistance. These new
materials may find applications in areas ranging from medical devices and
implants to nanomachines with tiny gears or other sliding parts. This project
will train scientists and engineers to create new metallic glass materials and
understand how they work at the atomic scale, and it will promote science and
engineering to K-12 students through live demonstrations of imaging single
atoms, the fundamental building blocks of matter, using the power of electron
microscopy.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project will support investigation of the heterogeneous
structure and dynamics of metallic glass and glass-forming liquids at the
nanoscale using coherent electron nanodiffraction in the form of electron
correlation microscopy (ECM) and fluctuation electron microscopy (FEM).
Spatially heterogeneous dynamics in supercooled liquids are central to many
theories of the glass transition, and temporally heterogeneous dynamics in the
glass are central to structural relaxation.

ECM experiments on liquids will yield a dynamic length scale and characteristic
time for liquid-state dynamics over at least two decades in time, and
investigate the glass transition behavior of a recently-discovered near-surface
layer with dynamics at least one order of magnitude faster than the bulk. ECM
experiments on glasses will reveal the size and spatial distribution of the
individual events that create structural relaxation, and FEM experiments will
yield insight into the structure of glasses before and after relaxation. New,
combined ECM/FEM experiments will enable direct, experimental correlations
between nanoscale structure and dynamics. In liquids, the hypothesis that
regions with icosahedral local structure have slower dynamics will be tested,
and in glasses, tools and approaches will be developed with the goal of
measuring the changes in structure associated with single relaxation events.
Together, these results will test existing theories of the glass transition and
relaxation and drive development of new theories. The insights gained on metal
systems with simple bonding have the potential for impact across materials
classes, including oxide, chalcogenide, small molecule, and even polymer
glasses.

The physical insights generated by this project will lay the groundwork for
rational design of metallic glass alloys with high glass forming ability and
desirable properties including high hardness, high elastic limit, and either
high corrosion resistance or biologically benign corrosion products for
applications ranging from biomedical devices and implants to micro- or
nanomechanical machines. This project will support teaching and learning through
ongoing updating of the Electron Microscopy Database website, and it will share
the excitement of science through live demonstrations to K-12 students of
imaging single atoms using high-resolution electron microscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.