* 1807327
* Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase behavior, and Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Cyrus Safinya, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to the University of California at Santa Barbara
(UCSB) is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the nature of forces
between biological protein molecules derived from neurons and how these forces,
in turn, are responsible for creating the variety of different architectures
found in neurons. Each different structure is responsible for a well-defined
cell function including molecular mechanisms that cells use to communicate. The
significance of the project is that the knowledge gained from the experimental
results will allow one to begin the process of clarifying the underlying
molecular causes for the disruption of the cytoskeletal structures inside
neurons, a condition that leads to cell degeneration. This gained knowledge will
allow the larger scientific community to design strategies to prevent cell
deterioration. The research activity is designed to educate and train graduate
and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in modern scientific
and engineering methods and for participants to acquire skills needed for
careers in academe, national laboratories, and industry. Investigators of this
project are involved in a broad range of UCSB Outreach Programs with community
colleges, and colleges and universities outside of Santa Barbara. These include,
the NSF funded Materials Research Science and Engineering Center outreach
program, the Research Internship in Science and Engineering, the Future Leaders
in Advanced Materials Program, the California Alliance for Minority
Participation, and the Research Experience for
Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposal is to develop a fundamental understanding of structures, interactions,
and phase behavior in co-assembling mixtures of cytoskeletal proteins, with
compositions of mixtures spanning the range found in distinct compartments of
neurons. A set of experiments utilizing modern X-ray-Osmotic Pressure techniques
are focused on clarifying the separate roles of selected cytoskeletal associated
proteins in mediating interfilament forces that result in filamentous assemblies
closely related to the higher-order structures found in axons and dendrites. A
separate series of experiments will explore how multivalent counterions, in
particular, those that are found in cellular environments, restructure the in-
vitro assembled cytoskeleton. A significance of the project is that the acquired
data are expected to result in fundamentally new insights relating
intermolecular interactions to heterogeneously assembled structures found in
different parts of neurons. Furthermore, the studies will lead to a
transformative shift in understanding of biological polymer phase behavior in
the presence of multivalent ions, a nascent field of high current interest in
biological physics and biomaterials. The proposed biomaterials and biophysics
program is multidisciplinary and educates and trains graduate and undergraduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers in modern methods required to address
problems at the interface between physics, chemistry, engineering and biology.
The acquired skills prepare the trainees for careers in academe, national
laboratories, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.