* 1807051
* EAR-PF: The interaction between ductile shear zones and the seismogenic crust
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Kali Allison, Allison                 Kali           L
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2020
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kali L. Allison has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at the University of Maryland. The research
project focuses on understanding the development of the structure of an
intercontinental strike-slip fault, such as the San Andreas Fault in California
and the Alpine Fault in New Zealand, and how it affects the earthquakes
occurring on this type of faults. Faults like the San Andreas are highly
localized in the shallow crust, and transition to broad zones of ductile
deformation (shear zones) deeper in the crust. Earthquakes occur on the shallow,
brittle portion, but they interact with the ductile shear zone. Examples of this
interaction include the triggering of aftershocks by viscous flow, the spatio-
temporal distribution of microseismicity, and microstructural data from exhumed
faults. By simulating the development of the large-scale fault structure, and
how it interacts with the earthquake cycle, this project will contribute to
assessing the seismic hazard posed by active strike-slip faults. In particular,
the depth of the transition from brittle to ductile deformation, which imposes a
limit on the possible depth of earthquake rupture, and therefore is one control
on the largest earthquake possible on a fault. The education plan will focus on
the mentoring of an undergraduate student in research using sophisticated
computational tools. Dr. Allison will also participate in public outreach and
education activities at the University of Maryland.

To investigate the interaction between the active faults and their ductile
roots, the PI will develop a comprehensive numerical model that couples the
shallow seismogenic zone and deeper ductile layers over the entire seismic
cycle. The model will map microstructural processes likely to be significant in
the lower crust, such as foliation and grain size reduction, to the scale of
intercontinental faults. The project will also explore the effects of an
inherited structure, such as a pre-existing anisotropic fabric in the lower
crust or upper mantle, on the development of a ductile shear zone, and the
spontaneous development of a fault through plastic deformation. It will also
consider a broad range of time scales, ranging from fractions of a second during
an earthquake rupture to millions of years during the development of an
intercontinental fault. Thus, the project will connect our current understanding
of the physical mechanisms considered, based on laboratory experiments and
analytical work, to geodetic and geologic observations. Observables which will
result from the model include: surface heat flux, the spatio-temporal pattern of
surface deformation, and the average grain size in the shear zone.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.