* 1807551
* SemiSynBio: Cardiac Muscle-Cell-Based Coupled Oscillator Networks for Collective Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Hsueh-Chia Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,125,000.00

Current rate of structured and unstructured data generation and the need for
real-time data analytics requires radically different computational approaches
that can operate in a massively parallel, scalable and energy efficient manner.
In addition, certain classes of computational problems, i.e. combinatorial
optimization problems, which have extensive applications in many real-world
situations such as fault diagnosis, scheduling, resource allocation and even
neural network training are fundamentally difficult to solve using the Boolean
framework, the backbone of our current computational framework. This proposal
aims to explore the potential of coupled oscillator networks made of living
heart muscle cells, or bio-oscillators, as a collective computing fabric for
solving computationally hard problems such as optimization, learning and
inferences. New computing paradigms that can solve computationally hard problems
efficiently using cell-based collective computing fabrics will transform how
synthetic biocomputing circuits are built. In addition, the proposed research
will lead to a better understanding of the electrical communication in muscle
cell networks impacting potential future applications ranging from biorobotics
to understanding and treating muscle disorders. The broader impacts will further
be achieved through interdisciplinary student mentoring and education by the PIs
with complementary backgrounds in Biology, Engineering and Computer Science,
timely dissemination of key research outcomes via published papers and
presentations, as well as proposed outreach activities including a workshop for
middle school girls providing hands-on activities in STEM, mentoring of high
school students, and a weekend long workshop each year for undergraduate and
graduate students, called 'Biology Inspired Computing'. These activities will
contribute towards educating a new cadre of students that will meet the future
need of this emerging field. Attention will be paid to student recruitment from
under-represented groups by participating in such recruitment programs at the
PIs' institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current designs that explore biological
components for biocomputing leverages the information processing units of the
cells, such as DNA, gene or protein circuitries, which are inherently slow
(hours to days speed). Using electrically active cells that could individually
operate in the hundred Hertz regime, and can be connected as networks to perform
massively parallel tasks, can transform biocomputing and lead to novel ways of
energy efficient information processing. The goal of this project is to explore
the potential of electrically coupled oscillator networks made of living heart
muscle cells to form a collective computing fabric for solving computationally
hard problems such as optimization, learning and inference tasks. Heart muscle
cells are electrically active components that can initiate and relay electrical
signals without loss. More interestingly, they spontaneously beat (i.e.
oscillate) at a stable pace, and when coupled with each other through ion
fluxes, they synchronize to a locked, steady frequency. In this study, it is
hypothesized that reconfigurable circuits fabricated using coupled heart muscle
cell oscillators, or bio-oscillators, can be configured into functional
continuous-time dynamical systems to solve computationally hard problems.
Towards this end, state-of-art nanobiofabrication methods will be used to create
bio-oscillators and to bi-directionally couple them through nanoporous ionic
membranes for programmable computing. The design space will be explored for the
geometry and size of the individual bio-oscillators, nanoporous membrane design
for bio-oscillator connectivity through ion fluxes, as well as the network
topology and fabrication feasibility of large bio-oscillator arrays. First, a
pair of coupled bio-oscillators will be studied and computationally efficient
compact models will be developed that accurately reflect the continuous time
dynamics of the coupled bio-oscillators. Then, the design will be scaled up to
larger network of coupled bio-oscillators and a feasibility study would be
conducted for solving a prototypical hard optimization task such as vertex
coloring of graph and graph partitioning. In addition to their inherent
connectivity, scalability and parallel processing ability, the muscle cell-based
approach proposed in this study requires minimal energy mostly in the form of
sugar, and as such will be a low-energy alternative to current energy demanding
traditional computing approaches for solving hard optimization problems using
heuristics based digital computing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.