* 1807143
* RAPID: Degradation and Resilience of Seagrass Ecosystem Structure and Function following a Direct Impact by Hurricane Harvey
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Lauren Yeager, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 199,722.00

Disturbance has long been recognized as a major organizing force in marine
communities with the potential to shape biodiversity. Hurricanes provide a
natural experiment to understand how acute physical disturbances (storm surge
and wind energy) may interact with longer-term changes in environmental
conditions (salinity or turbidity) to alter the structure and function of
ecological communities. As models indicate that hurricane intensity and
precipitation will increase with a warming climate, understanding the response
and recovery of coastal ecosystems is of critical societal importance. Harvey
made landfall as a Category Four hurricane on the Texas coast on August 25,
2017, bringing extreme rainfall as the storm stalled over the middle Texas
coast. The heavy rainfall and freshwater run-off created a low salinity lens
that continues to persist two months later. Seagrass ecosystems may be
particularly vulnerable because they grow on shallow, soft-sediment bottoms (and
thus are easily dislodged or buried) and because seagrasses are sensitive to
changes in salinity and turbidity. The societal implications of seagrass loss
are well recognized: seagrasses provide highly valuable ecosystem services of
large economic value for estuarine and nearshore dependent fisheries, serve as
nursery habitats, and sequester gigatons of carbon on a global scale. Using
measurements of the health and function of the seagrass and of the community for
which it is habitat, the PIs are assessing the impact of the hurricane and of
the persistent freshwater lens. Context is provided by looking at non-impacted
sites and by six prior years of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the overarching question: How do intense physical disturbances in
conjunction with chronic chemophysical perturbations affect loss and recovery of
seagrass community structure and function, including local production, trophic
linkages, and metazoan community diversity? To understand the impacts of
Hurricane Harvey on seagrass ecosystems across the middle Texas coast, the
investigators are (1) documenting losses in physical habitat structure, (2)
teasing apart independent and interactive effects of multiple stressors
associated with storm events on biodiversity and ecosystem function, and (3)
identifying factors that promote resilience following disturbance. A state-wide
seagrass monitoring program with six years of data from areas within Harvey's
path and surrounding seagrass systems will provide invaluable context. The
investigators are measuring seagrass structure, employing a Before-After-
Control-Impact design at sites that experienced severe physical damage and
appropriate reference sites. In situ loggers deployed after the storm track the
evolution of the low salinity event together with seagrass physiological stress
measurements (e.g. chlorophyll fluorescence, pigment loss, reduced growth).
Changes in seagrass habitat function is assessed through measurements of faunal
biodiversity within impacted and reference sites sampled via cores, benthic push
nets, and seine nets. Tethering assays of seagrass blades and common
invertebrate prey enables comparison trophic interactions across sites that vary
in disturbance impact. These data are used to create models of ecosystem
response to an extreme disturbance event and identify factors that best predict
recovery of the physical structure of the habitat and of associated ecosystem
functions.