* 1807415
* Engineering and intracellular delivery of recombinant antibodies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Qiaobing Xu, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 473,176.00

Abstracts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibodies are used as key tools for conducting
biological research and are used as therapeutics for cancer, arthritis, and
other conditions. While antibodies can be engineered to precisely target nearly
any biological process, they cannot access the insides of cells, limiting their
applications. A general strategy for introducing antibodies into cells would
enable many new studies of how cells function and would also enable new
therapies to be developed. This proposal will examine the key factors that will
enable the introduction of antibodies into cells using a drug delivery strategy
based on very small particles called nanoparticles. Because antibodies share a
large number of common features, the specific work of this project is
anticipated to lead directly to very broad applications in understanding how
cells work and, in the long term, how to target processes that lead to disease
initiation and progression. This project will support rigorous research training
for graduate and undergraduate students at Tufts University. In addition, an
expanded summer research program will provide opportunities for introducing area
high school students to key concepts in the modern biotechnology industry, a
rapidly growing portion of the local
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibodies are key tools used in biological
research that can be engineered to precisely interfere with individual signaling
events, but intracellular applications of antibodies remain limited because of
ongoing delivery challenges. This project will establish a general strategy for
delivering antibodies intracellularly with the ultimate goal of targeted
therapies for cancer and other diseases. To realize this approach, specific work
to be conducted in this proposal will enable the elucidation of the molecular
features that dictate effective antibody nanoparticle formulation, intracellular
delivery, and interference with cell signaling. Because antibodies can be
engineered to disrupt virtually any process of interest, this project will
facilitate the establishment of general strategies for interfering with
intracellular processes without the need for genetically modifying target cells.
Robust strategies for intracellular antibody delivery have the potential to
enable rapid exploration of therapeutic targets in a variety of diseases,
including those targets traditionally viewed as "undruggable". The proposed work
will train undergraduate, and graduate students in conducting rigorous
scientific research in the areas of protein engineering and nanobiotechnology.
In addition, expanding an existing summer research program to include a three-
week Tufts Summer Camp for Protein Engineering and Nanomedicine (TUSC-PEN) will
provide opportunities for introducing area high school students to key concepts
in crucially important areas of the modern biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.