* 1807326
* Determining the role of dynamics in allosteric communication and function for BLVRB
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Elan Eisenmesser, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Elan Eisenmesser from the University of Colorado Denver
to investigate how motions within an enzyme communicate to control enzyme
function. With the development of technological methods capable of identifying
the positions of all the atoms in molecules over the last two decades, it has
become increasingly clear that macromolecules, and particularly enzymes, are
reliant on a range of motions for their functions. However, how these motions
are communicated across an enzyme in order to control their functions is less
understood. Utilizing newly developed techniques that bridge molecular biology
and nuclear magnetic resonance, graduate and undergraduate students will reveal
how motions on multiple timescales communicate within a critical biological
enzyme, called Bilirubin Reductase B, and whether there is cross-talk between
movements on different timescales. Such studies could impact efforts to engineer
enzymes by considering both their structure and intrinsic motions. Dr.
Eisenmesser also plans to introduce these studies to minority undergraduates in
order to train students in molecular biology and state-of-the-art biophysical
techniques that probe the atomic level details of both structure and
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is aimed at elucidating how
networks of coupled motions regulate active site dynamics and how these in turn
modulate catalytic turnover. Dynamic communication is now well understood to
play critical roles in enzyme function and many recent studies have shown that
motions are only partially correlated. Thus, identifying the molecular basis of
these partial couplings and specifically modulating distal dynamics in order to
control enzyme function will significantly impact efforts for enzyme
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.