* 1807317
* Single Nanoparticle SPR Imaging Measurements of Bioaffinity Uptake and Release in Polymer and DNA-Cross-linked Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Robert Corn, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 12/31/2021
* USD 462,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Corn at the University of California, Irvine, is
developing and applying new optical techniques that can detect, characterize and
monitor in real time the size and composition of single polymer nanoparticles.
Understanding how porous polymer nanoparticles uptake, transport, and then
release biologically active molecules such as nucleic acids and proteins are
fundamentally important and interesting. Professor Corn develops better chemical
methods to improve the uniformity, reliability, and stability of
characterization of these nanoparticles. Professor Corn's research outcome could
lead to technological advances in the fields of sensor development, drug
delivery, and disease diagnostics. Professor Corn's project provides
participating students with research experience in a diverse set of disciplines:
polymer materials and characterization, nanomaterials, laser microscopy,
biosensors and biotechnology. Development of young scientists with such a wide
range of skills is essential for both industry and academia to successfully
address future multi-disciplinary technological challenges. In addition to
research, this grant supports education and outreach programs that attract high
school students from underfunded schools and middle school female students
interested in science to the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single
nanoparticle near-infrared surface plasmon resonance imaging (SPRI) microscopy
is developed as a novel refractive index-based method to quantify the
bioaffinity uptake and release of various biomolecules into individual porous
polymeric nanoparticles. SPRI is an established refractive index-based technique
for monitoring molecular and nanoparticle adsorption onto gold thin films. The
application of SPRI microscopy is expanded here to single nanoparticle
measurements that can monitor the uptake and release of biomolecules (both
single nanoparticle averages and distribution measurements) in real time by
measuring changes in the single nanoparticle refractive index that occur due to
changes in composition. A variety of modified N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm)
hydrogel nanoparticles that can uptake and release different proteins, lectins,
nucleic acids, peptides, and pharmaceuticals are synthesized and studied. Three
specific research efforts include: (i) the synthesis and characterization of
NIPAm hydrogel nanoparticles that incorporate click chemistry sites to attach
sugars, peptides, or DNA for the bioaffinity uptake and release of therapeutics,
proteins, and RNA, (ii) the synthesis and characterization of DNA-cross-linked
NIPAm (N-isopropylacrylamide)hydrogel nanoparticles that incorporate DNA
aptamers and DNAzymes, and (iii) single-nanoparticle measurements of pH and
temperature-induced morphological changes in NIPAm hydrogel nanoparticles that
release various cargo (e.g., peptides, enzymes, DNA, and gold
nanoparticles).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.