* 1807689
* Synthetic Lipid Switches for Controlling Liposome Assembly and Release
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Michael Best, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 539,999.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Liposomes represent promising molecular carriers
for enhancing the delivery of therapeutic agents due to their ability to
encapsulate a wide range of cargo and deliver these contents to cells in a
manner that limits side effects. While great advancements have been made to
improve delivery properties using liposomes, several challenges remain. In
particular, the ability to control the location and time of the release of
encapsulated contents has been a longstanding obstacle. In this project, a novel
paradigm for controlled release from liposomes is being pursued by which the
discharge of cargo is caused by specific biological molecules that are
overexpressed in and around diseased cells. Toward this end, designer liposomes
composed of synthetic lipids will be developed that undergo changes in assembly
properties in the presence of biological species to cause the release of
contents. This project will result in fundamental scientific progress by
advancing the ability to manipulate the assembly properties of liposomes and to
program changes in these properties that occur in response to different chemical
and biological conditions. This work will also advance national health as it
will culminate in new technology aimed at improving the therapeutic properties
of liposomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Liposomes exhibit
many favorable attributes as they are biocompatible nanocarriers that can
encapsulate both hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecular cargo. As such, there has
been significant interest in developing designer liposomes by which their self-
assembly properties can be controlled. Of particular interest is the ability to
trigger the release of encapsulated contents when in the presence of different
stimuli. In this project, novel strategies are proposed for triggering release
from liposomes driven by binding interactions with chemical species. Toward this
end, switchable lipids will be developed that are designed to undergo
conformational changes that destabilize membrane properties and trigger content
release upon the formation of binding interactions with target molecules. This
research will investigate how the design of synthetic lipid analogs can be used
to modulate the supramolecular properties of liposomes. In particular,
switchable lipid analogs will be developed that contain molecular recognition
groups embedded within their structures for the binding of target molecules.
These lipids are designed such that they will initially form stable membrane
bilayers. However, upon the formation of host-guest binding interactions with
target molecules, these lipids are envisaged to undergo conformational changes
that destabilize the liposome membrane, thereby altering lipid packing and self-
assembly properties, and triggering the release of contents. The research
performed during this project will entail comprehensive efforts for the design,
synthesis and assessment of these switchable lipids to evaluate and optimize
controlled release properties. Initial studies will be focused on understanding
the fundamental release properties of liposomes containing these lipids.
Subsequently, the ability of these designer liposomes to infiltrate cells and
deliver encapsulated cargo with different properties will be evaluated. In this
way, the proposed studies provide innovative approaches for modulating the self-
assembly properties of lipid-based nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.