* 1807199
* International Society for Atmospheric Research Using Remotely-Piloted Aircraft (ISARRA) Meeting Support; Boulder, Colorado; July 9-12, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Gijs de Boer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 35,050.00

The 2018 conference of the International Society for Atmospheric Research using
Remotely piloted Aircraft (ISARRA) will be held during July 9-12, 2018 in
Boulder, Colorado. This meeting has provided a platform for the presentation of
scientific results resulting from the use of unmanned aircraft in atmospheric
science. Additionally, ISARRA has served as a community forum for advancing
technology, sampling techniques, flight permissions, and general knowledge on
this topic. The meeting will feature several days of science talks, poster
sessions, industry events and, perhaps most importantly, ample time for
discussion of current frontiers in this rapidly evolving field. In addition to
the meeting, a 1-week flight period is planned for researchers from around the
world to participate in the collection of scientific data in the San Luis Valley
of Colorado. This work will entail a mini-field campaign in which a variety of
cutting edge tools are deployed to advance our understanding of boundary layer
phenomena in a high-altitude mountain valley. The project will support
participation of early-career and underrepresented scientists in both the
conference and flight week. Additionally, support to deploy several University
of Colorado researchers to the flight week to provide local knowledge and
operating capabilities is requested.

Intellectual Merit: The ISARRA meeting and the associated flight week have
become important platforms for advancement of the use of unmanned aircraft in
atmospheric science. Discussions surrounding best practices, the latest
instrumentation, improved sampling techniques, airspace access, and critically
the scientific results from such activities have helped to accelerate the use of
these systems in developing our understanding of the Earth's atmosphere.
Additionally, the ability of the society to act as a platform through which to
engage industry, legislators and funding bodies through a common voice has
helped to draw attention to the use of these systems. The flight week helps to
bring all of these discussions and groups together into a "real-world"
environment where the group ultimately truly evaluate what works and what
doesn't. The experience of conducting such trials benefits atmospheric science
by elevating our knowledge of strengths and weaknesses of individual sampling
techniques, instruments and operational modes. Engaging early-career and under-
represented scientists in these activities and in this community is a critical
step towards continuing the advancement of unmanned aircraft deployment in the
atmospheric sciences.

Broader Impacts: In addition to the above-discussed knowledge gained through the
ISARRA conference and associated flight week, the ISARRA community will offer
significant opportunities for outreach and societal benefits. First, this
project will help support participation of the next generation of atmospheric
scientists using unmanned aircraft in their research. Such advancement is
critical, particularly at a time when this area of research is growing at a very
rapid pace and the demand for such expertise is very high. Secondly, the project
will work with a variety of media and communications teams at the institutions
covered by the organizing committee to help spread the word about the benefits
of using unmanned aircraft (a.k.a. drones) in atmospheric research. Finally, the
discussions and progress resulting from this gathering are likely to accelerate
progress in the use of these systems in key areas of atmospheric science which
are critically important to society. The example of use of UAS to advance
hurricane forecasts is used, though additional examples, including ones related
to understanding Arctic climate and clouds and their impact on the reduction of
sea ice, exist.