* 1807342
* High Mobility Hole Extraction Materials for Colloidal Quantum Dot Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Susanna Thon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Generating inexpensive electricity from sunlight could
transform the way society meets its energy needs. Newer materials for solar
cells, such as those based on liquid paints, are inexpensive and can be coated
on a variety of surfaces; however, their power output is low compared to heavier
conventional technology. The research team seeks to increase the power output of
next-generation solar cells by developing new materials that more efficiently
conduct electricity. The project has the potential to address broad societal
goals in the development of more efficient renewable energy technologies, as
alternatives to costly, polluting and unsustainable fossil fuels, by improving
the power conversion efficiency of lightweight, cheap, and flexible solar
materials. Research activities are integrated with a comprehensive education and
outreach plan designed to introduce elementary students, undergraduates, and
graduate students to the fields of nanotechnology and sustainable engineering.
Research team members serve as mentors for the STEM Achievement in Baltimore
Elementary Schools (SABES) program, regularly visiting elementary school
classrooms in high-minority, low-income neighborhoods to engage students and
teachers in hands-on engineering enrichment projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The objective of this project is to
build new high mobility hole extraction materials for PbS colloidal quantum dot
(CQD) solar cells, addressing the efficiency-limiting factor in these devices.
The materials routes being explored include new small organic molecule ligands,
charge transfer dopants, PbSe-based CQD thin films, and stoichiometry-based
doping control. We employ chemical synthesis, solution-processed device
fabrication, and electrical and optical characterization. The three main goals
of the project are to (1) solve the efficiency-limiting problem of low hole
mobility in the hole extraction layer of PbS CQD solar cells using new doping
strategies; (2) build proof-of-principle PbS CQD-based single- and multi-
junction solar cells using the new hole extraction materials; and (3) answer
fundamental questions about doping mechanisms and charge transport in
nanoparticle-based thin film materials. This work aims to increase the
efficiency of CQD solar cells so that they become competitive with conventional
photovoltaic technology, representing a new flexible route for solar energy
harvesting. The novel materials have the potential to be used in multijunction
solar cells, transparent photovoltaics, flexible and wearable energy harvesting
devices, and other photonic and optoelectronic technologies such as light
emitting diodes and photosensors. The insights gained serve as foundations for
understanding nanoscale charge transport in a wider range of structured
materials systems. Research activities are integrated with an education plan
that involves the development of new interdisciplinary undergraduate and
graduate courses, focused on current research areas in renewable energy and
nanomaterials, as well as STEM enrichment in public elementary schools in
Baltimore City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.