* 1807566
* A Hybrid Photonics Device for Efficient Quantum Entanglement
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 07/31/2022
* USD 401,541.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers, which utilize quantum
mechanics, will be able to solve problems that are not tractable on today's
types of computers. An example relevant to national security is the
factorization of large numbers into component prime numbers. This
computationally hard task underlies modern encryption protocols used for secure
communication. An example relevant to materials discovery is quantum simulation.
Because interactions between atoms within a material are quantum mechanical, an
efficient materials simulator must also have quantum mechanical features. A
critical resource for quantum computers is quantum entanglement. In this
project, we will design, implement, and test integrated quantum circuits in
diamond with the aim to significantly increase quantum entanglement generation
rates. Specifically, we aim to increase this rate by integrating three
specialized layers: a quantum layer based on light-emitting defects in diamond,
a photonic layer which routes photons on the surface of the diamond chip, and a
detector layer which detects the single photons. These on-chip integrated
photonic circuits would then be the processor chip for a future quantum computer
or a node of a quantum network. Faster entanglement rates will impact our
ability to scale up the number of quantum bits used for calculations. As an
integrable part of this research, graduate students and undergraduate students
will be trained in nanofabrication, integrated photonics, and quantum
technologies, skill areas currently in high demand in industry and government
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Quantum entanglement, a
fundamental resource for quantum information processing, can theoretically be
efficiently heralded via photon measurement. Heralded schemes have some striking
characteristics. First, qubits do not need to be moved. Second, qubits do not
need to interact with each other. This latter condition limits the number of
decoherence channels that may be present, boosting the prospects for
scalability. Finally, photon-mediated heralded entanglement is uniquely suited
to (and perhaps can only be realized by) on-chip integrated photonics. This
proposal seeks to realize an on-chip integrated photonics entanglement
generator. The integrated photonics entanglement generator is based on a layered
device of different materials for integrated functionality: (1) quantum defects
in diamond, (2) a gallium phosphide photonics layer, and (3) waveguide-
integrated NbN superconducting single detectors. The main goal of integration is
to increase the entanglement generation rate to enable scaling to large (&gt;2)
qubit networks. Estimates that neglect the photon purity in the integrated
device indicate kHz rates are possible, five orders of magnitude greater than
free space implementations. However, we emphasize that at the current state of
integrated quantum photonics, it will be a major achievement to simply
outperform free space implementations in a scalable platform. Device and system-
level evaluation will be performed to give a roadmap toward efficient systems.
The demonstration of efficient generation of measurement-based entanglement is
expected to propel integrated photonics into viability as a universal quantum
computation platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.