* 1807398
* Logic-based Degradation of Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Cole DeForest, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,641.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Many therapeutic drugs have been successfully developed
to treat and cure disease, allowing us to live happier and healthier lives. For
these drugs to work as designed, they must reach a specific part of the body
with a precise dosage; just as a threshold of medicine is required for
successful treatment, drugs that accumulate at unintended bodily locations can
have dangerous side effects. To maximize therapeutic efficacy while minimizing
harmful side effects, new strategies are needed to selectively target delivery
of medications to diseased tissue. The proposed research seeks to establish a
generalizable approach to create drug-carrying biomaterials that degrade in
response to user-specified combinations of external stimuli. By programming
materials to dissolve and release their therapeutic cargo in response to
disease-presented cues, this strategy is expected to yield a new class of
"smart" drug-delivery platforms with unprecedented versatility. This research
will impact education by training multidisciplinary students in polymer
chemistry, material science, engineering, and biology through enhanced
laboratory and classroom-based courses. Outreach programs centered on
biomaterial development and the everyday uses for photochemistry will be created
and deployed to introduce and attract under-represented groups to polymer
science, sparking diverse student interest and lifelong careers in science,
technology, engineering, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
transport of drug- and cell-based therapeutics to diseased sites represents a
major barrier to clinical translation. Targeted delivery can be mediated through
degradable polymer-based vehicles that utilize disease biomarkers to trigger
payload release. The proposed research seeks to establish a modular chemical
framework for imparting hydrogel biomaterials with precise degradative
responsiveness to multiple environmental cues following user-programmable
Boolean logic. By specifying the molecular architecture and connectivity of
orthogonal stimuli-labile moieties within material crosslinkers, this project
seeks to gain unprecedented specificity over polymer gel dissolution and
therapeutic delivery. To illustrate this methodology, seventeen distinct
stimuli-responsive materials will be synthesized that collectively yield all
possible YES/OR/AND logical outputs from input combinations involving enzyme,
reductant, and light. Through systematic studies of crosslinker degradation in
response to environmental signals, structure-property relationships of these
dynamic material systems as well as a complete understanding of how molecular-
scale alterations translate into macroscopic response will be established. The
proposed strategies, which will enable unmatched customizability of polymer
stimuli-responsiveness, will find great utility throughout several diverse
fields including drug delivery, diagnostics, and regenerative medicine. Research
efforts will be complemented by the creation of outreach programs centered on
photochemistry and biomaterial development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.