* 1807863
* Chain Growth Polycondensation via Substituent Effects for the Synthesis of Functional Rigid Rod Polymer Brushes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Stephen Boyes, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,000.00

The modification of surfaces with polymers is widely used in the development of
new technologies or the improvement of existing technologies, ranging from
sensors to smart coatings. Coating by physically adsorbing polymers on surfaces
is a more versatile approach, but it suffers from the issue of leaching.
Chemically attaching polymers on surfaces provides more robust and longer
lasting coatings, but current synthetic techniques limit the molecular
structures and architectures of polymers that can be attached. To tackle this
problem, Professors Boyes and Vyas of the Colorado School of Mines are
developing a new surface-initiated polymerization technique for "growing"
polymers of desired architectures and properties directly from a variety of
different surfaces. A potential application of this synthetic methodology is the
preparation of novel membranes for the removal of salt from seawater. Access to
clean drinking water is a critical problem facing many people across the globe
and the removal of salt from seawater or brackish water has become an important
technique for providing drinking water to regions that suffer from limited
sources of fresh water. This project also provides research opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, outreach programs to local
high schools are established to educate and stimulate the next generation of
scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research
team focuses on developing a new surface-initiated polymerization technique
based on the chain growth polycondensation via substituent effects mechanism
(SECGP) for preparing aromatic polymer brushes with well-defined structures and
properties. The specific objectives of the project are: 1) to design and
synthesize N-substituted aminobenzoate monomers with a variety of ester leaving
groups, amino groups, and substituents on the aromatic ring; 2) to investigate
the effects of monomer structures and polymerization conditions on reaction
kinetics and properties (such as molecular weight and solubility) of the
resulting aromatic polyamides; 3) to perform density functional theory (DFT)
calculations to elucidate the steric and electronic effects of the monomer
structures on the polymerization mechanism and kinetics; 4) to conduct surface
initiated SECGP on silica substrates, investigate the effect of surface
properties on the formation of aromatic polymer brushes (including block
copolymer brushes), and probe the structure-property relationships of these new
polymer brushes; and 5) to prepare aromatic polyamide brushes on ceramic
membranes and test their performance in water desalination. A potential
application is in reverse osmosis membranes, where these new brushes can
overcome issues with coating instability, biofouling, and reduced flux capacity
that limit current polymer membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.