* 1807272
* NSF-BSF:  Synthesis and Analysis of Novel Microresonator Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Curtis Menyuk, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2023
* USD 367,730.00

Frequency comb sources are frequency rulers that make it possible to measure
frequencies with phenomenal accuracy - equivalent to measuring a shift in the
distance between the Earth and the Sun of 100 times the width of an atom.
Frequency combs are used in basic physics experiments, for chemical,
environmental, and medical sensing, for time and frequency transfer, and in
radar systems. The first frequency combs were made from bulky laser systems, and
the discovery in the past decade that microresonators (mm-size optical devices)
can produce frequency combs has led to an outpouring of scientific interest.
However, almost all frequency combs use short optical pulses called solitons.
Solitons in microresonators are hard to obtain, waste much of the optical pump
power that is used to generate them, and are thermally unstable. We will study
novel waveforms that have the potential to solve these problems. In our
theoretical studies, we will use a unique set of computational tools that we
developed and that to our knowledge no other research group has at present.
These tools make it possible to rapidly determine how these waveforms can be
obtained and to determine their robustness in the presence of noise and thermal
effects. That allows us to move away from the "cut-and-try" experimental work
that has mostly limited studies to date to single solitons. The computational
tools will be made generally available via the Web. We expect that they will be
useful in other systems, including economic and biological systems, as well as
other optical systems. To carry out this theoretical work and test these ideas
experimentally, we have assembled a team that includes scientists at the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem, Purdue University, and the French Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique. UMBC is a minority-serving institution with a reputation for
diversity and educational innovation, and we anticipate involving undergraduate
as well as graduate students in this research. All our students will benefit
from the strong theoretical-experimental collaboration and the opportunity to
interact with students and faculty from different
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal technical goal of this research is
to study the potential of waveforms other than single solitons for creating
frequency combs in microresonators. We will focus on cnoidal waves and soliton
molecules. Preliminary work indicates that cnoidal waves have a large region of
stability, can be simply accessed by raising the pump power, are robust, and can
have large bandwidths. Cnoidal waves and dark soliton molecules can be obtained
in the normal dispersion regime, in contrast to single (bright) solitons, which
increases the number of material systems in which frequency combs can be
obtained. To achieve this goal, we will use a set of computational tools, based
on dynamical systems theory and statistical mechanics, that we have developed
and will continue to develop. These tools will allow us to determine where in
the system parameter space the alternative waveforms are accessible, stable, and
robust in the presence of noise. A secondary goal of this research is to
demonstrate the utility of these theoretical tools and make them widely
available to the research community. Having identified where in the parameter
space stable waveforms exists, we will work with our experimental collaborators
at the CNRS and Purdue to test and refine the theoretical predictions, taking
advantage of their existing experimental infrastructure, which is based on
crystalline resonators and silicon-nitride resonators, respectively. We
anticipate an iterative process in which the theoretical work leads to new
experiments, and the experiments guide the direction of the theoretical
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.