* 1807116
* Layered Inorganic Solids as Building Blocks for Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Thomas Mallouk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 10/31/2019
* USD 372,768.00

DMR-1807116: Layered Inorganic Solids as Building Blocks for Functional
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2004 the discovery of graphene, monolayer sheets
of graphite building blocks, alerted the scientific community that two-
dimensional (2D) materials can have radically different properties from
chemically similar solids in which the bonding is three-dimensional. 2D
materials have emerging applications in microelectronics, catalysis,
lubrication, desalination of salt water, and many other areas. One of the
challenges in the field is to develop gentle chemistry that can separate 2D
sheets from each other without damaging them, and connect them to other
materials through chemical bonds. This project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
studies the fundamentals of these separation processes by measuring the energy
of interactions between molecules, ions, and sheets of the major families of 2D
materials: both organic and inorganic in nature. The researchers also
investigate chemical reactions that can transform one kind of 2D material into
another. Education and outreach activities are part of the project by involving
high school students and teachers in summer research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
investigates the reaction chemistry of two-dimensionally bonded materials. The
research follows on the unexpected discovery of strong covalent interactions
between late transition metal hydroxides and early transition metal oxide
nanosheets. The principle investigator and his research group explore this
effect with bi- and trimetallic complexes of late transition metals aiming to
understand trends in chemical bonding that are relevant to interfacial materials
properties such as adhesion, electronic contacts, and electrochemical energy
storage. Isothermal titration calorimetry is used to measure the enthalpy and
entropy of cluster adsorption from solution and to gain a deeper understanding
of the intercalation, exfoliation, and restacking reactions of layered oxides
and van der Waals solids (graphite, boron nitride, and layered metal
chalcogenides). New layered oxysulfide and chalcogenide nanosheets are
synthesized in order to explore the interactions of chalcophilic elements with
their surfaces. Another aspect of the project is to develop selective surface
chemistry for nanosheets derived from van der Waals solids, based on preliminary
results obtained with coordinatively unsaturated organometallic complexes.
Research on this project is integrated with mentoring and outreach activities
that benefit students at the K-12 and undergraduate levels and that provide
summer research experiences for high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.