* 1807348
* CCSS: Communicating with Implanted Energy Harvesting Devices under Temperature Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Sennur Ulukus, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Energy harvesting is a paradigm shift for several important reasons: reducing
the use of conventional energy and thus benefiting the environment; enabling
energy self-sufficient, energy self-sustaining, perpetual operation; and
furnishing wireless devices with true mobility by cutting the cord for
recharging. Another important aspect of energy harvesting that we particularly
highlight in this project is that it enables technological applications which
are otherwise impossible or extremely impractical with a conventional battery-
powered operation. The most prominent examples of such applications are in-body
and on-body medical and wellness applications, where devices are either
implanted in the human body or mounted closely on the human body. Many of such
life-critical applications are simply impossible or extremely difficult to
deploy without energy harvesting devices. This project focuses on communication
and computation aspects of such devices. When devices are implanted in or placed
on the human body, a new physical phenomenon becomes critical: temperature
increases and heating of the surrounding tissues due to transmission and
processing of data. This project addresses this important issue, and develops
communication and computation schemes that optimize the operation of the device
while keeping the temperature within safe limits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, we combine bio-heat models that relate power with temperature,
communication-theoretic models that relate power with throughput, and energy
harvesting constraints that relate power used with energy harvested, to
construct an optimization framework to determine the optimum operating
principles for such systems. The goal of this framework is to determine optimum
power control mechanisms, optimum energy harvesting and energy transfer schemes,
and optimum data processing methods (sampling, distributed compression, coding,
decoding) such that the overall system operates most efficiently for its data
processing and data transmission goals, while ensuring that the temperature
remains within pre-specified safe limits. In this project, we consider four
major research directions: 1) Understanding spatial distribution of heat and
developing methods to guarantee location- and tissue-specific temperature
guarantees. 2) Determining optimum operating principles for multiple
simultaneously active devices; developing joint power control mechanisms;
designing cooperation schemes; developing distributed source coding methods. 3)
Developing optimum processing mechanisms to determine the optimum on and off
times for circuits; optimum compression, encoding and decoding power
allocations; and optimum energy harvesting amounts. 4) Determining optimum
energy transfer rates for remote wireless charging of these devices, and optimum
energy and information transfer schemes, under temperature
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.