* 1807270
* Symplectic Topology of Weinstein Manifolds and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yakov Eliashberg, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2022
* USD 407,269.00

Symplectic and contact topology emerged in attempt to answer qualitative
problems of Classical Mechanics and Optics. Since its inception in 1980s there
were discovered many new connections of symplectic topology with other areas of
Mathematics and Physics. The primary techniques used in the subject go back to
Gromov's theory of holomorphic curves in symplectic manifolds and its many
ramifications, such as Floer homology, Fukaya categories and Symplectic Field
Theory. However, there remains a large class of open problems where holomorphic
curve techniques seems not to be sufficient for proving expected results. The
current project attempts to develop alternative techniques, or in case they do
not exist to develop new methods of construction which could show that
everything which is not prohibited by holomorphic curve techniques can indeed
happen. In particular, it provides a reformulation of symplectic topology of
affine symplectic manifolds as differential topology of singular spaces with a
certain well defined list of singularities. This approach can bring new tools
from differential to symplectic topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weinstein
symplectic manifolds recently moved to the forefront of the development of
symplectic and contact topology. Building on recent developments, both on the
rigid and flexible side of symplectic topology of Weinstein manifolds, the
project is designed to advance several central problems of the theory, such as
symplectic topology of Lagrangian submanifolds. Among the main objectives of the
project are: exploration of techniques for simplification of singularities of
Lagrangian skeleta of Weinstein manifolds, and in particular for proving
exploration of methods for attacking the regularity conjecture for exact
Lagrangian submanifolds of Weinstein manifolds; exploration of a new approach to
singularity theory: h-principle without pre-conditions; further exploration of
flexibility phenomena for Weinstein manifolds and their Lagrangian submanifolds;
and further development of Symplectic Field Theory. The project is designed to
bridge the gap between the negative results establishing limits for possible
symplectic constructions, and positive results involving the advanced symplectic
constructions on the frontier of possibilities. The new methods developed for
the arborealization project may find applications elsewhere in singularity
theory. The work on the project will involve several graduate students and
postdocs and there will be written a graduate student level book devoted to new
advances in symplectic flexibility. The obtained results and developed methods
may find applications in other areas of mathematics and theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.