* 1807974
* Integrated Power Grid and Microgrids with Massively Distributed Intelligent Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Zhixin Miao, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2023
* USD 397,273.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Improving the reliability of the electric power grid is one
of the critical challenges facing the nation. To meet this challenge, we believe
that the Intelligent Sensors and Analyzers advanced technology proposed here can
begin to transform our power grid and its affiliated microgrids to a Next-
Generation-Smart-Grid. It could also enhance our power and energy sustainability
and restorability in severely adverse weather conditions. It has the potential
of starting a new revolution in creating intelligent Power Grid and Microgrids
by extending todays microchip technology to integrated multi-sensing and
information processing in a single compact device -- specialized for Power and
Energy arena. Advanced sensor models integrated with Power Grid and Microgrids
models will be developed for achieving the true potential of the intelligent
sensors and analyzers (proposed herein) that would be deployable on a massive
scale. The project will also promote teaching, training and learning in this key
technology area. Specifically, the sensors, process-flow, and specialized
microchip design activity of the project will be imported into the undergraduate
senior-design projects. The project will also significantly benefit several
graduate courses including a new course on Smart Power Grids, and existing
courses on Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems II, and System on a Chip. The
advances will be shared with the power and energy industry, government, and
academia through a dedicated web site and, of course, through scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As stated above, the goal of this project is
to improve the reliability and restoration capability of wide area Power Grid as
well as its affiliated Microgrids thereby reducing power outages and their
cascade effects. Our solution is to embed novel intelligent sensors with
distributed processing tools to provide real time monitoring and control of
"Power Grid as well as its affiliated Microgrids" from transmission and
distribution levels. The problems associated with the present lack of a real
time intelligent infrastructure to monitor and control Power Grids -- on a
massively distributed basis, have resulted in numerous blackouts and other
serious inefficiencies. Our sensors/analyzers will provide accurate information
to protective relays, enable intelligent islanding, a means by which the
modeling of loads can be based upon accurate measured data rather than estimated
data, for load shedding plans. The unique sensor architecture, fabrication, and
signal processing issues will be addressed through an advanced Heterogeneous
Sensor System on a Chip. As just stated, included will be Microgrids, in which
the focus will be on islanding and restoration, sensors, estimation of key
variables (frequency, phase and amplitude -- for harmonics as well when
desired), defect and fault tolerance, thereby reliability improvement.
Microgrids incorporate renewable energy sources, among others. System on a Chip
based sensors can provide effective, real-time monitoring and control that is
self-healing, for such sources. In short, the main objectives are the following:
(1) Multi-Sensor (including Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems) design, fab, and
test, (2) Intelligence: analog and digital sections design, fab, test (for
"Power Grid and Microgrids"), (3) Power Grid and Microgrids objectives: Fault
detection, islanding, active &amp; reactive power estimation, theoretical models
&amp; simulations, (4) Final Heterogeneous System on a Chip design, fabrication,
tests; Also, tests in our Smart Grid Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.