* 1807269
* OP: Super-resolution imaging of plasmon-molecule interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Katherine Willets, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2023
* USD 439,354.00

Optical microscopes, such as those found in almost every high school to look at
cells, have an inherent limit to their spatial resolution. They cannot resolve
two objects that are closer to each other than the wavelength of light, which
for visible colors is about 500 nm, or about 1/100 the diameter of a human hair.
Recently super-resolution microscopes have been developed that can resolve
individual molecules that are only 10 nm apart. Super-resolution microscopy has
had tremendous success when imaging fluorescent dyes near other molecules, such
as proteins, but it has trouble when the molecule is located near a metal
nanostructure. The problem arises when the molecule interacts with the loosely
held electrons in the metal, which blurs its location. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Willets at Temple University is studying the interaction of
fluorescent molecules with metal nanoparticles. Professor Willets and her
students are developing protocols that can better pinpoint the location of the
fluorescent molecule. The project could pave the way to producing higher
fidelity super-resolution images, which may help to advance nanotechnologies for
biosensing, nanomedicine, and solar energy conversion. The work also provides
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, furthering the
development of the Nation's scientific workforce. In addition, the Willets lab
is actively engaged with the 9th grade science classes at Freire Charter School
in downtown Philadelphia, helping the students to foster an appreciation for
scientific exploration and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working alongside her
students, Professor Willets is functionalizing gold nanorods and nanospheres at
specific sites with fluorescently-labeled DNA. A combination of super-resolution
imaging and polarization-resolved microscopy is then used to track how the
position and orientation of the fluorescent molecules impacts the localization
precision of the fluorescent molecule. In super-resolution imaging, single
fluorescent molecules are localized by fitting their diffraction-limited
emission to a model function, such as a two-dimensional Gaussian, to localize
their spatial position with better than 10 nm precision. However, coupling
between the fluorescent emitter and the plasmon modes of the nanostructure
impacts the localization accuracy, resulting in the calculated position of the
fluorescent molecule being shifted from its true position. Theoretical modeling
provides insight into how the position and orientation of a single molecule
relative to the plasmonic nanostructure affects the localization error. By
creating well-defined hybrid organic-plasmonic nanoparticles, the team is
developing new analysis tools to extract information hidden in the fluorescence
images to improve agreement between the super-resolved images and the actual
nanostructure properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.