* 1807774
* RAPID: The Diablo Wind and Extreme Fire Behavior during the 2017 Wine Country Fires
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Sen Chiao, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2020
* USD 121,906.00

This RAPID project represents an ambitious effort to advance our understanding
of Diablo wind dynamics and their impact on extreme fire behavior during the
2017 wine country fires by collecting field observations to help guide WRF-SFIRE
modeling of the events. The key outcomes from this project are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) an
enhanced climatological analysis to include sites near the wine country fires
and including a pressure gradient criteria to climatological
analyses,&lt;br/&gt;(2) a synoptic and satellite analysis of event evolution to
determine large-scale forcing on fire spread,&lt;br/&gt;(3) high-resolution WRF
modeling of Tubbs Fire event that led to the destruction of the Coffey Park
neighborhood,&lt;br/&gt;(4) WRF-SFIRE simulations including a reconstruction of
fire-front positions for the Tubbs Fire,&lt;br/&gt;(5) a test of firebrand
transport modeling to emulate ember showers in extreme wind-driven wildfires,
and&lt;br/&gt;(6) the development of a 1-day Diablo Wind Workshop conducted at
SJSU with major stakeholders invited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The RAPID project will potentially transform wildfire research
by developing a first climatology of Diablo wind events and linking synoptic
patterns to variations in the climatological wind characteristics. This will
lead to a better understanding of how these winds can be forecasted during
critical fire weather conditions. In addition, a reconstruction of the
associated fire behavior patterns from the Tubbs Fire that destroyed nearly 5700
homes will lead to better understanding of how near-surface ember transport can
result in rapid fire spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
expected broader impacts of the RAPID project include:&lt;br/&gt;- a greater
understanding of critical fire weather conditions and fire behavior associated
with Diablo wind events,&lt;br/&gt;- improved climatology and understanding of
event frequency, and&lt;br/&gt;- the development of a Diablo wind workshop for
stakeholders / fire managers to disseminate results from the 1-year study.