* 1807604
* SemiSynBio: Redox-enabled Bio-Electronics for Molecular Communication and Memory (RE-BIONICS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,125,000.00

The goal of the RE-BIONICS project (Redox-enabled Bio-Electronics based on
Molecular Communication) is to create first-of-kind bioelectronics devices that
will mediate the rapid and facile information exchange between biology and
electronics. These devices will have the potential to transform healthcare,
enabling tele-monitoring and remote/autonomous drug delivery and facilitating
environmental monitoring in agriculture and cyber-defense where connecting
biological phenomena with electronics are important. The technical underpinnings
of this work recognize that microelectronic devices depend on electrons for
information processing while biology depends on molecules (e.g., insulin,
antibodies). These systems are not intrinsically compatible as there are no free
electrons in biology that could be transmitted to biological wires and control
cell-based electronic circuits. Instead, biohybrid devices are envisioned that
transmit information across this electron-molecule divide. New interfaces are
needed that accept molecules from biology and create electrons for devices and
the reverse. Such integrated systems designed and constructed within RE-BIONICS
will be capable of this bidirectional communication for memory and computation.
The project will build the components and information theory needed to construct
biohybrid devices that could eventually be embedded within a biological system
and provide electronic control. In addition to building capabilities for
designing and constructing completely new biodevices, a most important aspect of
this work is that it will bring together researchers and stakeholders from many
disciplines, including biology, chemistry, materials science, and computer,
electrical, chemical, and bioengineering. The project builds on the
interdisciplinary nature of the project with Research Team from computer
science, electrical engineering and bioengineering. The research thrusts span
computer science and information theory, microelectromechanical systems,
biofabrication and redox biology, and synthetic biology. Also, two
interdisciplinary teams of undergraduate students from UMD and UNL will
participate in the international Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) program
and competition, and participate in specific outreach activities targeting
Middle and High school students within the Future Problem Solving Program
(FPSPI) at UNL. Further, this project will promote the participation of women,
historically underrepresented in electrical engineering, representing more than
majors in biology and bioengineering. RE-BIONICS researchers will also interact
with federal agencies including NIST, FDA, and the Army Research Laboratory,
gaining exposure to manufacturing and regulatory issues, as well as direct
application areas such as national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
exploits reduction-oxidation (redox) mediators that are the biological
equivalents of free electrons in electronics. The reactions represent packets of
information transferred within biology. The project is organized into three
specific aims. In Aim 1, the team will design, build and test device elements
that facilitate information transfer from molecules of biological systems to
electrons of microelectronic systems and the reverse. Using the principles of
synthetic biology, bacterial cells will be engineered to recognize small
signaling molecules, an example being pyocyanin that is secreted by
opportunistic pathogen, Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Based on this recognition, these
and other engineered sensing cells will produce -galactosidase, an enzyme that
can be electrochemically quantified. In addition, cells will be engineered to
accept electrons from devices and in a programmed manner, "turn on" gene
expression that can modulate cell behavior. In Aim 2, the team will design and
construct a biological read/write memory device, based on the biopolymer
melanin, that can be accessed both biologically and electronically. In Aim 3,
the team will integrate these elements creating biohybrid circuits, such as
bioelectric logic gates, and biologic to electronic to biologic signaling
systems, culminating in an electronically-controlled device that interprets
molecular information, computes desired outcomes and electronically actuates
cells to signal and control biological populations. There are three
fundamentally novel aspects to this work. First, it will demonstrate the
potential to transfer information from biological systems to microelectronic
systems and the reverse, forming the basis for bioelectronic integrated
computing systems. Second, it will demonstrate electronically-controlled
synthesis of a novel, reliable and stable biological memory device. Third, it
will develop a technological framework for the development of bio-hybrid
computing devices that efficiently sense and process chemical information as
well as operate within and control complex biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.