* 1807735
* Electrically induced optical frequency shifts of laser light using microresonators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Govind Agrawal, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2022
* USD 423,999.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will develop a novel
platform capable of changing the frequency of laser light after its emission by
applying an electrical field, without the need of a gain medium or an optical
pump. Current techniques for changing the frequency of light require strong
optical pumps, which limit the scalability of devices based on laser frequency
conversion. The proposed technology will electrically induce laser frequency
shifts on a photonic chip and enable generation of multiple desired frequencies
on a chip from a single input laser. This new capability will enable high-radix
optical switching, frequency control of single photons, and add a new dimension
to network traffic manipulation. This project seeks to expose underrepresented
students at the pre-college and undergraduate levels to STEM careers via
integrated photonics. We will develop a weeklong mini course centered on hands-
on activities in photonics for the local high school community. The PIs will
host underrepresented undergraduate students for an immersive research
experience during the summer. As part of this effort, we will train two PhD
students in integrated photonics, microfabrication, nonlinear optics, and cavity
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs propose to develop and demonstrate electrically induced adiabatic frequency
conversion on a photonic chip using a lossless electro-optic platform. The
proposed work will lay the foundation by extending the general theoretical model
of adiabatic frequency conversion to photonic devices built on electro-optic
platforms. Building on the theoretical framework, the experimental work will
demonstrate electrical frequency conversion on an integrated photonic platform
using microring resonator cavities coupled to a bus waveguide. The PIs plan to
extend frequency conversion from a single cavity to arrays of coupled cavities
to enable cascaded frequency conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.