* 1807755
* In-Situ Studies of the Growth of Nanostructured Covalent Semiconductors by Electrochemical Liquid-Liquid-Solid Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Stephen Maldonado, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 460,000.00

This project seeks a simple, green method for preparing fully refined, pure, and
crystalline nanostructured semiconductors. This would have tremendous impact on
future optoelectronic, energy, and sensing technologies. Prof. Maldonado of the
University of Michigan has developed a method to synthesize crystalline
semiconductor nanomaterials without high temperatures or caustic reagents. This
singular approach is called the electrochemical liquid-liquid-solid (ec-LLS)
strategy and it works by blending two normally distinct strategies,
electrochemistry and melt crystal growth. Among many salient features, the ec-
LLS strategy can be performed at or near room temperature in water and the
ambient atmosphere. This work aims to further develop the ec-LLS concept into a
transformative methodology for environmentally-friendly and low cost
semiconductor manufacture. Experiments are designed to identify the controlling
features in ec-LLS that dictate crystal shape, size, and purity. The basic
science proposed here accordingly spans electrochemistry, materials science,
advanced electron microscopy, and X-ray spectroscopic methods, offering
extensive training in these areas for participating undergraduate and graduate
students. Through this project, Prof. Maldonado also expands pedagogical tools
for teaching basic chemistry and electrochemistry to beginning students.
Specifically, electrodeposited thin films are introduced as platforms for
preparing solar cells for the education of high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding support provided by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular &amp; Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division is advancing knowledge and control over the electrochemical synthesis
of semiconductor nanomaterials with liquid metals. Specifically, the
electrochemical liquid-liquid-solid (ec-LLS) concept for the syntheses of
crystalline covalent semiconductors offers a unique way to form technologically
relevant semiconductor nanomaterials under unusually benign reaction conditions.
A liquid metal is both a working electrode that facilitates heterogeneous
reduction reactions and a solvent that directs semiconductor crystal growth. The
purpose of this project is to gain predictive influence over the structure,
physicochemical, and electrical properties of the resultant materials. The
underlying research focus uses two orthogonal methods, in-situ transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and in-situ X-ray spectroscopy, to study
systematically the operational features of crystal growth in ec-LLS. The chief
overarching hypotheses to be tested are: (1) the extent of supersaturation in
ec-LLS, rather than the specific liquid metal, most strongly dictates the form
of the crystal growth and (2) the structure of the liquid metal at the
electrode/electrolyte interface impacts how ec-LLS initiates. The first
hypothesis is being investigated by visualizing ec-LLS syntheses of
semiconductor nanowires under a variety of conditions by in-situ TEM with a
liquid holder. The second hypothesis is being explored through shallow angle
X-ray reflection and diffraction studies of liquid metal/liquid electrolyte
interfaces during the initial stages of ec-LLS. Through the combination of these
different methods, more refined ec-LLS methods are being developed to synthesize
more advanced nanomaterials. Prof. Maldonado's undergraduate laboratory
curriculum on perovskite solar cells is being adapted for high school students.
The intent is to simplify electrodeposition platforms sufficiently so that even
very beginning students can contribute meaningfully to original materials
chemistry research on photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.