* 1807583
* Thermoelectric Effects in Superconductor-Ferromagnet Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Meenakshi Singh, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 453,018.00

Non-technical abstract: Thermoelectric systems convert heat to electricity and
vice versa. They have applications in refrigeration, waste heat recovery, and
thermometry. With no gas or liquid components and no moving parts,
thermoelectric devices are small, portable, and sturdy. However, the energy
conversion efficiency of thermoelectric materials decreases with decreasing
temperature. Therefore, to date, there is no efficient thermoelectric systems
operating below ~ 200 K. The thermoelectric system this project is focused on
fabricating and measuring, is predicted to be efficient at elevated
temperatures. From a technology perspective, this will enable applications that
were previously thought impossible such as thermoelectric cooling for cryogenic
devices and space telescopes. This project trains a new generation of students
with expertise in quantum systems, synthesis, characterization, cryogenics, low-
noise electronics, and computation. Undergraduate research and recruitment of
underrepresented groups is facilitated through Colorado School of Mines' bridge
program with community colleges. Additionally, modules are being developed,
introducing the science behind this project, for use in Mines' outreach programs
to Denver Public Schools, Vertical Skills Academy (which is a school for
dyslexic children in Evergreen, CO), and the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Thermoelectric effects,
which are normally negligible in superconductors, are expected to increase
dramatically in superconductor (S) - ferromagnet (F) hybrids. Although exciting
theoretical predictions abound, there are hardly any experimental studies in
this field. Moreover, there are no studies, experimental or theoretical, on the
role of dimensionality and the nature of superconductivity (singlet vs.
triplet). This is a tremendous missed opportunity for several reasons. First, if
the predictions of high thermoelectric figure of merit at cryogenic temperatures
are correct, S-F systems will be the only efficient thermoelectrics in this
temperature range. Second, there is fascinating Physics at S-F interfaces,
including triplet superconductivity, seen in charge and spin transport
measurements. Thermoelectric effects offer a novel probe into this Physics.
Third, the effects of reduced dimensionality on quasiparticles in a
superconductor, which are relevant for thermal effects, has not been explored.
Finally, there are a number of fascinating predictions for thermal effects in
S-F systems that have not been realized because the 'groundwork' experiments are
missing. This project fills this gap by systematically investigating
thermoelectric effects in S-F hybrids using low-temperature, charge, spin and
thermal transport measurements. The results test existing theoretical
predictions, inform future studies and explore heralded applications including
nanoscale cooling. These efforts build upon the PI's expertise in nanoscale
fabrication and low temperature transport experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.