* 1807809
* SemiSynBio: Nucleic Acid Memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Tim Andersen, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,125,000.00

The rapid proliferation of cloud computing and the emergence of big data for
massive scientific, financial, governmental, and genetic records is creating an
information storage crisis. These data, once generated, cascade through the
information storage lifecycle -- from primary storage media in the form of hard
disks and solid-state drives to archival media such as magnetic tape. While
innovations in information density, stability, and energy consumption routinely
occur, existing memory materials are approaching their physical and economic
finish lines. As imagined by the Semiconductor Synthetic Biology (SemiSynBio)
Roadmap, DNA-based massive information storage is a brand new start for memory
manufacturing. As a result, the research team proposes to pioneer a cold storage
paradigm by designing, building, and testing two accessible, editable, and non-
volatile memory technologies made from DNA. Inspired by DNA circuits and made
possible by state-of-the-art optical physics, the team will: (1) biologically
synthesize DNA molecules, (2) engineer substrates made from said molecules, (3)
write digital information onto the substrates using additional DNA molecules,
(4) minimize encoding and decoding errors using computer science algorithms, and
(5) read, as well as edit digital information onto the substrates using
reversible DNA binding. In full support of this interdisciplinary project, the
research team includes expertise in: DNA nanotechnology, nanoscale
characterization, optical physics, biologically-inspired algorithms, and
synthetic biology. Modeled after the faculty collaboration, a new cadre of
students will work and study at the confluence of the biological, computational,
and engineering sciences in anticipation of the emerging field called Nucleic
Acid Memory (NAM). As active participants in and co-owners of a Vertically
Integrated Project called NAM, undergraduate and graduate students will enroll
into a multi-year and multi-disciplinary research team that provides ongoing
course and teaching credit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focal points of this
proposal are two storage medium prototypes, digital Nucleic Acid (dNAM) and
sequence Nucleic Acid Memory (seqNAM). Each offer a novel approach to coding
information using DNA, and both use super-resolution microscopy to read
information. In dNAM, information is encoded into defined spatial arrangements
of DNA sequences on top of addressable DNA origami nanostructures, called NAM
storage nodes. DNA origami provides a convenient pathway and a proven approach
to high-yield and rapid prototyping of NAM node structures. Staple strands will
be extended from the NAM node structures with a unique sequence for site-
specific attachment of NAM data strands. When bound, data strands serve as
docking sites for complementary data imager strands, which are employed in a
DNA-based form of super-resolution microscopy (SRM) called DNA-PAINT. DNA PAINT
is a stochastic super-resolution imaging technique that uses repetitive,
transient binding of fluorescently labeled data imager strands to circumvent the
diffraction limit of light. Thus, data imager strands act as the read head and
reveal the state of each site of the NAM storage node with better than 7 nm
resolution. Binary states at each data cell can be defined by the presence (1)
or absence (0) of the NAM data strand, as determined by SRM. Increasing site-
specific bit-density from 1 to 3 bits can be simply achieved by multiple
orthogonal sequences. Editing of data strands is performed by either adding a
required data strand to a vacant data cell or by removing an existing data
strand via toehold-mediated strand displacement. Built upon a similar storage
node platform, seqNAM employs two data cells to arrange data strands into
ordered arrays. In seqNAM, information is encoded within portions of the data
strands that remain single stranded. The sequences of the data strands are read
using a multi-color super-resolution sequencing (SRS) process that uses a
library of locked nucleic acid imager strands. Editing is performed by removing
the target data strands with complementary sequences using toehold-mediated
strand invasion and then adding the replacement data strands. seqNAM exceeds
dNAM by storing information within DNA sequences at a potentially higher
density. In addition, it creates a new enzyme-free sequencing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.