* 1807580
* Towards One-Dimensional Single-Molecule Topological Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Professors Latha Venkataraman and Luis Campos of
Columbia University are aiming to create new molecular systems that can be wired
into circuits to efficiently conduct electricity. Significant efforts have been
made to develop molecules that can transport electrical charges at the nanometer
scale, as these are important for electronic application, as well for
photovoltaics and artificial photosynthesis. However, most molecules that
function as conducting wires studied to date show a very rapid decrease in
conductivity as their lengths are increased, limiting their applications. In
this work, new families of molecular systems are designed and synthesized. The
overarching goal is to create and determine the electronic properties of
molecules, aiming to find systems where, for example, an increase in
conductivity is observed as the molecular length is increased. This
interdisciplinary work combines synthesis and measurements while also
integrating research with a broad range of educational and outreach activities.
The investigators train and mentor post-doctoral researchers, augment their
undergraduate teaching to include results from their research, and expose K-12
school children to concepts from nanoscience and nanotechnology while also
introducing them to a laboratory environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: In this project, Professors Latha Venkataraman and Luis Campos of
Columbia University use concepts of physical organic chemistry to make single-
molecule junctions with wires that model 1D topological insulators, to probe
their unconventional transport properties. Families of molecular systems are
designed and synthesized. These include (1) wires that have radicals near the
ends; (2) molecular backbones with redox active units that enable the creation
and control of radical states; and (3) molecular wires with resonance structures
that ensure small bond-length alternation. Scanning probe techniques are applied
to measure their single-molecule conductance and to characterize transport
properties as a function of molecular length. The ultimate goal of this proposed
work is the development and proof of concept demonstration of systems with high
conductivities and transport properties that go beyond those observed in
standard conjugated molecules. The educational and outreach efforts of this
proposal have three broad objectives. The PIs provide an undergraduate research
experience in a multidisciplinary environment, influencing the graduate
admissions through service programs, integrate their research into the Applied
Physics and Chemistry undergraduate curriculum and finally, make a focused
effort to bring in K-12 school children in a laboratory environment to introduce
them to basic concepts in chemistry and nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.