* 1807729
* Medium Matters: Merging Photochemistry with Supramolecular-, Nano-, and Green Chemistries
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

The efficiency and selectivity of chemical processes in biological systems often
stem from the localization of reactants in highly restricted and organized
environments. Some of these processes (e.g., photosynthesis) harness light as
the source of energy for driving the reactions. The research program of Prof.
Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy at University of Miami focuses on fundamental
understanding of the properties of molecules in confined space and exploring the
use of light to initiate reactions in water. The long-term goal is to address
the national needs in sustainability by developing efficient methods for
capturing and converting sunlight (a sustainable source of energy) into chemical
energy through transformations in water (that avoids environmental issues
associated with the use of organic solvents). This interdisciplinary project
involving domestic and international collaborations provides research training
to graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Additionally, Prof.
Ramamurthy reaches out to undergraduate and graduate students at universities
within and outside USA and motivates young researchers toward becoming
successful scientists through his general lectures that highlight the importance
of basic science in the context of everyday applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of understanding the behavior of molecules
in confined environments and enhancing the selectivity and efficacy of reactions
in water, Prof. Ramamurthy's group synthesizes water-soluble cavitands that
encapsulate organic molecules and serve as reaction vessels with dimensions of a
few angstroms. The research team investigates the generation of reactive organic
radical ions in the capsule by photoinduced electron transfer from encapsulated
donors across the capsular wall to acceptors (e.g., a water-soluble sensitizer
or TiO2) present outside, harnessing solar energy for chemical transformations
in water. The photochemical reactions being studied include the geometric
isomerization of olefins and cyclopropanes, cycloaddition reactions to produce
energy rich cyclobutanes, valence isomerization to generate highly strained
molecules and cycloreversion reactions. Spectroscopic studies, including
ultrafast (ns-fs) experiments, are performed to measure the rates of electron
transfer, identify the radical ion intermediates, determine the reactivity of
the intermediates, and elucidate the product
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.