* 1807124
* Understanding Spin Diffusion Lengths in Metals and Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 11/30/2021
* USD 406,622.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;High performance magnetic devices are
ubiquitous in our society, the magnetic hard disk drives that power cloud data
storage serving as one example. Underpinning technological advancement in this
area is the ongoing progress in fundamental understanding of magnetism and
magnetic materials. In this project, a fundamental problem relevant to "spin
electronics" is being tackled, specifically how electron spins relax after being
pumped from magnetic to non-magnetic materials. This is a poorly understood
issue in magnetism, despite many scientific efforts and high importance for next
generation devices. In this work, a particular type of nanomagnetic device is
being used to understand, quantitatively, and for the first time, how specific
materials defects control the relaxation of spins. In addition to advancing
basic scientific knowledge, broader impact is being achieved through societal
benefits from device applications, through education of students, and through
outreach to the public. The latter involves collaboration with the Science
Museum of Minnesota, developing exhibits and performances on the science of
materials in our everyday lives, thus raising awareness of the role of materials
research in our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Central to many spintronic phenomena and devices is the flow
of a pure spin current, or a spin-polarized charge current, in a non-magnetic
metal. A fundamental question in such a situation is over what distance does a
non-equilibrium spin population relax in a non-magnetic metal, or: what is the
spin diffusion length? Remarkably, while the basic mechanism governing metallic
spin relaxation, the Elliot-Yafet mechanism, is known, there remain massive gaps
in our understanding of this process. The individual effects of specific defects
remain unknown, preventing quantitative or predictive understanding of spin
transport. Addressing this problem, with its obvious technological relevance,
would constitute a transformative advance. The essence of this project is to use
non-local lateral spin valves to determine spin diffusion lengths in a variety
of conventional and oxide-based metals. Elemental metals such as Al are being
studied to separately quantify spin relaxation due to phonons, impurities, grain
boundaries, surfaces, and interfaces, thus determining Elliott-Yafet constants
for each defect. Metallic perovskite oxides are also being studied. These
materials offer tremendous potential for spintronics, although an understanding
of their spin diffusion lengths remains elusive. A progression from conventional
metal-based devices to perovskite metals is being followed in this research,
providing the first understanding of spin diffusion lengths in oxide
ferromagnets and non-magnetic metals, a critical step in the development of
oxide spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.