* 1807056
* IGE: A pathway to inclusion for STEM researchers
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sarah McCullough, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 498,950.00

Although the research across science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) fields is diverse, all of this work takes place within a larger societal
context. Providing students with the training to recognize and address these
contextual issues, including biases, cultural/historical perspectives and the
need for interdisciplinary collaborations and inclusion, will enable them to
support diverse voices, diverse approaches and new questions in STEM. This
National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of California, Davis will pilot a cross-STEM curricular component to
help students address real-world, cultural complexities within their research
context. The curriculum will examine the underlying assumptions in students'
research questions by drawing on the social sciences and humanities; provide
support for productive collaborations; and foster interdisciplinary projects. A
broader perspective will help junior researchers better frame and initiate
complex research questions, while supporting diverse researchers and projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curricular intervention will be grounded in social
scientific research that illuminates the impact of history, culture, and
philosophies of science upon scientific practice. This project will test both
the impact of the content on graduate student attitudes and outcomes, as well as
the delivery method. The major research questions being addressed focus on: (1)
student recognition of societal context for research (including potential bias
and societal needs), (2) a culture of inclusion for those underrepresented in
STEM fields, (3) interdisciplinary collaborations, and (4) the ability to
accurately and appropriately use categories in research (e.g. gender, race). A
mixed-methods approach will be used to assess learning outcomes that includes
pre/post attitudinal measures, focus groups, thematic analysis of student
reflections, and observational data from team projects. Given the complexity of
incorporating this type of intervention across multiple STEM disciplinary areas,
the project will also test the efficacy of three delivery mechanisms: (1) a ten-
week seminar that will directly train two cohorts of interdisciplinary graduate
students, (2) a train-the-trainer faculty education program that will measure
the utility of this program in specific, disciplinary settings (Engineering and
Biological Sciences), and (3) independent learning modules incorporated into
programs on campus throughout the academic year. Students who complete training
will be encouraged to incorporate this knowledge into their dissertation
research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are
to pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.