* 1807670
* New Approaches to Peptide Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 606,804.00

Paramjit Arora of New York University is supported by an award from the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop more
environmentally friendly and more efficient methods for the synthesis of
peptides. Current peptide synthesis utilizes a solid phase approach, where the
amino acid links of a peptide chain are added one at a time, in a specified
sequence. This technique revolutionized peptide synthesis when it was
introduced, but as currently implemented it is a highly wasteful process, with
typical reaction conditions utilizing five times the amount of excess reagents
for every amide bond synthesized. Professor Arora's work is building on
classical and recent advances in peptide synthesis to develop new, more
efficient approaches. In the new approach, excess reagents are replaced with
optimized catalysts giving an efficient, "green" catalytic cycle. This research
has applications in pharmaceutical and biomedical industries. The project
provides valuable training to students at the interface of chemistry and
biology. Students engaged in the project gain experience in molecular design,
conformational analysis, organic synthesis, and biochemistry. Professor Arora
co-directs the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Chemical
Biology at NYU. This site introduces young scientists to this rapidly growing
and technologically-important research field by incorporating studies from the
project into the REU curriculum. A collaboration with Professor Amy Brown of the
Neumann University Department of Chemistry is establishing the first-ever
undergraduate research course at that university, including student capstone
research projects. This project advances the fundamental understanding of human
health and produces a well-educated, diverse workforce in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop new methods
of amide bond synthesis that are both atom-efficient and sustainable. There is
an urgent need for methods that do not require excess reagents and are mild
enough to not lead to epimerizaton of adjacent stereocenters. In this project,
amide bond formation is accelerated by organocatalysts that transiently enforce
a hydrogen-bonding-mediated intramolecular reaction between the carboxyl and
amine termini of two fragments. The new approach engages the substrates through
non-covalent and covalent interactions to reduce the entropic penalty of
organizing the optimal transition state for catalysis. The project includes
significant educational and outreach activities including the integration of new
laboratory experiment modules based on the science of the project within
undergraduate chemistry courses at NYU. Professor Arora develops teaching
modules for use by faculty at 13 Historically Black colleges and universities
and 12 colleges in Puerto Rico---disseminated through the NYU Faculty Resource
Network. Professor Amy Brown of Neumann University, a small liberal arts
university that serves a commuter-student population including many students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM collaborates on this
proposal. Professors Arora and Brown are developing a chemical biology course
that does not require extensive resources but enriches the curriculum with
cutting-edge research-based projects, providing opportunities for students to
expand their knowledge of state-of-the-art chemistry
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.