* 1807281
* A Wideband Silicon Photonic Millimeter-wave Beam-forming Transmitter with Automatic Beam Calibration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kamran Entesari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Beamforming with instantaneous wide-bandwidth and high-resolution beam-steering
is an essential challenge for many applications including the fifth-generation
(5G) wireless communications, radars, and satellite communications such as
airborne satellite radios. While it is extremely challenging with conventional
electronic beamforming network technology, RF photonics technology has the
potential to significantly improve mm-wave beamforming transmitters with wider
instantaneous bandwidth, higher resolution in beam-steering, and smaller
footprint. Utilizing a photonic beamforming network along with integrated
electronics will allow the use of RF silicon-photonics delay units to fulfill
these requirements. The project will demonstrate wideband, high-resolution
silicon-photonics mm-wave beamforming networks to advance wireless technologies
for applications such as wireless communications, radars, satellite
communications, and remote sensing. The proposed research has the potential to
revolutionize the future of the 5G wireless industries and provide further
technological diversification for the semiconductor industry. In addition to the
aforementioned technical impacts, the proposed project also promotes outreach
activities to increase participation of students from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering, including annual summer camps for high school students.
The research and educational results of this project will be disseminated to
academic, industrial and government sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal
of this project is to develop a novel chip-scale mm-wave silicon-photonics
beamforming transmitter array with wide-bandwidth and high-resolution capability
implemented using hybrid Silicon on Insulator (SOI) photonics and Complementary
Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) chips, along with an antenna array unit.
Automatic configuration of silicon-photonics beamforming network using
electronic control circuitry implemented on CMOS chip allows for compensation of
severe silicon-photonics process and temperature variations in silicon
photonics. The proposed research objectives are: 1) architecture definition of a
silicon-photonics mm-wave transmitter array with automatic beamforming system
and performance analysis, 2) development of novel silicon-photonics beamforming
delay units capable of electrical reconfiguration, and algorithms and hardware
for delay unit automatic tuning, 3) implementation of novel CMOS prototypes
which include the beamforming network tuning hardware, and transmitter front-end
circuitry, and testing them with the proposed silicon-photonics integrated
circuits, and 4) hybrid integration of silicon-photonics chip, CMOS chip and
antenna array unit and perform the required tests for the entire unit. The
emerging silicon-photonics technology has enabled the wideband high-resolution
RF photonics delay units to be realized for radio systems with small form factor
and low power consumption. Furthermore, this project aims to achieve a mm-wave
transmitter beamforming array with desired directivity, by precisely controlling
a significant number of photonic delay elements inside the beamforming network
structure through automatic calibration to provide the desired group delay at
the band of interest. The project will also address the degradation of
transmitter performance due to inherent non-linearity of photonic modulator
devices by linearization techniques that employ integrated RF electronics before
the photonic modulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.