* 1807463
* Super resolution imager sensing system using structured illuminated plasmonic spatial interferometers
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Leslie Ying, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 12/31/2022
* USD 392,000.00

Portable biomedical devices hold significant promises for various applications
that have the potential to impact the fight against several global health
problems. It was estimated that approximately two-thirds of global cell-phones
are being used in the developing world (e.g. Africa, Asia). Therefore, sensitive
biomedical devices integrated with smart-phones would yield a promising sensing
system and introduce great impact on point-of-care diagnostics in developing
countries and resource-limited areas. This proposal aims to develop a
monochromatic structured illuminated plasmonic spatial interferometer suitable
for highly sensitive sensing on digital cameras (e.g. on desktop microscopes and
smart phones). The enhanced sensing performance is enabled by the super
resolution strategy of structured illumination integrated with the plasmonic
nanostructure developed in this project, which overcomes the resolution limit of
the digital cameras. When successfully developed, such highly sensitive
interferometers will allow a variety of biosensing applications at a much lower
cost, with great societal impact on real time and in situ monitoring of global
environmental (e.g. water) quality, liquid-food borne illnesses and personal
health conditions. This research will be closely integrated with educational
programs in the departments of Electrical Engineering and Biomedial Engineering
at University at Buffalo. It will significantly impact the Electrical
Engineering and Biomedial Engineering curriculum with its emphasis on
experiential learning, and will provide an excellent educational opportunity for
graduate and undergraduate student training of the next generation of
researchers, educators and global leaders. The two PIs will provide excellent
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate training in theoretical modeling,
nanofabrication, miniaturized system design and optical super resolution image
processing. The main goals of this educational and outreach program are to
enhance the educational communication and collaboration, improve the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge researches,
for outreach to K-12 students by organizing engineering summer campus, and
provide opportunities for under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While
Surface Plasmon Resonance systems are currently used for label-free sensing,
they remain inadequate for use in portable systems as the commercial
instrumentation is expensive, complex, bulky and inconvenient for the
integration with microfluidic platforms. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
develop low-cost, compact, and high performance sensor systems for the ever-
increasing sensing applications. Nanoplasmonic sensors are attractive
miniaturized platforms to potentially meet these requirements. However, because
nanoplasmonic sensors are mostly based on broadband wavelength shift
interrogation which requires expensive spectrometers, high throughput sensing is
still very challenging. This proposal will develop a plasmonic spatial
interferometer structure to transfer the broadband wavelength peak/valley shift
to the spatial interference pattern shift at a monochromatic wavelength such
that the shift can be directly imaged by digital cameras on microscopes and
smart-phones without the need of expensive spectrometers. To further enhance the
sensing performance of the proposed system, the super resolution structured
illumination strategy will be integrated into the sensor design by introducing a
nanopatterned reference slit to generate Moire fringes with low spatial
frequency information. This strategy enables a resolution much higher than the
resolution limits of the optical imager system, thus allowing ultra-small
spatial shift (sub-resolution-limit) to be observable even with portable
cameras. The proposed system does not require spectrometer or angular tunable
prism coupling system, leading to a significant reduction in device cost and
instrumental complexity, especially when realized on smart-phone-based
microscope systems. The potential of this sensing system will be demonstrated
through the super-resolution-resolved peak/valley shift of 50 nm using
inexpensive digital imagers, corresponding to an ultra-small sensing resolution
approaching the performance of commercial bulky surface plasmon resonance imager
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.