* 1807847
* Predictive Design and Scalable Synthesis of New Multimetallic Nanoparticles with Enhanced Surface Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 508,326.00

This a collaborative synthetic and computational research program between the
groups of Profs. Simon M. Humphrey and Graeme Henkelman at the University of
Texas at Austin, which focuses on the preparation and studies of new nano-
catalyst materials. Catalysts reduce the total energy used in large-scale
chemical processes, including the synthesis of fuels, polymers and textiles,
drugs, and the remediation of environmental pollutants. Catalysts also reduce
the amount of waste by-products that are generated. The majority of catalysts
currently in use are based on precious metals, which are unfortunately also both
scarce and expensive. Therefore, it is critically important to find ways to
prepare modern catalysts that can operate using less total metal, whilst
maintaining their catalytic performance. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of Chemistry, this
project directly addresses these issues by studying the synthesis and properties
of metallic nanoparticle catalysts that comprise only a few thousand atoms per
entity; nanoparticles are attractive compared with bulk metals because they
exhibit superior reactivity, as well as having very large surface areas compared
to their volumes. The project also studies the use of scalable and
environmentally-sustainable synthesis methods, such as microwave heating, to
prepare new nanoparticle catalysts comprised of previously unstudied mixtures of
precious metals. The fundamental properties of these new catalysts are assessed
using experimental and theoretical (computational) methods, in order to
understand how composition relates to performance improvements in real chemical
reactions. The ultimate aim is to apply experimental and computational expertise
to predict new catalyst compositions that should have optimal properties for
given industrial processes. The project is also significantly enhanced through
integration with an innovative new undergraduate educational program, called the
Austin-International Framework in which undergraduates travel overseas to
collaborate with world-renown research group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly collaborative synthetic and
computational research program between the groups of Profs. Simon M. Humphrey
and Graeme Henkelman at the University of Texas at Austin focuses on the
synthesis and studies of new noble metal nanoparticle catalysts with unusual
compositions. The major objectives of this research activity are to make direct
connections between the structure and function of novel metallic nanoparticles
that are comprised of unusual binary and ternary combinations of precious
metals. There are significant intellectual challenges to achieve this goal.
First, determining the atomic structure of supported multicomponent metal
nanoparticles is difficult. A combination of electron microscopy, total X-ray
scattering to generate pair distribution function data, extended X-ray fine
structure spectroscopy, and temperature programmed desorption/reaction will be
used to experimentally quantify structural parameters. This data will be used to
inform realistic theoretical models at the atomic scale. Second, structural
information with atomic detail is also critical to building theoretical models
of active site, reactivity descriptors, and predictions of selectivity. It is
also important to have feedback in terms of predictions from theory that can be
tested experimentally, so that the models can be validated and calibrated. The
ultimate goal of this work is to be able to rationally predict optimal
structures and compositions of new catalysts that should have desired reactivity
for specific applications. Meanwhile, differences between predictions and
experimentally observed reactivity are equally valuable for improving the
computational methods developed in this work. The project is also significantly
enhanced through integration with an innovative new undergraduate educational
program, called the Austin-International Framework (AIF). The AIF is an
innovative and modern-thinking program that provides a fully immersive,
scholarship-supported international exchange experience to UT Austin
undergraduates. It provides students the unique opportunity to broaden their
horizons by witnessing first-hand the global nature of science. The students
involved in this program receive course credit for their research experiences
and scholarships are provided to cover their basic cost-of-living expenses while
doing research overseas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.