* 1807552
* Collaborative Research: Non-Hermitian wave mixing for highly efficient nonlinear light sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Ramy El-Ganainy, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 02/28/2023
* USD 179,988.00

Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;The growing demand for complex photonic systems and platforms
continues to push for exploring new optical geometries, concepts and material
systems to achieve sophisticated and unprecedented functionalities. These, on
the other hand, require a deeper understanding and precise control of the
interaction of light with material. One particular research activity of great
interest to modern technology, enabling applications in computing,
communication, sensing and detection, and bio-imaging, is the development of
efficient coherent light sources that can provide emission at wavelengths beyond
those obtained by conventional lasers. Nonlinear wave-mixing processes, by which
light of different colors can intermix to produce new colors, are often the
strategy pursued. The implementation of these nonlinear light sources requires
stringent physical conditions dictated by the conservation of photon momentum.
This poses serious limitations on the design and, to date, impede the
utilization of many highly nonlinear materials such as semiconductors as
nonlinear light sources. This project will explore theoretically and
experimentally novel strategies to overcome these difficulties by engineering
the optical losses in the photonic structures to control the nonlinear wave-
mixing process, creating irreversible energy conversion from input photons (pump
photons) to signal photons with the desired wavelength (color). This will enable
the practical implementation of new chip-scale light sources toward applications
in healthcare, information technology and sensing. Synergistically, this project
includes outreach activities aiming at increasing the diversity and talent pool
of future scientists and engineers in photonics. The team will organize
participatory activities, lab open houses, and research training opportunities
for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, with a focus on students
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will develop an integrated theoretical and experimental
platform for developing efficient nonlinear light sources via spectral and
spatial engineering of optical losses in wave-mixing processes. Loss engineering
enables non-Hermitian phase matching by removing the idler component produced in
the process, and thus allowing the use of highly nonlinear materials that do not
lend themselves easily to Hermitian phase-matching. This also allows the
nonlinear process to take place in such materials without stringent waveguiding,
dispersion engineering or quasi-phase matching criteria. The approaches in
pursuit of this goal are: 1) Developing a theoretical model and platform to
study the impact of loss engineering on the dynamics and efficiency of nonlinear
wave-mixing process; 2) Investigating design strategies and experimental
techniques to controllably introduce asymmetric loss and gain profiles for wave-
mixing; and 3) Demonstrate optical parametric amplification and efficient
nonlinear light sources in waveguides and resonators by loss engineering. The
structure of non-Hermiticity and its effects on optical processes, if properly
understood and controlled, will present an exciting opportunity to explore novel
photonic devices and light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.