* 1807460
* RUI: Photoisomerization Potential of Molecular Switches on Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Andreas Riemann, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2023
* USD 233,100.00

Professor Andreas Riemann of Western Washington University (WWU) is supported by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the
Division of Chemistry to investigate the behavior of spiropyran molecular
switches. A molecular switch is a molecule that can swing back and forth between
two or more stable states. In each state, the molecule has a distinctive shape,
structure, and electronic and optical properties. The molecules switch from one
state to another in response to external stimuli, such as light. The goal is to
control the switching mechanism and create surface structures consisting of
functional molecular switches. Molecular switches are important components of
molecular electronics used in electronic devices. Undergraduate students at WWU
are an integral part of this project and are given relevant experiences for
their futures in scientific research or in industry. Additionally, Professor
Riemann is involved in outreach through "Compass 2 Campus," a Western Washington
University initiative to increase science literacy of students from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds, by stimulating their interest in
research and providing them with pathways to higher education.

The goal of this research is to study molecule/substrate combinations which are
able to undergo a photoisomerization process with a large enough cross-section
to make it suitable for further application in molecular electronics. The
systems under investigation are spiropyran/merocyanine isomers deposited on
noble metal substrates and graphite. Thin molecular films where individual
molecules can be excited to switch their configuration are created.
Conformational behavior of these molecules and control of the photoisomerization
process are investigated using a variety of experimental surface science
techniques such as STM, LEED and XPS as well as computational chemistry methods
including DFT and Molecular Mechanics calculations. The project is conducted in
three stages: 1) the analysis of adsorption behavior of various spiropyran-based
molecules at various temperatures and substrate coverages; 2) the use of light
and heat to trigger and monitor isomerization switching; and 3) the use of
computational chemistry to simulate the adsorption behavior of spiropyran-based
isomers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.