* 1807474
* Reaction Tomography - Atomically Resolved Imaging of Chemical Transformations with Molecular Functionalized SPM Tips
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Felix Fischer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 475,288.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Fischer at the University of California, Berkeley, is
developing atomically resolved imaging techniques that enhance the analytical
tools available to image, manipulate, and spectroscopically characterize the
reactivity and self-assembly of molecular structures on surfaces. This research
program overcomes challenges faced in the application of atomic-resolution
scanned probe techniques, and makes these techniques both more accessible to
researchers and more capable of answering significant scientific questions
regarding the chemical composition, electronic structure, and reactivity of
molecular systems. The tools and techniques developed are not only be able to
identify unknown compounds with single-atom resolution, but have an impact on
all nanoscience areas that require precise knowledge of atomic-scale processes.
This includes the development of new applications that benefit society in the
areas of energy research, molecular-scale electronics, molecular recognition,
and sensor technology. The interdisciplinary science that lies at the core of
this project is introduced to students at all levels, from K-12, across the
undergraduate to the graduate level via integrated research and educational
components. Undergraduate students recruited from California State University
East Bay as part of a summer training program in synthetic organic chemistry
contribute to the establishment of a publicly accessible library for atomically-
resolved images of adsorbed molecular systems that serve as a resource for K-12
and undergraduate educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
project is to develop scanned probe microscopy (SPM) techniques capable of
resolving individual atoms and molecular bonding configurations with higher
spatial resolution and elemental specificity than previously possible. A new
class of molecular probe tips is derived from multipodand chelating ligands that
selectively bind to low-coordinated transition metals lining the apex of
electrically etched SPM tips. These chemically engineered probe tips feature
electronically and vibrationally tunable apex configurations capable of inducing
element specific covalent or non-covalent interactions with molecular adsorbates
on surfaces. The project focuses on overcoming three significant challenges
currently faced by single-molecule SPM techniques ? achieving atomic resolution
in non-planar molecular structures, achieving atomically-resolved elemental
composition, and achieving distortion-free characterization of bond strengths
and their order. The SPM techniques developed herein address key challenges at
the forefront of single molecule imaging, pave the way for the discovery and
elucidation of surface facilitated reaction mechanisms, and provide an
unprecedented detailed insight into the most elemental steps of common chemical
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.