* 1807395
* GOALI: Functional Polysulfides From Elemental Sulfur as Crosslinking Agents for Rubber Vulcanization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Pyun, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The production of rubber is an important industry as noted by the wide range of
rubber based products on the market and the large demands for rubber tires.
Despite the maturity of the rubber and tire industries, there remain fundamental
scientific challenges in improving the properties of these materials, which
arise from limitations in the crosslinking chemistry to harden, or vulcanize
rubber precursors. In this collaboration between Professor Jeffrey Pyun at the
University of Arizona and Dr. Paul Endres at the Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber
Company, the research team aims to develop novel sulfur-based crosslinkers for
the production of the next generation rubber with improved properties. It has
long been known that tire performance alone can profoundly impact the fuel
efficiency in automobiles. The use of sulfur-based crosslinking agents also
provides the petroleum industry avenues to consume excess sulfur waste generated
from fossil fuel refining. Hence, this research is anticipated to broadly impact
the rubber industry, automobiles, petroleum industry, and sustainability. This
project provides opportunities for research training and industrial experience
to undergraduate and graduate students, preparing a skilled workforce of
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this synergistic collaboration between
academia and industry, Prof. Pyun and Dr. Endres aims to provide a new
technological route to enhanced rubber and tire products. Prof. Pyun develops
novel approaches to large-scale synthesis of polysulfides, as soluble sulfur
crosslinking agents for rubber vulcanization, from the polymerization of
elemental sulfur with vinylic and electronically activated aromatic co-monomers.
The compositional tunability of the synthetic methods enables the introduction
of organic co-monomer units that can improve the compatibility and reactivity of
the sulfur phase with polydienes (rubber precursors). Using the specialized
industrial facilities at the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Dr. Endres
incorporates the novel polysulfide crosslinkers in formulations for
vulcanization of rubber and evaluates the mechanical properties of the resulting
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.