* 1807077
* RAPID: Hurricane Irma Impacts on Nitrogen Cycling in Florida Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2019
* Christopher Martens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2019
* USD 156,472.00

Availability of the nutrient element nitrogen generally limits the production of
organic matter in Florida Bay and most other coastal ecosystems. In Florida Bay,
approximately 90% of this primary production has been generated by seagrasses
with another 10% generated by single celled algae and bacteria in the water
column. Research completed prior to Hurricane Irma by the UNC-Chapel Hill team
in collaboration with scientists at the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Commission (FWC), has revealed that approximately half of the nitrogen needed by
these primary producers is supplied by a huge sponge population that filters and
decomposes freshly produced organic matter, then balances the nitrogen budget by
efficiently recycling inorganic nitrogen back to the water column. The sponge
community is capable of pumping and processing organic matter throughout the
entire water volume of Florida Bay in less than a week, thus helping to maintain
healthy seagrass communities and water clarity. The passage of Hurricane Irma
may have profoundly altered the central Florida Bay ecosystem by causing
tremendous losses of sponge and seagrass biomass and resulting changes
associated with nitrogen cycling. This project will help to assess short- and
long-term impacts of Irma through a quantitative assessment of sponge and
seagrass biomass losses at representative locations, characterization of water
column algal blooms, and measurement of changes to the nitrogen budget of
Florida Bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed new work is
to quantify potentially major changes in Florida Bay nitrogen cycling and
nitrogen budgets associated with the passage of Hurricane Irma, using a
combination of pre- and post-storm data from established study sites. The
proposed new work builds directly on the team's recently completed
investigations of the role of sponges in the overall nitrogen budget of the Bay
plus the catastrophic impacts of algal blooms on nitrogen cycling in its central
basins that feature water column residence times of days to weeks. The results
of this previous work have important implications for sponge-rich ecosystems
throughout the Caribbean and tropical Pacific plus many other coastal regions
including Antarctic shelf environments where sponges comprise a major component
of the benthos. Pre-Irma results include multi-year nitrogen surveys and time-
series data, sponge and seagrass biomass surveys at key sites and algal bloom
meta-genomics and bacterial count surveys have been conducted. This research
will benefit from new collaborations between scientists at UNC-Chapel Hill and
FWC laboratories in Marathon (FWC-M), where post-Irma sponge surveys will be
made and in St. Petersburg (FWC-SP), where algal bloom meta-genomic studies will
be conducted. Data from the Pre-Irma studies includes extensive dissolved
nitrogen (DIN and DON) water column concentration and time-series measurements,
determination of the role of sponges in organic C and nitrogen recycling rates
and the nitrogen budget, multi-year (2013-16) associated sponge biomass surveys
at our study sites by FWC-M scientists (2013-15) and algal bloom meta-genomic
plus bacterial count studies during a bloom at one of those sites led by FWC-SP.
Two graduate and two undergraduate students will participate in this project.