* 1807724
* Coherent Control of Spin Dynamics to Improve Spectral and Spatial Resolution in NMR
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jamie Walls, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Professor Jamie
Walls and his group at the University of Miami are working to develop cost-
effective methods to improve the resolution of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometry, a powerful and versatile tool widely used in academic, clinical,
and industrial research. If successful, this work will enable improved contrast
in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a noninvasive tool widely used for clinical
diagnostics and other imaging applications. This in turn could improve
characterization and diagnosis of cancer and other difficult-to-detect ailments
in the human body, as well as improving spatial resolution of images of solids
such as bone. Dr. Walls is also developing software that will enable others to
emulate and expand on his methods. Undergraduate and graduate students working
on this research receive training in both theoretical and experimental aspects
of NMR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spectroscopy, two resonances can be resolved if
their frequency difference, ????, is larger than the linewidths of the
individual resonances. In NMR, improving spectral resolution is one of the most
important challenges for extending the range of problems NMR can address. The
PI's group recently discovered that unexpected improvements in spectral
resolution could be achieved (1) by using low-power RF excitation in solid-state
systems, (2) by using delayed-acquisition to highlight spectral differences due
to Fourier dephasing, which is a result of the mathematical properties of the
line shape and is independent of the underlying spin dynamics and/or complexity,
or (3) by generating multispin-order in the presence of partially correlated
radiofrequency (RF) and magnetic field B0 inhomogeneities in liquid-state
samples. Collectively, these results suggest an alternative and unexplored route
towards improving spectral resolution in NMR that forms the basis of this
research. Specifically, the Walls group is developing pulse sequences that
exploit differences in Fourier dephasing in order to enhance sharp spectral
features in a spectrum. The work entails both theoretical and experimental
investigations into the nature of the multispin-order that can lead to optimal
line narrowing in liquid-state NMR. It can provide alternative methods for
coherently improving resolution in both solid- and liquid-state NMR
applications. These improvements can enhance spectroscopic characterization of
pharmaceuticals, complex sugars, and other biomolecular species in addition to
improving spatial resolution in solid-state MRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.