* 1807208
* Collaborative Research: Water partitioning between trees, soils, and streams following forest disturbance
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Kevin Bladon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 6,922.00

Over half of the freshwater supply in the contiguous United States originates in
forested watersheds. It is thus critical that forested headwater catchments are
properly managed to ensure clean and ample water supplies for aquatic ecosystems
and downstream communities. Research on forested experimental watersheds has
established that reducing forest cover generally increases water yield and that
afforestation decreases water yield. However, there is still not agreement on
the magnitude and persistence of changes in streamflow, particularly during
periods of the highest and lowest streamflow. This is because the connection
between forest harvesting, or other forest disturbances, and streamflow is
essentially a "black box", whereby the mechanisms influencing streamflow are not
understood. This research will broaden our process-based understanding of forest
hydrology by investigating how contemporary forest management affects water
movement and storage in a well-studied coastal California watershed. Results of
this research will provide evidence to motivate new forest management in coastal
watersheds and lead to better foundational knowledge of the linkages between
vegetation and water supply. These results will be generated in conjunction with
the USDA Forest Service and the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection, which will use the results to update California's Forest Practice
Rules.

It is increasingly critical to improve our quantitative understanding of how
forest disturbances affect the storage and release of water through catchments.
However, it is not yet understood how disturbances impact water
compartmentalization at time scales other than the annual water balance. This is
because the mechanisms by which streamflow increases can only be inferred in
paired watershed studies, which have been the most popular tool for quantifying
hydrological effects of forest disturbance. A combined mass balance and dual
water isotope approach offers the potential to critically improve our
understanding of the effects of disturbances on the processes and mechanisms
that drive water storage and release. Here, it is hypothesized that the
ecohydrological response of a forested watershed is proportional to the severity
of disturbance. Using different intensities of forest harvesting (0%, 35%, 55%,
and 75% removal of pre-treatment vegetation) as a mechanism for studying forest
disturbances, the following research questions will be addressed: How do
increasing levels of disturbance affect the water budget at different hillslope
positions? How does forest disturbance affect the separation of water between
soils, groundwater, streams, and trees? To answer these questions, this study
takes a novel approach to connect the processes by which forest disturbance
affects water budgets, subsurface water movement, and plant water use by
combining a mass balance analysis and dual water isotopes. All components of the
water budget (i.e., streamflow, soil moisture, groundwater, evapotranspiration,
and fog) will be monitored and coupled with dual stable isotopes (2H and 18O).
This study also addresses critical calls for field-based hydrologic research to
inform hydrologic models to answer key questions about disturbance impacts on
water resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.