* 1807644
* Electrical Injection Nanolasers Based on 2D Monolayer Gain Material
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Cun-Zheng Ning, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Nanoscale lasers are important for a wide range of applications, especially in
optical interconnects for integrated nanophotonic circuits in future computers.
Despite great progress made, no such light source currently meets the stringent
requirements of future on-chip interconnects. Current semiconductor lasers
consume ~ 0.1-1 pico (one trillionth) joule of energy per bit of information
transmitted; however, the required lasers must consume less than 0.01 pico-joule
of energy per bit, which in turn limits the dimensions of such lasers to 100s of
nanometers to displace electronic interconnects. The proposed project focuses on
fundamental research to develop such nanoscale light sources with high energy
efficiency. If successful, the research would have far reaching societal,
economical, and educational impacts by 1) addressing energy efficiency issue,
because the amount of internet-related energy consumption is increasing at a
rate that far exceeds the current increasing capacity of energy generation; 2)
training undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from the
underrepresented groups, in research and development of green-photonic
technology through nanophotonic device design, nano-fabrication, and the
development of future computer technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale
lasers require two key ingredients: a small cavity to confine photons and
efficient optical gain materials. One of the most efficient and smallest-volume
gain media emerged recently is the two-dimensional (2D) layered materials of
transition metal di-chalcogenides (TMDCs). Recent research has demonstrated
lasing using only a single layer of TMDCs. These studies have demonstrated 2D
materials as potentially the most efficient gain materials. But all experiments
to date have required optical pumping, while their operation under electrical
injection is necessary for on-chip applications.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed efforts
aim at developing the first electrical-injection nanolasers based on 2D TMDCs to
address the fundamental challenges of energy efficiency. The proposed approach
combines the most efficient optical gain material of 2D TMDCs with high-quality
silicon cavities to fabricate the most energy-efficient nanolasers. The 2D
materials operating on excitonic transitions provide several benefits to
nanolasers: the most efficient optical gain material, the smallest gain volume
to achieve lasing, and ease of integration into a silicon platform. The Si-
nanobeam cavity provides the highest quality factor with the lowest possible
laser threshold, while offering advantages of compatibility with electronics and
maturity in fabrication. Such an electrical injection nanolaser on a Si-platform
is ideally suited for optical interconnects and other Si-based
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposal is to study the carrier
injection into 2D monolayer molybdenum ditelluride with optimized design to
achieve the first electrical injection nanolaser using a 2D gain material on a
Si-platform by combining theoretical design and simulation with experimental
fabrication and characterization. Achieving this objective would lay the ground
work for development of a variety of future devices for use in sensing and chip-
level interconnects for future energy-efficient
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.