* 1807536
* Dynamic Risk-Averse Optimization of Distributed Energy Resource Aggregators
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Daniel Jiang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,892.00

Flexible distributed energy resources (DERs), such as energy storage devices,
can provide diverse services to the nation's power grid that help mitigate
variability and improve grid resilience. DER aggregators serve as mediators
between electricity markets and consumers, seeking to incentivize DERs to
provide multiple services to the grid while concurrently making commitments to
the markets. However, current rules governing interactions with wholesale
electricity markets are designed for large generators. These rules either
discourage or do not allow for full utilization of the technological
capabilities of small-scale energy storage and DER aggregations. The Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission recently announced that independent system
operators will soon be required to update their market rules in order to "remove
barriers to the participation of electric storage resources and distributed
energy resource aggregations in the capacity, energy, and ancillary markets..."
Such rule changes will present opportunities for aggregators to effectively
manage DER assets in a way that mutually benefits consumers and the grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create analytical and computational
methods to devise optimal, or near optimal, strategies for DER aggregators who
seek to incentivize DERs to provide multiple grid services, while making
commitments to the market, in a risk-averse setting. Considered are multiple
DERs and multiple grid services, uncertain interactions with the DERs and the
market, and extendable notions of incentives and commitments to future rule
implementations. It will also assess the value of aggregating DERs and co-
optimizing multiple grid services and devise efficient techniques to compute
risk-averse policies for problems that lack structure. A risk-averse Markov
decision process (MDP) model with a dynamic risk measure is used to address the
aggregator's sequential decision-making problem, and a suite of interrelated
solution techniques for large-scale, risk-averse MDP models will be devised.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intelligent management of DERs for multiple uses
promotes sustainable energy production and a reduction in environmental impacts
by enabling deeper penetration of clean energy sources into the U.S. power grid
while improving grid resilience. Furthermore, the techniques for risk-averse
control are widely applicable to other large-scale operational problems that
involve the joint management of several entities, including supply chain
problems with multiple sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.