* 1807708
* Bottom-up fundamental approach for characterizing plasticity and deformation in BCC and FCC high entropy alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Satish Rao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 460,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Recently, it has been shown that when five or
more elements are combined in nearly equal atomic concentrations, a new class of
metals emerges. These metals are typically referred to as multi-component
concentrated solid solution alloys, or more commonly high entropy alloys (HEAs).
These new complex alloys have drawn substantial attention in recent years due to
the vast available composition space for tuning their mechanical, thermal,
electrical, and magnetic properties. Over the past decade, several such alloys
have been shown experimentally to demonstrate very promising fracture toughness
behavior, low temperature ductility, high temperature strength retention, and
tensile ductility. These superior properties, as compared to traditional
metallic alloys, suggest immense potential for HEAs in a wide range of
functional and structural applications. Nevertheless, the fundamental mechanisms
that control such properties are not yet fully characterized. Accordingly, this
award will support research to fundamentally quantify the mechanisms controlling
the properties of these complex alloys, with specific focus on their high
temperature mechanical properties for extreme environment applications. This
will be accomplished by utilizing a bottom-up multiscale modeling approach (i.e.
from atoms to continuum scale). This modeling approach is of high scientific and
engineering interest especially with respect to the materials genome initiative.
The integration of research, education and outreach in this project is also a
central component and will focus on: (1) improve STEM achievement in a
predominately African American elementary schools in Baltimore; (2) involve
under-represented students from a local historically black college through
internships on research in mechanics and materials; and (3) develop an education
portfolio that will increase the knowledge of undergraduate and graduate
students in fundamentals of state-of-the-art multiscale
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of this research are to fundamentally identify the underlying
mechanisms controlling the ductility at low temperatures, the work-hardening
response, and the retention of strength at high temperatures in face-centered
cubic (FCC) and body-centered cubic (BCC) multicomponent concentrated solid
solution alloys. Primarily, the focus will be on FCC Cantor-like alloys, such as
CoCrNi, CoCrFeNi and CoCrFeMnNi alloys, which show very promising fracture
toughness behavior and low temperature ductility, as well as refractory BCC HEAs
alloys, such as HfNbTiZr, HfNbTaTiZr, and NbTiZr with V, Mo, Ta, and Al
additions, which show significant high temperature strength retention and
tensile ductility. This will be achieved through a bottom-up coupled approach,
which combines molecular dynamics (MD), Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC), and three-
dimensional (3D) discrete dislocation dynamics (DDD) simulations to predict
dislocation and twinning mediated plasticity in both FCC and BCC HEAs. The 3D
DDD simulations proposed here will be informed by the MD and KMC simulations to
also incorporate twinning mediated plasticity and fluctuations in screw
dislocation cross-slip activation energy due to statistical variations in local
atomic concentrations. The results of these multiscale simulations will also be
used to develop an analytical model to predict the high temperature yield stress
of BCC multi-component concentrated solid solution
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.