* 1807822
* Understanding self-assembled He-bubble superlattices under deformation in materials utilizing novel experimental methods
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Peter Hosemann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 354,271.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The creation of inert gases in materials, by
nuclear reactions induced by irradiation within a material, for example, can
lead to the development of very small gas bubbles in the material. These
features can change a material's response to mechanical deformation and can lead
to increased strength. Depending on temperature, the amount of gas, and time,
these gas bubbles can arrange themselves into an ordered structure, which is
oftentimes called a gas-bubble 'superlattice'. Deformation of the material, can
change the arrangement of this gas-bubble superlattice, which, in turn, can
change the mechanical-property response of the material. In this work, we will
focus on helium (He) bubbles, which are common in materials exposed to nuclear
environments. We will use a helium-ion-beam microscope with subsequent small-
scale mechanical-property evaluation techniques, such as indentation and nano-
pillar compression testing. Different materials which represent different
structures will be investigated which will allow us to understand the changes
these structures undergo while being deformed and its implications for the
mechanical performance of a material. The images and results of this research
will be used as an outreach tool in classes and in presentations, to engage
local high-school students in materials research. Furthermore, we will actively
engage undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented minority
groups, in this research effort, thereby training them on relevant materials-
science techniques and tools and preparing them early for graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to
obtain a fundamental understanding of self-assembled, nanoscale, He-bubble
superlattices in representative metallic materials of different crystal
structures under external load and subsequent deformation. The goal is to
observe how this regular arrangement of gas bubbles reacts to the deformation,
perhaps even to the point of losing the regular arrangement of the bubbles. To
make these observations systematically, we will utilize a He-ion-beam microscope
in a novel way: namely, not to photograph images but to implant the beam's He
into the material. By controlling the implantation, we can quantify with
increased experimental accuracy the mechanical-property changes associated with
these structures, which will allow us to refine the material-hardening models
with direct parameter input from these experiments. Expanding the experimental
text matrix to different crystal structures (FCC, BCC, HCP) will lead to a more
fundamental understanding of the formation of these structures while also
generalizing the effect of these structures on mechanical properties.
Additionally, the development of this new implantation technique not only will
accelerate research on gas bubbles in materials but may also impact other
scientific fields investigating the optical and quantum properties of
semiconductors as well as nano-foamed materials. The funding will provide the
resources needed to do the research and will allow the nuclear-materials group
at UC Berkeley to intensify our outreach efforts both within and outside the
academic community, to trigger the general public's interest in materials and
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.