* 1807293
* Stabilization and Circuit Strategies for Enhanced Vapor Sensing with Polymer Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Howard Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 438,463.00

Non-technical: Sensing of gas-phase compounds is essential for monitoring
industrial processes, detecting military and security threats, ensuring air
quality, and, most recently, aids medical diagnosis. Small, unobtrusive, and
low-cost sensors can be deployed throughout an area or a building and
incorporated into wearable electronics. Organic semiconductors (OSCs) are
attractive for use in vapor sensors as they can be incorporated into simple
devices such as resistors or transistors and are compatible with mechanically
flexible substrates and low-cost fabrication processes. The chemical properties
of OSCs can be tuned to optimize the response to target gases and control the
electronic responses of sensors. One major drawback of OSC-based sensors is the
tendency of the output current or voltage to drift over time due to
environmental effects such as temperature and humidity or in response to non-
target gases (interferents). This project will use chemically stable OSCs and
employ them in circuit layouts that minimize the influence of interferents and
environmental effects. Progress will be made by combining material synthesis
with device fabrication and simulation of devices and circuits. Circuits will be
developed that preserve sensitivity while minimizing environmental drift; arrays
of these circuits will provide increased selectivity. The project will include
multiple outreach efforts. Computer modeling opportunities will be offered to
undergraduate and high school students from the underserved Appalachian region
anchored by Frostburg State University. A related class will be developed and a
summer camp for high school students will be held at Frostburg State University.
High school interns will be recruited to Johns Hopkins University from a local
high school that serves an underrepresented community.

Technical: Sensing of gas-phase compounds is essential for monitoring industrial
processes, detecting military and security threats, ensuring air quality, and
most recently as a tool in medical diagnosis. The smallest, least intrusive, and
lowest cost options can be used for widespread deployment throughout a building
or geographic zone or incorporated into wearable electronics. Organic
semiconductors (OSCs), including molecules and polymers, have multiple
advantages for vapor sensors, as they are compatible with simple sensing
circuitry, mechanically flexible substrates, and low-cost fabrication processes.
They also have well understood chemical tunability and interactions with gaseous
analytes for optimal design and control of the electronic responses to the
analytes. They may be incorporated into simple resistive devices, or organic
field-effect transistors for cascading in logic circuits. One major drawback of
OSC-based sensors is the tendency of the output current or voltage to drift over
time, related to their responsiveness to interferents and environmental
perturbations, such as humidity and temperature change. This proposal will
demonstrate the advantages to be gained by using OSCs with greater chemical
stability and employing them in circuit layouts that minimize the influence of
interferents and make the responses to analytes more pronounced. Progress will
be made by combined efforts in material and device fabrication and in simulation
of devices and circuits. The combined material sensitivity to analytes and
stability against environmental influences will be optimized. Circuits will be
developed that preserve analyte signaling while minimizing the environmental
drift. Arrays of these circuits will provide increased selectivity. This work
will provide an enabling solution to performance requirements for the adoption
of OSC-based sensors in commercial technologies. Electronic device simulation
opportunities will be offered to undergraduate and high school students from the
underserved Appalachian region anchored by Frostburg State University.
Undergraduate students will learn semiconductor device physics, develop computer
programming skills, and learn modern device simulation software. High school
interns will be recruited to Johns Hopkins University from predominantly female-
minority Western High School in Baltimore City.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.