* 1807852
* Dynamic Elements: Effects of Co-Solvents on Peptide Folding Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Carey Johnson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Krzysztof Kuczera and Corey K. Johnson of the University of Kansas are supported
by an award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry to analyze how biological molecules modify their structures in
response to external stimuli, using experimental and computational approaches.
Changes in response to environmental influences are a crucial aspect of
biomolecular function in living cells, and can involve responses to temperature,
pH, and solvents. This project focuses on peptides, relatively small molecules
---10-60 amino acids in length---that serve as simple models of proteins.
Professors Kuczera and Johnson are designing custom peptides tailored to exhibit
shapes such as helices, sheets, and turns. These shapes incorporate "reporter"
components for tracking structural changes. Time-resolved spectroscopy is used
to analyze peptide structure and motion under normal conditions and under
various stresses. A combination of computational approaches is used to model the
three-dimensional peptide structures. A key component of this computer modeling
strategy is the identification the peptide's "dynamic elements"---
representative shapes used to characterize the experimentally-determined peptide
changes, including folding and unfolding. This research advances understanding
of fundamental biological processes such as enzyme activity and cell signaling,
and applications to drug delivery. Educational activities include the
integration of computational modeling techniques into general chemistry classes,
with over 1200 students annually. The team expands the widely-used computer
simulation interface for use in molecular modeling education. While the research
program trains, participation in the university's Diversity Scholars Program
supports the success and retention of minority students in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis underlying this project is that
changes in peptide folding pathways induced by the addition of co-solvents are
the result of specific microscopic interactions. The research is utilizing
combined experimental and computational approaches to investigate folding path
changes of designed peptides exhibiting an array of helices, sheets and turns.
The project is using a range of advanced spectroscopic methods, including
circular dichroism, NMR, and FRET, with analysis of fluorescence anisotropy
decay (FAD) to probe rotational motion, and temperature-jump studies for
analyzing kinetic processes. The studies are being performed in buffer, and in
the presence of denaturants, protective osmolytes and viscogens, in order to
characterize dynamical effects as a function of environment. Clustering and
kinetic coarse-graining are employed to identify major, representative peptide
conformers, its "dynamic elements", from trajectory analysis of molecular
dynamics (MD) and replica-exchange MD simulations. Dihedral-restrained MD and
continuum hydrodynamics are used to analyze diffusion and microscopic solvation
patterns of the dynamic elements, allowing de-convolution of the observed
spectroscopic signals into contributions from specific structures and
interactions. For each peptide type and environment, co-solvent effects on
structure, local and global dynamics and on equilibria between folded, unfolded,
and intermediate states are analyzed. By mapping observed signals onto specific
structures, interactions and motions, the microscopic insight provided by the
dynamic elements approach, grounded in comprehensive experimental data, is
providing insight into the structure, dynamics and folding pathways of the basic
structural building blocks of peptides and proteins at new level of detail. The
project is integrating extensive computational modeling and active learning
activities (visualization, kinetic data analysis, dynamical systems, agent-based
modeling) within the general chemistry curriculum, and the investigators are
contributing to the recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups in
chemistry, through participation in the University of Kansas Diversity Scholars
Program and Research Experience for Undergraduates
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.