* 1807563
* CDS&amp;E: Optimization of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure through Data-Driven Computational Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patrick Bridges, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,644.00

Modern scientific and big-data computing systems must balance multiple system
attributes such as power, &lt;br/&gt;performance, and reliability to meet
application science demands. These systems and their designers are,
however,&lt;br/&gt;constrained by the lack of clear and well-defined methods to
guide system design and tuning. This reduces the &lt;br/&gt;overall
effectiveness of modern strategic computing systems. This project is developing
new&lt;br/&gt;techniques for quantitatively characterizing and optimizing system
tradeoffs in a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;modern strategic computing systems. The
short term goal of this project is to develop models, analyses,&lt;br/&gt;and
optimizations that will enable system software, applications, and system
architects to make effective &lt;br/&gt;end-to-end performance tradeoffs. The
desired long-term impact of this research is to increase the&lt;br/&gt;overall
efficiency and effectiveness of current and emerging strategic computing
systems. The techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed as part of this project will also be
integrated with large-scale computing educational programs&lt;br/&gt;at the
University of New Mexico and across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is grounded in stochastic inter-collective-interval model for
characterizing &lt;br/&gt;the performance of application/system-software
configurations. To this end, the project is &lt;br/&gt;investigating techniques
for estimating how different system software and applications mechanisms change
&lt;br/&gt;application model parameters, providing a general means for
understanding application/system software &lt;br/&gt;performance tradeoffs. In
addition, the project is examining optimization techniques that leverage
&lt;br/&gt;these models to improve resource allocation decisions in system
schedulers and runtime systems. &lt;br/&gt;These techniques are being evaluated
based on their ability to improve the overall performance of modern
&lt;br/&gt;strategic computing systems in areas such as scheduling, power
management, and data locality. The techniques&lt;br/&gt;developed as part of
this project will also be integrated with large-scale computing educational
programs&lt;br/&gt;at the University of New Mexico and across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.