* 1807263
* Tuning the Spin Texture in Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Suchismita Guha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 413,333.00

Non-Technical Description: Organic-inorganic perovskite materials are attracting
a lot of attention as novel optoelectronic materials, in particular for
photovoltaic applications. They are becoming a viable source for clean power
generation, as the efficiency of perovskite solar cells gets close to that of
crystalline silicon. As with any new technology, there are fundamental
challenges that need to be addressed; there is a need to find alternate ways of
improving the efficiency and stability of perovskite materials. As sunlight is
absorbed in a photovoltaic material, charges are produced. Some factors that
improve the efficiency of solar cell materials involve suppression of charge
recombination and increasing the distance that charges can travel in the
material (diffusion length) before being collected. Perovskite materials allow
the manipulation of recombination pathways by tuning interatomic distances,
which in turn impacts the magnetic behavior of the charge carriers, known as
spin. This research interfaces the areas of perovskite materials and high
pressure techniques, and provides a novel way of tuning charge carrier lifetimes
and diffusion lengths by influencing the spin-dependent property of the charges.
The project has a direct impact on improving the efficiency and stability of
perovskite materials for photovoltaic applications. The connection between
advanced concepts in science and education is reinforced by involving
undergraduate students in advanced magneto-optical experiments to probe spin-
dependent phenomena in perovskite films. The project plays a vital role in
training future scientists; undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers gain expertise in a multidisciplinary range of technical skills. The
international scope provides US students an exciting opportunity to work with
researchers from Europe and South Africa. A diversity intensive seminar course
on "Science under Pressure" is designed, which includes discussions on the
physics of materials under high pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The project focuses on high pressure techniques for tuning the spin
texture effect in alkali halide organic-inorganic perovskite materials. The spin
texture of the conduction and valence bands may be controlled by changing the
interatomic distances, resulting in different spin helicities. The main
objective of the research is a fundamental understanding of the ramifications of
spin-orbit coupling in perovskite materials. The research validates the
prediction of the Rashba spin-splitting, which result in both spin-allowed and
spin-forbidden recombination channels. The project employs: a) chemical vapor
deposition of methylammonium Pb-halogen perovskite films including replacement
of Pb and organic cations with Cs and other molecular cations in collaboration
with the University of Western Cape, South Africa; (b) optical, structural, and
magneto-transport studies under ambient conditions; (c) Raman scattering under
high pressure to monitor the phonons associated with the octahedral cage of the
perovskite structure; (d) X-ray diffraction under pressure for correlating
structural and optical properties; (e) photoreflectance spectroscopy under
pressure; and (f) magnetoresistance measurements under high pressure. The
research team aims to develop protocols for the analysis of a non-trivial
Berry's phase from magnetoresistance measurements. An additional facet of the
project addresses the simultaneous presence of ferroelectric and topological
order in a class of inorganic halide perovskites under a strain field. The
results of this project are relevant for various practical applications. The
presence of topological states and the prospect of tuning the spin texture
effect in hybrid alkali halide perovskites open up schemes for designing
materials with improved performance in photovoltaic applications and high speed
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.