* 1807940
* GOALI: Transforming Wavefronts with Additive Manufactured Electromagnetic Metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Gurkan Gok, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 11/30/2022
* USD 392,862.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;A new approach to controlling electromagnetic waves is proposed
using finely textured surfaces (metasurfaces) fabricated through advanced
additive manufacturing. Unlike conventional curved lenses that simply phase
correct and focus waves, the proposed metasurfaces can transform both the phase
and amplitude of electromagnetic waves. Today, such functionality requires
complex assemblies of lenses (compound lenses) that are often bulky and cost
prohibitive. The advance-manufactured metasurfaces promise to extend
functionality, reduce size and weight, as well as lower manufacturing costs over
these existing lens-based solutions. The proposed, finely-textured surfaces
(metasurfaces) will enable ultra-thin, low cost and highly efficient antennas
for airborne satellite communications and imaging, as well as make possible low-
cost, low-power imaging and radar solutions with applications to environmental
remote sensing, autonomous vehicle navigation and security scanners. The
proposed metasurfaces promise to separate electromagnetic functionality from
shape. Conventional lenses derive their electromagnetic properties from their
shape. The proposed surfaces can take on arbitrary shapes while performing a
targeted functionality, since they derive their properties from their fine
texture. This will enable them to be seamlessly integrated into various form
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative University-Industry effort
supports advanced manufacturing in America. Specifically, the proposed research
will advance additive manufacturing methods through the development of
affordable, advanced-manufactured electromagnetic devices. An integral component
of this project is education and outreach. It includes internships for graduate
students with the industry partner, summer undergraduate research projects at
the University of Michigan, as well as the development of a short course and
graduate course material in electromagnetic metamaterials and additive
manufacturing by the University PI and Industry co-PI. The outreach effort will
also include the organization of joint technical sessions at prominent
conferences with both academic and industrial
invitees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
University-Industry research effort is to develop reflectionless metasurfaces
capable of transforming an impinging electromagnetic wavefront, in both phase
and amplitude, to a desired aperture field. Unlike conventional, curved lenses
that simply phase correct wavefronts, the proposed metasurfaces can apply
extreme phase, polarization, and amplitude changes to a wavefront in a low-loss
manner. Additive manufacturing capabilities of the industry partner will be
advanced, and exploited to realize the proposed metasurfaces that require both
in-plane and out-of-plane structure. Unlike the metasurfaces reported to date
that offer only polarization and phase control, the proposed metasurfaces will
also be able to manipulate the amplitude distribution of a wavefront. A
theoretical framework and systematic approach to designing such metasurfaces is
proposed. The metasurfaces will possess both tangential and normal (out-of-
plane) surface parameters that can be electric, magnetic, and magneto-electric.
The complex geometries required to achieve these surface parameters will be
fabricated through advanced additive manufacturing methods developed by industry
partner. The additive manufacturing methods allow both low-loss dielectrics and
high conductivity metals to be seamlessly combined into three-dimensional
geometries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the polarization, phase and
amplitude of electromagnetic waves is critical to electromagnetic systems
ranging from RF to optical wavelengths. The proposed metasurfaces will enable
ultra-thin microwave, millimeter-wave and sub-millimeter-wave lenses that can
generate wavefronts with arbitrary amplitude, polarization, and phase profiles.
Applications will range from optimal antenna-feed coupling, lenses that allow
precise control over the radiated beam pointing direction and sidelobe level, to
the formation of perfect holograms with images reconstructed in both phase and
amplitude. Several business units of the industry partner will benefit from the
extended functionality, reduced size and weight, and potentially lower
manufacturing cost of these metasurfaces that are enabled by additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.