* 1807541
* Bismuth Rudorffites: Promising New Materials for the Top Cell in Solution Processed Tandem PV
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Hugh Hillhouse, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 424,908.00

Non-Technical Description: An effective way to decrease the overall cost of
electricity from solar energy is to increase the power conversion efficiency of
solar cells, particularly if it can be accomplished with minimal increase in
manufacturing cost. This goal can be achieved by adding a low-cost high-bandgap
solar cell on top of a silicon solar cell. To date, the most promising materials
for this top-cell are hybrid perovskites. These new materials have
extraordinarily high performance, but they contain lead, which is toxic and
raises environmental concerns. This project focuses on developing new low-
toxicity bismuth-based high bandgap semiconductors that can potentially be used
instead. The team is exploring a recently discovered class of bismuth materials
called rudorffites and is building an understanding of the critical
relationships between material structure, properties, and processing for these
non-toxic semiconductors. This basic research could have significant societal
impact by enabling the development of low-cost tandem solar cells from non-toxic
elements. Furthermore, the project provides training of a graduate student, a
postdoctoral scholar, and several undergraduates, as well as engage the public
though the Pacific Science Center in Seattle and the Clean Energy Institute's
Clean Energy Ambassadors program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Bismuth-based semiconductors are interesting non-toxic optoelectronic materials
since the partial oxidation of Bi3+ with the 6s2 lone pair is expected to lead
to similar defect tolerance as the lead-based hybrid perovskites. The recently
discovered bismuth rudorffites are of particular interest since they exhibit
high bandgaps suitable for tandem solar cells. Solar cells from bismuth
rudorffites have a few-percentage efficiency, but they have the potential for
much higher efficiency. In this project, investigators are conducting a body of
fundamental research to explore the potential of solution grown bismuth
rudorffites for optoelectronic applications, to understand the fundamental
processes responsible for potential performance limitations and to develop
strategies to overcome them. Preliminary research shows that nanoscale layer
morphology and doping/alloying have a tremendous effect on the optoelectronic
quality of these materials. The project utilizes combinatorial spray coating
methods to synthesize a large number of alloy/doping compositions, absolute
intensity photoluminescence to assess quasi-Fermi level splitting, and
photoconductivity-based methods to assess the carrier diffusion length. The goal
is to connect structure and processing with the most important material
performance metrics for photovoltaic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.