* 1807461
* SemiSynBio: Collaborative Research: Very Large-Scale Genetic Circuit Design Automation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kate Adamala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 275,625.00

The computing power of biology is incredible, evident in the natural world in
the intricate patterns underlying materials and the body plan of animals. Cells
build these structures by using networks of interacting bio-molecules, encoded
in their DNA, that function as microscopic computers, the power of which grows
as many cells communicate to work together on a problem. The goal of this
project is to significantly scale-up the ability to build these systems by
design such that cells can be programmed to perform complex computational tasks.
This will be done by creating software that allows a user to write code, exactly
as one would program a computer, which is then compiled to a DNA sequence. New
theoretical tools will be applied to determine the power required by the cell to
run these programs and how best to distribute tasks between circuits encoded in
cells and conventional electronic systems. This research will broadly impact
biotechnology, which is increasingly being used to commercially produce a wide
range of products, from consumer goods to high-end advanced materials. Current
products do not harness the computational potential of cells; in other words,
all the genes are turned on all the time. This research will enable cells to be
programmed to build chemicals and materials in multiple steps, both by
performing the computations inside of the cells and also communicating across
cells. This work is interdisciplinary and requires backgrounds in Biology,
Chemistry, Mathematics, Biological Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and
Computer Science. As such, the project includes the development of new
educational platforms in anticipation of a need in industry for students trained
at the interface between traditionally separated fields. This includes a new
undergraduate-level Synthetic Biology Design course, an industrial co-op, and
curriculum material "How to Grow Almost Anything," which will be made public at
an international level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To build the complexity of the
natural world, cells use regulatory networks made up of interacting bio-
molecules to control the timing and conditions for gene regulation. For the last
20 years, researchers have been able to build synthetic genetic circuits by
artfully combining regulatory interactions. The problem is that the largest of
such circuits only consist of ~10 regulators, far smaller than natural networks,
which drastically limits the computation that can be performed. The proposed
research will develop technologies that collectively enable a massive scale-up
in computational complexity to ~10^5 regulators. The first objective seeks to
increase the size of circuits within cells. Logic gates based on Cas9 have
enormous scale-up potential, but are limited by dCas9 toxicity and sequence
repeats. A set of gates will be designed to fix these problems, guided by
mathematical modeling. A framework for design automation will be developed that
enables a Verilog specification to be converted into a logic diagram, that is
then divided up amongst many interacting cells. The second objective seeks to
distribute a genetic circuit design across multiple communicating cells. The
number and reliability of cell-cell communication signals will be improved by
directed evolution to increase the number of channels from 2 to 8. These will be
implemented in living cells and non-living systems, thus enabling a broad range
of applications inside and outside the bioreactor. Combined with 50 gates/cell,
this platform offers the possibility of multicellular circuits containing 10^5+
gates. Some applications require deployment as a non-living system, for example
when the application is outside of the lab, thus requiring containment. The
third objective seeks to translate the parts developed in Objectives 1 and 2 to
operate in multiple communicating lipid vesicles encapsulating cell-free protein
extract. Cas9 gates and additional communication channels will be characterized
to expand the computational potential. These will be characterized as gates and
implemented using Electronic Design Automation tools to automate the design of
large systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.