* 1807047
* Collaborative Research: IGE: Scaling Faculty Development to Broaden Participation in Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Julie Posselt, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 490,672.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the University of Southern California and Rochester Institute of Technology
will pilot a network of faculty and administrators across six major California
universities that aims to improve how universities choose the scientists of the
future. Currently, the demographic composition of the student body in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) doctoral programs and the
scientific workforce is not only different from the composition of U.S.
demographics, but it is also changing more slowly than the demographic shifts in
the US. It is important to address these inequities in order to create a robust
domestic scientific workforce, which may contribute to a healthy economy and
promote U.S. scientific superiority. Inherited practices for recruiting,
admitting, and mentoring graduate students contribute to these inequities, as
does the lack of opportunity for faculty to reflect upon their practices in
these areas. This award creates innovative systems by which faculty can improve
those practices, and therefore holds significant promise as a strategy for
broadening participation in graduate education and the scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will form a network that provides faculty and
graduate school administrators within and across the University of Southern
California and University of California campuses at Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los
Angeles, and Santa Barbara with opportunity and incentives to critically reflect
upon and change longstanding practices. Participating STEM PhD programs will
receive professional development from project leaders in the form of workshops
and continuous learning activities on recruiting, admitting, and mentoring
graduate students from diverse backgrounds. Leaders that emerge from each
program in years 1 and 2 will be selected to establish campus-level teams who
will deliver similar faculty-to-faculty learning opportunities on their own
campuses. The research and evaluation activities of the project involve a
sequential multi-method study, including the first-ever clustered randomized
experiment to test the impact of faculty development around three outcomes: the
admissions practices that PhD programs use, the diversity of their admitted
cohorts, and the programs' selectivity. The structure of the network allows for
sustainable gains, and it works with, rather than against, the decentralized
nature of graduate education and its varied institutional and disciplinary
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
program is focused on research in graduate education. The goals of IGE are to
pilot, test and validate innovative approaches to graduate education and to
generate the knowledge required to move these approaches into the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.