* 1807810
* Exploring 2D Van der Waals Heterostructures with Layered Magnets for Valley-Based Electronics and Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jie Shan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 699,999.00

Nontechnical description: The control of magnetism, which lies at the heart of
modern information technology, is typically achieved by using another magnet.
This approach significantly limits the size of devices for information
processing. There is a pressing need to develop non-magnetic approaches to
control magnetism for better information technology. This project aims to
develop a new class of composite magnetic materials of nanometers in thickness,
whose magnetic properties can be effectively switched through an electric field.
Such an operation is much more energy-efficient since it avoids heating of the
electronic device. The research employs atomically thin crystals, including both
magnetic and non-magnetic semiconductors, and stacks them vertically by design.
These composite materials are studied to understand how their structural
characteristics may lead to improved magnetic properties, and to develop device
concepts for applications in electronics and optoelectronics. This project
supports the research and development of one graduate student. In addition to
training in research, the student develops other skills for teaching in the STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) disciplines at the
university level by working with the Cornell University Center for the
Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning. The Principal Investigator is
incorporating state-of-the-art research concepts such as modern optical
microscopy into an undergraduate lab course, while also overseeing outreach
activities targeting younger students and their
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: A large family of two-
dimensional materials that possess interesting properties individually has been
discovered in recent years. Stacking different two-dimensional materials to form
van der Waals heterostructures has opened up unprecedented opportunities for
exploring new physical phenomena and device concepts. This project aims to
develop a new class of ferromagnetic semiconductors based on magnetic proximity
coupling between single-layer non-magnetic semiconductors, such as transition
metal dichalcogenides that exhibit interesting valley-dependent properties, and
layered magnets, such as transition metal trihalides. The research combines
materials fabrication and optical, structural and transport characterization to
achieve three objectives: (1) Demonstrate and understand electrical switching of
magnetic order in layered magnets; (2) Develop heterostructures of non-magnetic
semiconductors and layered magnets with strong magnetic proximity coupling and
demonstrate electrical switching of the valley properties of the
heterostructures; and (3) Explore the transport and optical properties of the
heterostructures for electrically switchable valley-dependent electronic and
optoelectronic devices. The results of this project have the potential to impact
a range of diverse fields including spintronics and valleytronics, as well as
improve understanding of interfacial phenomena in low-dimensional systems. The
project supports the scientific training and professional development of one
graduate student, as well as education and outreach activities at all levels,
while focusing on introduction of state-of-the-art research
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.