* 1807823
* High Field, Fully Superconducting 'Air-Core' Generators for Ultra-large Wind-turbines
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kiruba Haran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 340,000.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The pace of advancement in electric machine technology in
the multi-megawatt scale has not kept up in recent years with the large strides
made in smaller machines and in adjacent areas like power electronics. Rapidly
advancing enabling technologies and exciting new applications offer the
opportunity for potentially transformational electric machine designs.
Superconducting machines, for example, can lead to a step change in power
density and efficiency over conventional designs, making them attractive for
applications ranging from renewable energy generation to transportation. Most
superconducting machines developed to-date are partially superconducting, with
either the stator or the rotor made with conventional (copper or aluminum)
conductors. Fully superconducting machines can further improve specific power if
the increased losses at cryogenic temperatures can be accommodated. The losses
introduced in fully superconducting machines are a strong function of the
electrical frequency, and are particularly difficult to manage. This project is
focused on a machine concept that can retain high power density at relatively
low frequencies, making fully superconducting designs more practical. A
lightweight direct-drive generator that can help reduce the cost of electricity
from offshore wind will be designed and risk reduced. The project is also
expected to help reinvigorate research on large electrical machines in US
schools, and train the next generation of electrical machine experts to support
the growing 'electrification' trend in the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
fully superconducting generator employing active shielding for field containment
and enhancement will be pursued. Significantly higher electromagnetic shear
force can now be obtained in the airgap, leading to substantially higher torque
to weight ratio. The active shielding concept has been applied to relatively
high speed, high frequency aerospace machines, with significant weight
reduction. At the frequencies encountered in the aerospace application, 'ac'
losses in the armature winding would be prohibitively large, and thus only
partially superconducting machines with just 'dc' superconducting excitation
coils have been considered thus far. In this project, superconducting coils will
be utilized in the armature winding as well. An iron core has been employed in
such machines in the past, with relatively modest flux densities experienced by
the superconductor, leading to manageable 'ac' losses. Maintaining the high flux
densities that can be obtained with the shielded 'air-core' topology and
accommodating the resulting 'ac' losses will be challenging, but key to
obtaining the promised reduction in size and weight of the generators.
Preliminary studies indicate that the mitigating effects of the ultra-low
frequency can compensate for the increased field, enabling a significant
reduction in tower top weight (5-10X compared to state-of-the-art). Detailed
multi-physics models incorporating electromagnetic, cryogenic, mechanical and
materials interactions used in the partially superconducting machine projects
will be extended to include physics-based 'ac' loss computations in the
superconducting windings. A scalable (10-50 MW) fully superconducting machine
will then be designed and used in system level
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.