* 1807428
* Switching beyond the Molecule using Hydrazones
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ivan Aprahamian, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 430,000.00

The development of molecular switches and machines is a vital part of the
current scientific drive towards miniaturization. Appreciable advances have been
made in recent years in the design of new molecular switches, integrating them
into bulk materials, and applying them in new functions. However, there are
still many challenges that need to be addressed before such systems can find
their way into real-life applications. This research addresses one of these
issues, which is the lack of a basic understanding of how to make molecular
switches and machines work together towards a useful goal - a solved problem in
natural biological systems. To mimic Nature, the Aprahamian research group at
Dartmouth College studies the interactions of molecular switches with their
environment. This knowledge may lead to the engineering of dynamic, adaptive and
self-regulating molecular assemblies that can be used in drug delivery and
energy-related applications. The broader impacts of this research include
participation in the American Chemical Society's SEED Program and other
endeavors to help retain students at different levels of education (high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students) in the sciences. Professor Aprahamian also
uses interactive demonstrations to educate the public about important concepts
related to supramolecular chemistry. These activities are expected to strengthen
and extend the group's informal and formal science education partnerships and
networks with local schools and science museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
Division of Chemistry, this research examines the coupling of
zinc(II)-initiated, coordination-coupled, deprotonation (CCD) of hydrazone
switches with other metals, particularly palladium(II). These reactions extend
the capabilities of currently known switching cascades and open the way for
compartmentalization driven catalysis using self-assembled cages. The Aprahamian
group gains a deeper understanding of the factors that control CCD-enabled
negative feedback loops and uncovers the underlying rules that lead to analyte
regulation. Finally, the group develops new zinc(II) photocages/switches that
can couple with CCD and feedback loops to enable the future design of
oscillating systems, molecular clocks, and self-regulating
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.