* 1807127
* Design, Structure, and Properties of Polymeric Materials with Programmed Macromolecular Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Virgil Percec, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 519,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will
draw inspiration from a combination of fundamental principles derived from the
metallurgy of metal alloy phases and some of the most fundamental principles of
biology such as homochirality, and apply them to the design and synthesis of
individual macromolecules with simple and complex architectures that may include
memory effects, which will allow to discover new concepts in complex polymeric
materials. These concepts are anticipated to be competitive with the most
efficient methodologies currently available in biology. The outcome of this work
is expected to facilitate control of supramolecular electronic properties of
interest for applications such as solar cells, new tools for medical devices
including drug delivery, environmental aspects of polymer materials, and other
uses. This research involves an interdisciplinary program at the interface
between organic, macromolecular and supramolecular chemistry, physics, biology,
synthetic biology, and materials science; it also includes collaborations with
scientists from around the world. This program will also enable the education of
undergraduate and graduate students, high-school students, and postdoctoral
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Frank-Kasper phases were first discovered and
employed in metal alloys. In soft matter they were discovered in a related NSF
program and recently also in block-copolymers, surfactants and other assemblies.
They are expected to evolve soon into new technological applications. However,
many supramolecular spherical assemblies are helical and therefore chiral and
the molecular mechanism as well as the role of homochirality in these phases
remains to be understood. The structures and properties generated by memory
effects in these materials are accessible only by chiral supramolecular
dendrimers and by other monodisperse assemblies. Therefore, this project will
elucidate the role of chirality in Frank-Kasper soft phases and will be
fundamental for the development of new material properties from polymers and any
other organic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though most polymeric and
organic materials exhibit helical structures and are therefore chiral, they are
considered to be racemic when assembled from achiral or racemic building blocks
and display low-ordered structures and properties. This supramolecular trend is
similar to that of isotactic (homochiral), syndiotactic (heterochiral), and
atactic (racemic) polymers. A new mechanism of crystallization, the cogwheel
mechanism that disregards chirality, has recently been discovered and shown to
be potentially able to eliminate the difference regarding the perfection of
helical structures generated from chiral versus racemic building blocks. The
generality of this mechanism to combinations of racemic and achiral building
blocks to generate the same material properties as the homochiral ones will be
studied. The outcome of this research will have broad scientific impact across
many types of materials, including electronic, medical, and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another aspect of this project involves
monodisperse polymers. Monodisperse polymers containing single-dimension species
are produced only by biology. This research will include continued development
of self-interrupted living polymerization, which will enable study of
similarities and differences between the structure and properties of truly
monodisperse polymers versus those of narrow dispersity produced by standard
living polymerizations. These will also impact broad areas involving the design
of polymeric materials with numerous potential
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.