* 1807407
* Cationic Amphiphilic Polyproline Helices (CAPHs): Coupling Antibacterial Activity with Mammalian Cell Penetration
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Jean Chmielewski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 12/31/2022
* USD 671,334.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Jean Chmielewski from Purdue University to
investigate how newly designed cell penetrating compounds function. The entry of
genes, proteins, particles and, at times, small molecules into cells is
prohibited due to their inability to adequately cross the membrane of cells. A
class of molecules has been designed that effectively cross the cell membrane
and enter human cells. These same molecules also interact with bacterial cells
leading to the death of the bacteria. In this work, changes to the molecules are
made to improve both of these activities, and also to gain a deeper
understanding of the way in which the molecules function. This pursuit allows
graduate students to acquire specialized training in organic and peptide
synthesis, human cell imaging and antibacterial action. This project also seeks
to increase the diversity of the graduate student population in the chemistry
department at Purdue University through the Chemistry Diversity Initiative, a
three-pronged program for the successful recruitment, retention and professional
development of underrepresented minority graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project undertakes mechanistic
studies of a class of molecules, cationic amphiphilic polyproline helices
(CAPHs), that are designed to effectively translocate mammalian cell membranes
and also display potent antibacterial activity. The goals of the proposed
research are to probe the specific structural features within CAPHs that allow
for efficient cell uptake, subcellular localization and antibacterial action,
while developing a mechanistic model for CAPH activity. Additionally, CAPHs are
harnessed to alter the specificity of antibiotics, such as vancomycin, to target
Gram negative bacteria. Information from this study provides a deeper
mechanistic insight into the structure and function of CAPHs within mammalian
and bacterial cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.