* 1807332
* Meeting: 7th Foundations of Systems Biology in Engineering Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Juergen Hahn, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the 7th Foundations of Systems Biology in Engineering
Conference (FOSBE), an international conference, being held in Chicago,
Illinois, August 5-8, 2018. The funds provided by NSF are used to subsidize the
cost of undergraduate and graduate student registration. The field of systems
biology involves the holistic study of complex biological interactions in an
effort to understand an organism's function. It has emerged as the bridge
between the reductionist approaches of molecular and cellular biology and the
more global understanding of an organism's function that is required in order to
produce useful knowledge. Such knowledge would be applied to agriculture and
medicine for example. The FOSBE conference convenes an international group of
scientists that provides an in-depth review and critical assessment of the
current state-of-the-art in systems biology and discusses the current and future
needs of research, education and training for the scientific area. The
conference also discusses the translation of scientific knowledge into practical
applications for the benefit of society and identify new directions,
opportunities and challenges in the area of systems biology. The program for
this conference includes, platform presentations, as well as extended poster
sessions and brainstorming sessions that allow attendees to spontaneously
interact with each other. Attending undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral research associated have opportunities to give presentations and
enhance their training in the area of systems. The conference proceedings and
results will be published in an appropriate scientific journal.

The field of systems biology, and its translational science counterpart systems
medicine, has emerged as the bridge between reductionist molecular and cellular
biology approaches and the systems-level understanding required to use this
knowledge. Drawing upon the revolutionary advances from reductionist approaches
in molecular and cellular biology, systems approaches focus on the relationships
between the gene, protein, and metabolite responses that compose the individual
and population responses at the whole organism level. The 7th Foundations of
Systems Biology in Engineering Conference provides an in-depth review and
critical assessment of the current state-of-the-art and discusses current and
future needs of research, education, training and translation to practice. In
addition, new directions, opportunities and challenges in systems biology are
identified. The activities include poster sessions, a conference proceeding and
brainstorming sessions.

This conference is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Bioscience and the Engineering Biology and
Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.