* 1807703
* Linking Thermodynamics to Pollutant Reduction Rates by Fe(II) Bound to Iron Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Christopher Gorski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2022
* USD 365,805.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports research by Prof. Christopher Gorski at Pennsylvania State
University. The goal of this project is to improve public access to clean water.
The majority of drinking water in the U.S. comes from groundwater aquifers. In
the U.S., over 126,000 groundwater aquifers contain toxic chemicals. This
research aims to understand how toxic chemicals transform in groundwater systems
over time. The work looks at how the composition of water affects the
transformations. The work also develops a new teaching program for grade 6-12
young women. The teaching program aims to teach young women about groundwater
and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to mechanistically elucidate
why pollutant reduction rates by Fe(II) bound to iron oxide minerals are highly
sensitive to changes in solution chemistry and the presence of iron oxide
nanoparticles. Many classes of environmental pollutants undergo reductive
transformations in groundwater coupled to the oxidation of oxide-bound Fe(II).
These transformations significantly alter a pollutant's toxicity, solubility,
and/or bioavailability, and therefore they must be taken into account in risk
assessments and remediation efforts. The rates of these reactions are highly
variable among studies. Reported reaction rate constants varying by over six
orders of magnitude for commonly studied pollutants. Models based on
thermodynamic parameters can often explain trends among measured pollutant
reduction rates in simple water chemistries. However, they fail to describe
datasets collected with more complex water chemistries relevant to real
groundwater systems, limiting their practical use. To address this issue, this
project tests several working hypotheses previously proposed in the literature
to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for changes in pollutant reduction rates
when iron oxide nanoparticles, carbonate, and/or natural organic matter are
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.