* 1807029
* Particle and Gamma-Ray Astrophysics with HAWC/VERITAS (Utah Group Grant)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2021
* USD 745,000.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. This award supports scientists at the
University of Utah to carry out gamma-ray astrophysics research using two
complementary ground-based observatories. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is designed to
study high energy gamma-rays with very sensitive pointed observations. The High-
Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra
Negra in Mexico, is a continuously-operating array with a wide field of view
that can observe two-thirds of the high energy gamma-ray sky every day. The
University of Utah group will contribute to the operation and maintenance of
VERITAS and HAWC and work on analysis and interpretation of the scientific data
from both observatories in conjunction with the FERMI satellite gamma-ray
observatory. Through their leadership role in the newly formed Consortium for
Dark Sky Studies the group will develop interdisciplinary connections between
astronomy, and earth sciences, as well as urban planning and economic
development. The group will continue and expand their existing education and
outreach activities through research internships designed to bring research
opportunities to physics undergraduate students in small liberal arts colleges,
through the organization of the yearly SNOWPAC conference series and the meeting
of the four-Corners Section of the American Physical Society, and by hosting a
conference on dark skies science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Utah
group will use recently developed diffuse analysis techniques and multi-
wavelength analyses to study the properties of galactic binary systems LS I +61
303 and Swift J0243.6+6124 and to resolve the putative detection of galactic
microquasar SS433. The group will reprocess both new and archival VERITAS
observations with these analysis techniques to search for a new class of highly-
extended high energy gamma-ray sources that have been suggested by recent HAWC
observations. The researchers will apply the multi-wavelength analyses to joint
FERMI-VERITAS-HAWC observations to substantially improve source localization and
energy spectrum constraints on point and diffuse sources. This award supports
additional work on understanding the origin of high energy horizontal muons
created by extensive air showers that are sensitive to high energy cosmic ray
composition and origin. This award also supports first visible band optical
imaging of 30 nearby stars using stellar intensity interferometry
instrumentation at the VERITAS observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.