* 1807522
* Collaborative Research: Targeted resampling of deep polar ice cores using information theory
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Tyler Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 94,505.00

Ice cores contain detailed accounts of Earth's climate history. The collection
of an ice core can be logistically challenging, and extraction of data from the
core can be time-consuming as well as susceptible to both human and machine
error. Furthermore, locked in measurements from ice cores is information that
scientists have not yet found ways to recover. This project will apply
techniques from information theory to ice-core data to unlock that information.
The primary goal is to demonstrate that information theory can (a) identify
regions of a specific ice-core record that are in need of further analysis and
(b) provide some specific guidance for that analysis. A secondary goal is to
demonstrate that information theory has practical and scientific utility for
studies of past climate.

This project aims to use information theory in two distinct ways: first, to
identify regions of a core where information appears to be damaged or missing,
perhaps due to human and/or machine error. In the segment of the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet Divide core that is 5000-8000 years old, for instance, information-
theoretic methods reveal significant levels of noise, probably due to a
laboratory instrument, and something that was not visible in the raw data. This
is a particularly important segment of the record, as it contains valuable clues
about climatic shifts and the onset of the Holocene. Targeted re-sampling of
this segment of the core and reanalysis with newer laboratory apparatus could
resolve the data issues. The second way in which information theory can
potentially aid in ice-core analysis is by extracting climate signals from the
data--such as the accumulation rate at the core site over the period of its
formation. This quantity usually requires significant time and effort to
produce, but information theory could help to streamline that process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.