* 1807374
* Probing Eectroweak Symmetry Breaking and Searches for New Physics at the LHC with the ATLAS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kathryn Grimm, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 389,598.00

This award will provide support to a new group working on the ATLAS experiment
at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in
Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle detector
facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and other
agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the Higgs
Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM)
that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics. Search for evidence of such physics is the goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California State University East Bay high
energy physics group will use data collected by the ATLAS experiment to probe
the mechanism by which fundamental particles acquire mass through electroweak
symmetry breaking (EWSB) and to search for evidence of new physics. The group
will search for pairs of Higgs bosons and other exotic particles decaying to
pairs of b-quarks and pairs of tau leptons. Study of such rare events has become
more viable as the center-of-mass energy of the LHC is increased to 14 TeV and
the luminosity of the accelerator facility is steadily increased. In parallel,
upgrades of the ATLAS detector are underway which will allow for further
improvements in data recording. The Cal State East Bay group will focus on
reconstruction of particle tracks and their association with primary collision
vertices, important for the identification and measurement of the b-quarks and
tau leptons in complex particle interactions. Collaboration is planned with the
ATLAS group at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory to work on the upgrade
of the ATLAS Fast TracKer (FTK), instrumentation that facilitates fast charged-
particle track finding used in triggering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will bring the excitement and study of high energy physics to Cal State
East Bay, which is recognized as a university with one of the most diverse
undergraduate student enrollments in the country. Students in the group will
participate in collaborative science, data analysis, and in instrumentation
testing at the group's campus laboratories and at SLAC and
CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.