* 1807358
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the role of branching in determining the physicochemical properties of dendritic, hyperbranched and linear bis-MPA polyesters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Scott Grayson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,956.00

A significant percentage of the materials around us are made from plastics, also
referred to as "polymers". The vast majority of synthetic polymers exhibit a
linear structure, resembling a string, on the molecular level. Within the last
few decades, a number of branched polymers, with a more tree-like molecular
structure, have been designed and made commercially. The difference in structure
from linear to branched results in unique properties and applications. Professor
Grayson at Tulane University and Professor Nazarenko at the University of
Southern Mississippi are using new synthetic methods to control the exact amount
of branching in a family of polyesters. They study the properties of the
polyesters to better understand how controlling polymer structure on the
molecular level can yield polyesters with improved behavior and performance.
This effort engages researchers from both the undergraduate and the graduate
levels in a multi-disciplinary, collaborative approach. This project also
include outreach to local public high school chemistry classes to demonstrate
the use of the scientific method to better understand fundamental concepts in
chemistry. A new interdisciplinary archeological chemistry course is also under
development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program from the Division of Chemistry, new
synthetic tools are being employed to prepare a library of linear,
hyperbranched, dendritic and "pseudodendritic" polymers based on the
bis(hydromethyl)propanoic acid monomer. Both traditional (nuclear magnetic
resonance) and more novel (mass spectrometry) characterization techniques are
being utilized to elucidate the structure as well as the reactivity of each
architectural class of these polymers. X-ray studies are combined with computer
modeling to confirm the nature of the intra-and inter-molecular hydrogen bonding
that occurs in these polyesters. Pressure-volume-temperature studies are carried
out to understand the molecular packing in the melt and solid states. Finally,
the materials dielectric properties are being investigated and correlated with
the type of branching, as these materials show promise for high dielectric
constant materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.