* 1807922
* NMR methodologies for measuring correlated structural distributions in oxide glasses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Philip Grandinetti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2022
* USD 529,631.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and co-funding from the Ceramics Program in the Division of
Materials Research, Prof. Philip Grandinetti and his group at the Ohio State
University are developing and using sophisticated nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) tools to probe the chemical properties of glasses. While the majority of
world-wide glass production focuses on windows and containers, there is growing
demand for improved specialty glasses which have become vital to a large range
of technological applications, such as handheld electronic devices, displays,
optical fibers, glass substrates for lighting, bio-glass implants, and nuclear
waste storage. A major challenge in tailoring the properties of new glass
compositions is the inadequacy of available quantitative details about the
structure of glasses, which determines their macroscopic (bulk) properties. NMR
is uniquely suited for characterization of this structure. Professor Grandinetti
is developing both sophisticated "higher-dimensional" NMR methods, and new
approaches to statistical analysis of NMR data to characterize alkali and
alkaline-earth silicate and aluminosilicate glasses. The work will enable better
understanding of features contributing to phenomena such as phase separation and
properties such as the strength of glasses. These new insights will help glass
scientists and engineers working on the next generation of specialty glasses.
The work is providing research opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups, in part through a partnership with Berea College (where 1/3 of students
are from ethnic minorities and admission is granted only to students whose
family income falls within the bottom 40% of U.S. households). Collaborations
with scientists at Corning, Inc. and other research labs throughout the world
provide all students involved in the project with opportunities for interactions
with industry and across national boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on employing (1) two-dimensional (2D) NMR methods that separate and
correlate isotropic and anisotropic NMR frequencies arising from the Si-29
nuclear shielding and from O-17 nuclear electric quadrupole interactions, (2) 2D
NMR methods that separate and correlate isotropic and Si-29 J couplings to
determine quantitative distributions of NMR spectroscopic parameters present in
glasses, and (3) inverse Laplace methods to determine the distribution of
nuclear longitudinal and transverse relaxation times of Si-29 in multi-component
silicate glasses, including alkali and alkaline-earth silicate and
aluminosilicate glasses. The Grandinetti group is seeking quantitative
distributions of specific structure quantities such as the distribution of
network-forming anionic species (Qn), the Q3 silicon-non-bridging oxygen
lengths, the inter-tetrahedral linkage angle and distances, intra-tetrahedral
distortions, and cation percolation thresholds, by determining analytical
relationships between NMR parameters and short- to medium-range structure. They
also use the distribution of nuclear longitudinal and transverse relaxation
times of Si-29 in multi-component silicate glasses to identify phase separation
in glasses and gain insight into composition and structure of phase-separated
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.