* 1807362
* Coacervate formation in amino acid functionalized polypeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 456,637.00

Coacervation is a process by which attractive electrostatic forces between
positive and negative groups on long macromolecules called polyelectrolytes
cause their aggregation and separation out of a mixture with water as a
polyelectrolyte coacervate. These coacervates have similarities to cellular
organelles that contain intrinsically disordered proteins and are not
encapsulated in a membrane, hence their being named "membraneless organelles".
Protein coacervates have been linked to many important biological processes and
are also known to be key components of moisture-resistant adhesives produced by
marine organisms, which have applications in medicine as surgical sealants.
There is also considerable interest in use of coacervation to create materials
that can be used as drug carriers, cell scaffolds, or for engineering
applications. The research group of Professor Timothy Deming at University of
California Los Angeles is developing a new class of coacervate-forming
polypeptides, which are synthetic mimics of natural proteins and whose
properties can be rapidly tuned for specific uses. The study of coacervate-
forming polypeptides can be used in the efforts to better mimic and understand
the physical behavior of disordered proteins and to prepare bioadhesives and
biologically-inspired artificial organelles. This project is also contributing
to the development of human resources in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics. Specifically, the PI provides mentorship to the members of the
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering Student Chapter at UCLA. He
also trains bioengineering undergraduate students who work on interdisciplinary
projects in an engineering lab and who have a medical school collaborator. The
PI mentors in research high school students who participate in the Engineering
Science Corps Outreach Program of the UCLA School of Engineering. This summer
research program is designed to bring local underrepresented minority students
from the LA area in research labs at UCLA where they learn about, and prepare
for, careers in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the
(i) design, preparation and characterization of polypeptides whose sidechains
makes them good mimics of coacervate-forming proteins and allows their
properties to be tuned or switched, and on the (ii) design, preparation and
characterization of block co-polypeptides that contain distinct hydrophilic and
alpha-helical coacervate-forming domains and can form hydrogels responsive to
environmental stimuli, such as the temperature and pH. The research team works
to identify the molecular parameters that control the response of the molecules
to temperature and pH. A pioneering aspect of this research is that the block
copolypeptides can have multiple individual chain segments, each sensitive to
temperature, ion, or redox changes; hence combinations of stimuli can generate
different responses in the assemblies. The proposed materials are designed to
form hydrogels. The material's ability to respond to environmental stimuli
confers them potential utility in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.