* 1807292
* Receptor Polymers for Enhanced Antibody-Mediated Electronic Neurological Protein Detection
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2022
* USD 498,403.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many medical disorders, including
some brain injuries, can be detected by changes in the amounts of certain
proteins in the body. The amounts of proteins can be measured using simple
electrical devices. However, some proteins do not give a strong enough
electrical signal to be detected in the amounts that would indicate a medical
problem. This project is to improve the materials used in the electrical devices
so that small amounts of the proteins can be more easily detected. The proteins
are recognized by the devices using "antibodies", which are substances that are
naturally generated when new proteins are introduced to the bloodstream. By
maximizing the number of antibodies in the device, and using more effective
concentrations of water and salt to surround the antibodies, the electronic
signal for the protein can be made stronger. Designing better materials to hold
the antibodies in the device will accomplish these goals. The new material
designs will be based on knowledge of the chemical properties of the materials
and computer models of how they interact with the proteins. A fundamental
understanding of these important surrounding materials will be a scientific
benefit of the project. The knowledge gained about proteins used in this project
will speed the development of devices that can detect the proteins faster than
they can be detected now. Graduate students will make the materials and perform
computer and electronic studies of devices. They will acquire a broad foundation
for science and technology employment. Minority female high school students will
be selected to participate in summer internships at JHU, working as part of a
research team under the mentorship of a graduate student supervised by the PIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many approaches to
polymeric materials with rapid electronic responses to biomacromolecule analytes
such as proteins depend on analyte-induced changes in polymer properties such as
dielectric constant and ion distribution. These property changes lead to changes
in electronic parameters of devices in which the polymers are incorporated.
Polymer receptor material design represents an unrealized opportunity to improve
the sensitivity, selectivity, and stability of electronic biosensors based on
proteins being recognized by their corresponding antibodies. This proposal
connects fundamental observations of biomolecule-receptor polymer interactions
to the electronic responses, while designing new polymers to amplify those
responses The overarching scientific hypothesis is that the electrical signal
measured during protein-antibody binding is caused by simultaneous combined
changes in the electrical double layer at the solid-liquid interface (surface
potential contribution) and by an impedance response within the polymer
(capacitive or injection barrier contribution), the fundamental understanding of
which are essential to the design of new materials that give improved signaling
of protein-antibody binding. The emphasis in this program is on structure-
activity relationships among material components and fundamental properties,
leading to design and synthesis of new biopolymer materials. The work of the
proposal will include electronic signaling of proteins with different net
charges, generating a model of how the newly introduced charges generate the
signals, and using the model to guide the synthesis of improved polymers that
support the antibodies and maximize the signaling obtainable from protein
binding. Design features will include increasing the area density of antibody
incorporation and decreasing the double layer screening effect of the media
surrounding the antibodies. The effectiveness of field effect and complex
impedance transduction will be compared on similar material platforms. The
knowledge gained about biomarkers of this proposal will accelerate development
of real time biosensors providing timelier indications of neurological injuries.
Graduate students will synthesize materials and perform computational and
electronic characterizations of devices. They will acquire a broad technical
basis for diversified science and technology employment. Minority female high
school students will be selected to participate in summer internships at JHU,
working as part of a research team under the mentorship of a graduate student
supervised by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.