* 1807984
* Epitaxy and Characterization of h-BN/AlGaN Nanowire Heterostructures: Towards High Efficiency Light Emitters in the Ultraviolet-C Band
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Hovden, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project is related to the development of a new
generation of nanostructured wide bandgap semiconductor materials, which have
the potential to enable efficient light emission in deep ultraviolet spectrum.
If successfully developed, such materials promise new semiconductor light
sources that can potentially replace conventional mercury lamps and excimer
lasers for a broad range of applications, including water purification, sensing,
and sterilization. For example, the replacement of mercury lamps by high
efficiency solid-state ultraviolet lamps will eliminate mercury emissions to
air, soil, and water and also significantly reduce electricity consumption for
water processing and treatment. The broader impacts also include the highly
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research and the outreach to
undergraduate, underrepresented minorities, and K-12. Students will be trained
in a highly collaborative and interdisciplinary environment that includes
materials design and theory (physics and materials science), nanomaterials
growth/synthesis (materials science and electrical engineering), and
characterization (materials science and engineering). Enhanced student training
and teaching will also be achieved through characterization workshops and by
developing and distributing state-of-the-art, open source software tool for
offline processing electron microscopy data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The overarching goal of this project is to investigate hexagonal
boron nitride (h-BN) and aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN) nanowire
heterojunctions to enable efficient current injection and light emission in the
deep ultraviolet wavelength range that was difficult to achieve in conventional
wide bandgap materials. In this project, h-BN/AlGaN nanowire heterostuctures are
grown by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy and are characterized using a
broad range of techniques, including transmission electron microscopy, scanning
transmission electron microscopy, photoluminescence spectroscopy, micro-Raman
spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction. Due to the efficient surface strain
relaxation, the use of nanowires can significantly reduce the formation of
dislocations related to the lattice mismatch between h-BN and AlGaN and with the
underlying substrate. More specifically, the research aims to demonstrate strong
p-type conductivity of h-BN by exploiting the shallow acceptor-like boron
vacancy formation, and realize h-BN/AlGaN heterojunctions wherein the p-type
h-BN can function as deep ultraviolet transparent, conductive electrode. This
could enable the replacement of conventional resistive and highly absorptive
Ga(Al)N contact layers in current ultraviolet light emitters, and therefore
promises ultraviolet light emitters with significantly enhanced efficiency. The
effort is based on close interaction between two research groups with
complementary expertise ensuring a closed loop between materials design and
modeling, epitaxy, materials characterization, fabrication, and testing. Such an
interdisciplinary, highly collaborative approach also provides a comprehensive
training environment for both graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.