* 1807911
* Photoredox Polymerization of O-Carboxyanhydrides for Functionalized Polyesters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Rong Tong, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 430,000.00

Polyesters are important biocompatible polymers that can degrade in human
bodies. They are widely used in everyday applications ranging from clothing and
packaging to agriculture and biomedicine. However, the small number of
structurally-different polyesters limit the range of materials properties and
utility in applications that demand mechanical strength. To address this
challenge, the research group of Professor Rong Tong at the Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University explores new synthetic strategies to produce
polyesters from natural amino acids, that have a wider range of chemical
structures and properties. This research develops new reactions for preparing
environmentally-friendly and biodegradable polyesters that can serve as
alternatives to petroleum-based plastics in commercial applications. The
multidisciplinary research project is integrated with educational and outreach
activities for undergraduates and students of underrepresented groups. An
outreach program that emphasizes hands-on demonstrations of biodegradable
polyesters is developed for middle and high school students in Montgomery
County, Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor
Tong's group develops novel controlled polymerization chemistry to synthesize
functionalized biodegradable polyesters from O-carboxyanhydries - an alternative
class of highly active monomers with a rich variety of side-chain
functionalities. Specifically, this research identifies photoredox catalytic
systems that enable efficient synthesis of functionalized polyesters at room-
temperature using light. Such polymers cannot be achieved using conventional
methods. Using newly developed catalysts, stereoregular polyesters that possess
improved thermal and mechanical properties compared with atactic homopolymers
are synthesized. Additional research activities include the study of the
photoredox ring-opening polymerization mechanisms and the exploration of one-
pot, sequence-controlled, photoredox copolymerization of two
monomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.