* 1807131
* Investigating Membrane Proteins with Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Gary Lorigan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Gary A. Lorigan from the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry at Miami University to investigate the structural and dynamic
properties of a membrane protein known as pinholin. Novel powerful state-of-the-
art techniques are used to study pinholin, which is an important membrane-bound
protein that is directly involved in cell death. The last step of the virus
infection cycle is cell death through lysis, the breakdown of the cell membrane.
Professor Lorigan plan to develop the experimental procedures to characterize
the structure and mechanism of the active and inactive forms of pinholin in a
membrane. The pursuit allows graduate students, undergraduate students, and
students from under-represented groups to obtain specialized training in
cutting-edge Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) biophysical techniques. The
new biophysical methods developed are useful generally to study a variety of
different membrane protein systems. This research project also enables the
development of a transformative STEM mentoring program called DUOS at Miami
University that strengthens the synergy/interaction between graduate and
undergraduate researchers to collaborate on a research project under the
supervision of a faculty member in a Ph.D. granting department. One
undergraduate/graduate student team from the Lorigan lab is scheduled to
participate in this new program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is
conducted to characterize the structure, topology, dynamics, and oligomerization
state of the active and inactive forms of pinholin. Powerful CW-EPR and pulsed
EPR spectroscopic techniques are used to investigate the different formations of
pinholin. Multiple distances are to be measured between spin labels to provide
important structural information on the pinholin embedded in a membrane.
Information from this study should provide new insight into the pinholin
mechanism and cell lysis, and provide novel methodology generally applicable to
membrane proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.