* 1807330
* From Molecular Simplicity to Supramolecular Complexity: Low Symmetry Packings of Ionic Spherical Micelles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 491,277.00

Surfactants are small molecules in which a water-soluble headgroup is attached
to an insoluble tail. Common examples of useful surfactants are soaps and
detergents. As a result of the different solubilities of the headgroup and the
tail, surfactants spontaneously form ordered assemblies in water. The assemblies
can range from very simple spheres dispersed in water to much more sophisticated
geometries. However, predicting the geometry of a complex assembly from the
chemical structure of the surfactant remains a significant challenge. Motivated
by the desire to control surfactant assembly and access complex structures with
unusual and useful properties, Prof. Mahesh Mahanthappa and his research team at
the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities seek to understand how surfactant
structure dictates the packing geometry and the stability of an assembly. Their
discoveries could have broad implications for the future design and development
of surfactants for applications such as enhanced oil recovery, personal care
product formulation, drug encapsulation, and therapeutic delivery. The project
also contributes to the interdisciplinary research training of undergraduate and
graduate students, including members of underrepresented groups. Public outreach
demonstrations using visually appealing soap bubble froths showcase the
properties of surfactants and help to arouse the interest of students in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A delicate balance of non-covalent interactions
drives the supramolecular assembly of minimally hydrated amphiphiles into
different lyotrophic liquid-crystalline phases. Of particular interest is the
complex Frank-Kasper (FK) phases, which apparently arise from a frustrated non-
covalent force balance that minimizes local variations in amphiphile solvation,
while maximizing global micelle cohesion across the supramolecular assembly.
Specific experiments of this project aim to 1) understand how the ionic
amphiphile tail structure, counterion symmetry, and chirality impact micellar
aggregation and consequent packing of the micelles into high coordination
number, low symmetry lattices; 2) evaluate whether these complex packings are
long-lived metastable states or thermodynamic equilibrium phases; and 3) assess
whether non-ionic amphiphiles might form these complex phases. An important goal
is to uncover new molecular design criteria that drive the formation of
lyotropic liquid crystals with exceptional translational order, at length scales
far exceeding those of their constituent molecular and supramolecular micelle
building blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.