* 1807462
* RUI: Mechanistic Elucidation of the Formation of Secondary Building Units in Metal Organic Frameworks via Tandem Spectroscopic and Synthetic Approaches.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Douglas Genna, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 352,731.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are materials
that continue to gain interest from the materials research community for their
potential in industrial applications such as catalysis, purification, and
molecular storage. The scalability of MOF syntheses has always been a barrier to
large scale industrial implementation, in which some frameworks either do not
form at all or have diminished materials properties upon scaling. While the
community has developed several methods for the synthesis of these materials,
the fundamental chemistry behind their formation remains to be elucidated. This
project focuses on understanding the mechanism of MOF formation at the early
stages of their assembly, leading to advances in rational design, scalable
synthesis, and increased industrial relevance. Through synergistically combining
the synthesis of new materials and utilizing spectroscopy a detailed
understanding of MOF formation is being developed. Such approaches have been the
hallmark of other synthetic fields including the pharmaceutical industry in
which a rich understanding of mechanistic organic chemistry has directly led to
the synthesis of blockbuster drugs. To increase adult scientific literacy, a
lecture series at the Mahoning Valley Lifelong Learning Institute (MVLLI), an
adult-centered education facility, focusing on demystifying materials chemistry
has been initiated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
research activities focus on understanding the mechanism of formation of the
inorganic secondary building units (SBUs) in metal-organic framework (MOF)
architectures. This project outlines a spectroscopic and synthetic road map to
gain mechanistic understanding of the formation of the SBU and the subsequent
self-assembly process. This level of understanding is expected to lead to more
efficient syntheses of MOFs and to novel framework architectures with untold
properties that were previously inaccessible. Raman spectroscopy is used to
identify solution-phase intermediates prior to the precipitation of the fully
formed MOF (Objective 1). The identified intermediates are then targeted for
independent synthesis in either molecular or polymeric form (Objective 2). The
synthesized intermediates are subjected to further chemistry which yields
electronically diverse copolymers that cannot be realized by traditional means
(Objective 3). Undergraduate and Master level students are involved in all
aspects of this project from MOF syntheses and spectroscopy to delivering
lectures for the adult outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.