* 1807643
* RUI: Study of Small Molecule Activation by Molybdenum Enzymes using Computational Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dalia Biswas, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 08/31/2022
* USD 188,386.00

Dalia Rokhsana of Whitman College is supported by an award from the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate the
reactivity of molybdenum-based enzymes, bacterial proteins that catalyze water-
splitting reactions to produce hydrogen gas. Hydrogen is an important "green"
energy source for fuel cells, propulsion systems, and combustion engines.
Rokhsana and her group are using state-of-the-art computational chemistry and
molecular modeling techniques to understand how the protein active site controls
structure, function, specificity, and reactivity. This research has potential
applications to the biomimetic design and optimization of large-scale hydrogen
gas production. The project is supporting undergraduate student engagement at
this primarily undergraduate institution. These students co-author scientific
papers, and make presentations at national meetings and regional conferences.
External collaborations with leading computational scientists enhance the
integration of scientific discovery with student education, in keeping with the
teacher-scholar model promoted at Whitman College. Problems based on the
research are integrated with coursework in computational chemistry and
biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One chemical functions of biological systems
is the activation of inert small molecules under ambient conditions.
Understanding the molecular mechanism of these processes is a challenging areas
at the interface of biology and chemistry. In this project, Rokhsana and her
group are focusing on a diverse family of molybdenum enzymes that catalyze oxo-
transfer to interconvert various substrates (carbon monoxide, sulfite, arsenite,
etc.) into products, while splitting water into protons and electrons. This
research focuses on a poorly-understood bimetallic [Mo-S-Cu] active site of a
Mo-enzyme, CO dehydrogenase. The first aim is to investigate the composition of
the active site as a function of redox-, spin-, and protonation-states. The
second aim is to characterize geometric and electronic structures of
intermediates and transition states during the non-reversible, catalytic
transformation of carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide. A computational approach
is necessary due to the lack of direct and unambiguous information about
intermediates from experiments. Rokhsana and her group are utilizing realistic
quantum mechanical (QM) and extended quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical
(QM/MM) models to systematically and comprehensively investigate the effect of
protein environment on the geometric and electronic structure of the active
site, and understand how the inner coordination sphere and outer protein
environment control and tune metalloenzyme function. This work may providing
insights into the overall catalytic mechanism of CO oxidation, with application
to molecular engineering of biomimetic systems for the water splitting reaction.
The project is immersing undergraduate students in comprehensive and
complementary bioinorganic and computational chemistry research involving state-
of-the-art modeling and simulation techniques. The new course is helping meet
the considerable demand for research opportunities requested by students at
Whitman College, and facilitating new collaborations and engagement with the
broader chemistry community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.