* 1807266
* Precision Measurement of the Muon Anomalous Magnetic Moment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Timothy Gorringe, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 555,000.00

This award supports continuing research activities to precisely measure
characteristics of an elementary particle called the muon, which is similar to
the electron but with larger mass. The experiment takes place at Fermi National
Accelerator Facility (Fermilab) near Chicago, Illinois. Precise experimental
tests of fundamental particle properties are now a well-established way to
search for new laws of nature beyond our current physical knowledge. The
measurement will address an intriguing discrepancy between a prior measurement
and the Standard Model prediction of the muon?s characteristics and is sensitive
to new particles and undetected forces that uniquely complement other efforts at
high energy colliders and elsewhere. The PI will continue his involvement of
high school students, physics majors, graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers in research activities. The group's involvement in high-performance
data acquisition, analysis and simulations will expose students to many aspects
of innovative computer and telecommunications technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The muon g-2 experiment will measure the muon anomalous
magnetic moment to 140 ppb; a four-fold improvement over the prior BNL E821
experiment. The measurement will address the longstanding discrepancy of ~3.5
sigma between the previous BNL E821 measurement and the Standard Model
prediction. It represents a key test of the Standard Model and has broad
sensitivity to new particles and interactions beyond the Standard Model. It
complements other searches for new physics at the energy, intensity and cosmic
frontiers. The muon g-2 project has involved the relocation of the E821 muon
storage ring from Brookhaven National Laboratory to Fermilab as well as major
upgrades of the detector, electronics and acquisition sub-systems. The
installation of the storage ring and its associated instrumentation on the
Fermilab muon campus was completed in 2017. The first data taking run took place
from November, 2017 to July, 2018 and has already exceeded the statistics of
prior BNL E821. Two further majo running periods over the next three years
should achieve the goals of collecting about 21 times the statistics of BNL
E821. The PI's group has been, and continues to be, the lead for both the 20
GByte/sec, 100 TFlop, g-2 data readout and processing system and the
infrastructure, analysis and simulation effort for the Q-method determination of
the anomalous precession frequency. About one third of the group's overall
effort will be associated with data acquisition responsibilities and two thirds
of the overall effort associated with Q-method analysis
responsibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.