* 1807813
* RAPID: Power Grid Assessment Post IRMA and MARIA
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Yamilka Baez-Rivera, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2020
* USD 72,420.00

The 2017 hurricane season inflicted two severe blows (Irma and Maria) to the
Atlantic region of the U.S. resulting in significant economic losses. Power
losses for many customers resulted from collapsed structures, faulted lines, and
the inability to resurrect electrical power grid operations immediately after
the storm. The effects of Hurricanes Irma and Maria are consistent with
projected increases in natural disasters, both in terms of frequency and
intensity. This study investigates the aftermaths of the hurricanes and
reconstructs the power grid failure history through forensic analytics. The
intent is to identify critical elements in the design of a resilient system. By
collecting the perishable evidence from these extreme events, the project team
can provide valuable information to help improve the resilience of electrical
power grids through a strategic and optimized
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research is a joint
effort between multiple universities, Duke Energy and Puerto Rico Electric Power
Authority (PREPA). A website will be developed to host the project and will
reside in a secured server system. The team will upload the data to the secured
website and use the collected data and storm event history to generate the
geospatial-temporal integrated analysis within a GIS framework. This work will
investigate failure patterns and failure history in order to strategically
assess risk based on vulnerabilities and critical importance of the existing
grid systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Hurricanes Irma and Maria
have the interest of national and international scientific and engineering
organizations and the general public. The critical question raised by a
concerned public are such storms examples of future extreme events and how can
the power delivery systems be more resilient. The collected data will also help
coastal utilities evaluate the viability of building a resilient grid system
that resists extreme weather. The analysis of the data gathered by this forensic
study will allow an evaluation of the effects on the grid in well-developed
areas compared to less-developed areas. Such a comparison can be invaluable in
designing future grid modernization investments not only in Puerto Rico but also
around the world.