* 1807876
* RUI: Fundamental Investigation Towards Phosphorus Recovery Through Organophosphate Pesticide Degradation by Molybdate Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Louis Kuo, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 248,739.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Chemistry Division. Pesticides and herbicides are used to kill weeds and
insects, but these chemicals last a long time and can be found throughout the
environment. These chemicals can be damaging to animals and humans, and have
even been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. Using basic chemistry
techniques, this project from Professor Louis Kuo at Lewis and Clark College
looks for ways to make these pesticides and herbicides safer. A main ingredient
in these chemicals is the element phosphorus. This project also investigates the
use of non-toxic metals to collect, break down, safely recover, and transform
the phosphate-based toxins for a new use. Phosphorus is non-renewable and
essential for life on earth, so recycling it is important for sustainability.
This research lies at the interface of inorganic and organic chemistry, and uses
a combination of experimental and computational techniques. Undergraduate
researchers, high school students, and high school teachers participate in this
project, while engaging in meaningful science within the context of safe
environmental stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses
environmental toxin remediation and phosphorus recovery. Organophosphates (OP)
are agricultural pesticides that are now ubiquitous in the environment. As such,
there is a need for materials that degrade these OP pesticides in a practical
fashion. This goal is more meaningful when the degraded OP pesticides are
recovered as usable organophosphates since phosphorus is an essential but non-
renewable resource. This study focuses on using supported and solution=-phase
molybdenum complexes that convert organophosphate toxins into commodity
chemicals. Specifically, the project examines how polystyrene-supported and
picolinato (solution) complexes of molybdenum-peroxo compounds convert sulfur-
containing organophosphate pesticides and the widely-used glyphosate herbicide
(Roundup) into phosphate commodity chemicals. Several hypothetical routes
involving reactive oxygen species are tested with spectroscopic studies on
solution models and supported molybdenum-peroxo complexes. In parallel with the
experimental work there is a computational component using density functional
theory that simulates the organophosphate reactions. The goal is to predict and
design better molybdenum complexes that accomplish the organophosphate
degradation. In this connection, the long term goal is to develop new supported
and practical molybdenum-peroxo materials that degrade the organophosphate
toxins into value-added materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.