* 1807526
* SemiSynBio: An On-Chip Nanoscale Storage System Using Chimeric DNA
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jean-Pierre Leburton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,125,000.00

DNA-based data storage is an emerging recording paradigm that has received
significant attention from the scientific community due to several recent
demonstrations of the viability of storing information in macro-molecules.
Unlike classical optical and magnetic storage technologies, DNA-based storage
platforms offer extremely high recording densities, and they do not require
electrical supply to maintain data integrity. Furthermore, under mild
maintenance conditions, DNA retains its information content for centuries while
still allowing users to retrieve the information independent of the specific
reading technology. Still, despite the promises of DNA-based archival systems,
several problems remain that prevent wide-scale deployment of the technology.
These include the high cost of DNA synthesis, the lack of structural and
distributed organization of data encoded in DNA, and the nonexistence of an
integrated random access and readout mechanism. To address these issues, this
collaborative project aims to test and implement a new molecular storage
paradigm that combines unique ideas in polymer chemistry, coding theory and
molecular dynamics modeling, as well as new nano-material and solid state nano-
pore technologies. The accompanying interdisciplinary research and educational
programs involve experts in chemistry, biophysics, electrical engineering and
theoretical computer science and aim to train a new cadre of students able to
address future scientific challenges in molecular storage and computing systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of the proposed program is to reduce
the cost-integration barrier between classical recorders and DNA-based data
storage devices by developing a new system centered around chimeric DNA,
comprising cheap native DNA and chemically modified nucleotides. Chemically-
modified nucleotides extend the coding alphabet from four symbols to more than
twenty. Chimeric DNA is stored and accessed using a novel implementation of
self-rolled semiconductor micro-tubular grids, controlled by three-dimensional
arrays of electrodes. Random access in such systems is achieved via voltage
modulation, with selected DNA guided into a sample preparation and specialized
nano-pore sequencing device. The implementation of such systems is aided by new
software tools for molecular dynamics simulations. Additional system support is
provided via new coding methods that combat the effects of chimeric DNA
integration and nano-pore sensing errors. Particular research challenges include
identifying chemical modifications in nucleotides amenable for detection via
nano-pore sequencers, calculating electrostatic forces within the tubes and
within the pores in the presence of chimeric DNA, and integrating the micro
tubular chip with an on-chip sample preparation and sensing device. Supporting
work on bioinformatics and coding theoretic algorithmic development are expected
to ensure additional robustness and operational stability of the proposed
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.