* 1807222
* Collaborative Research: How bacteria control manganese(IV) oxide biomineralization using a multicopper oxidase complex
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Thomas Spiro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 273,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Bradley Tebo from Oregon Health &amp; Science University
and Dr. Thomas Spiro from the University of Washington to find out how bacteria
change dissolved manganese (Mn) into manganese oxide minerals. This chemical
process produces manganese oxides that are widespread, highly reactive,
efficient catalysts that play important roles in elemental biogeochemical
cycles. Although these oxides are primarily made by microbial processes, the
biological means for their formation are poorly understood. This project reveals
the pathway of bacterial manganese oxide production, using the first purified
active manganese-oxidizing enzyme complex. The project may uncover the
biochemistry of how two processes-manganese oxidation and mineral formation-are
achieved, laying the foundation for future application of biologically-derived
manganese oxides in clean water technologies and energy storage and production.
This project enhances the training of the next generation of scientists in
interdisciplinary methods, and serves as a vehicle in outreach programs to
engage undergraduate, middle, and high school students in studies of
microbiology and biochemistry, as related to environmental science. In addition,
postdoctoral fellows develop a Saturday Academy course targeting either 6-8 or
9-12 grade students and focusing on the importance of microbiology and
biochemistry as related to environmental science. The Saturday Academy provides
professional development for the postdoctoral fellow as the
instructor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents an investigation of how
a purified protein can accomplish the difficult two-electron oxidation of
Mn(II), forming a nanoparticulate MnO2 mineral product. Results to date indicate
that the active protein belongs to the well-known multicopper oxidase family of
enzymes, but with a unique ability to adapt the polynuclear chemistry of
manganese to perform the catalysis. The research efforts are focused on
establishing a molecular-level detailed mechanism of the catalysis, by resolving
manganese oxidation intermediates and studying the effects of key mutations with
an array of spectroscopic techniques. The spectroscopic studies are complemented
by modeling, crystallography, and cryo-electron microscopy work to derive the 3D
atomic structure of the enzyme. In the context of broader environmental
applicability, the research explores the effect of other metals occurring in the
environment on the enzymatic catalysis of manganese
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.