* 1807797
* Collaborative Research: Development of Dimeric Molecular n- and p-Dopants and their Application in Organic Light-emitting Diodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 02/28/2022
* USD 650,000.00

Non-Technical: There is increasing interest in low-cost, lightweight flexible
electronic devices such as displays, lighting and solar cells that use organic
(carbon-based) molecules or polymers in place of traditional semiconductors. The
electrical properties of organic materials are often controlled using additives
called dopants. The PIs have developed dopant molecules that exhibit an
unprecedented combination of ease of use and effectiveness. Recently they have
discovered that exposure to light can increase the utility of these dopants
still further, enabling them to be used with materials suitable for display
applications for which few other dopants are effective. This research explores
the possibilities and limitations of this approach using chemical synthesis of
new dopants, electrical measurements, and device fabrication and testing.
Research outcomes may lead to improved devices, particularly displays that
require less power. The research provides graduate students with
interdisciplinary training, affords case studies for inclusion in the PIs'
lectures, and gives opportunities for the education and training of women and
minorities by hosting summer students and encouraging application to graduate
school, recruiting at minority-serving institutions and conferences, and through
interactions with New Mexico Highlands
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Controllable doping of organic
semiconductors with molecular oxidants or reductants can greatly improve charge
injection and conductivity in transistors (OFETs), as well as organic
photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes. Dimeric n-dopants offer an
unprecedented combination of ambient stability and strong reducing ability. This
research builds on the PIs' recent findings that UV or visible light can extend
the effective strength of these dimers beyond their thermodynamic limit,
enabling n-doping of OLED materials. The goal of the research is to understand
the mechanism, scope, practicalities, and limitations of the photoactivation,
through varying the semiconductor electron affinity and rigidity, developing
both stronger and weaker dimeric n-dopants, and developing dimeric p-dopants.
The approach includes dopant synthesis and characterization; reactivity and
photoactivation studies; electron spectroscopy, electrical, and dopant-diffusion
measurements; and OLED fabrication and testing. Broader technological impacts
include facilitating OLEDs with low turn-on voltages, and simplification of OPV
and OFET manufacture. Educational impacts include interdisciplinary training of
research students in synthetic chemistry, physical characterization, and device
work; incorporation of materials based on the research into lectures at the PIs'
institutions and at New Mexico Highlands University (where students also
determine crystal structures of new compounds); and opportunities for the
education and training of women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.