* 1807722
* Chemical Sensing: Linking sequence, mechanisms and inhibition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Smita Mohanty, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 630,000.00

Smita Mohanty of Oklahoma State University and Eric Anslyn of the University of
Texas, Austin, are supported by an award from the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Division of Chemistry to investigate the biochemical and
physiological mechanisms of molecular signaling in two lepidopteran insect
species (moths). They seek to understand the molecular detail of how an odor is
detected and communicated from the female moth to the male moth within a species
during the mating process. The ability to respond to chemical stimuli such as
odors is a fundamental behavior of all organisms. This project is utilizing
structural and biochemical experiments to discover the basic mechanism of odor
communication in two moth species, one of which is a voracious pest of crops and
stored foods. Computationally-designed molecules are being synthesized and
tested in the laboratory for their ability to competitively bind to odor-binding
protein molecules to inhibit the sensing of female-secreted scent by the male,
and thus disrupt the mating process. Knowledge gained from this research is
helping bridge the fundamental gap in knowledge of the chemical and mechanistic
details of sense of smell in animals, as well as paving the way for the
development of novel, species-specific, and environmentally-friendly odor
mimetics as alternatives to harmful pesticides, for insect control. Students at
the undergraduate and graduate levels are being trained in state-of-the-art
instrumentation, thus preparing the future generation of teachers, researchers,
and innovators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects use insoluble fatty acid (FA)
derivatives as highly-specific signaling molecules. Lepidopteran insects serve
as a model for studying the biochemical and physiological mechanisms of FA
signaling. Odor/pheromone binding proteins (OBP/PBP) ferry the fatty acid odor
to the odorant receptor across the aqueous sensillar lymph that surrounds the
dendrites of odor-sensitive olfactory neurons. The details of the mechanism of
lipid transfer to the olfactory receptor neuron by OBPs/PBPs remain largely
unknown. This project is using the combined tools and techniques of
biochemistry, biophysics, molecular biology, chemical modeling, and synthetic
organic chemistry to identify the chemical signatures in the protein sequences
that dictate the mechanism of lipid binding and release by PBPs in two
lepidopteran species: Anthereae polyphemus and Ostrinia furnacalis. The current
model for lepidopteran PBPs, including Anthereae polyphemus PBP (ApolPBP1),
posits a pH-dependent conformational switch for the uptake and release of the FA
signal at the sensory neuron membrane. However, preliminary data for Ostrinia
furnacalis PBP (OfurPBP2) suggests that this protein binds lipid and releases it
through a distinct, novel mechanism. A strategy of successive mutations in
ApolPBP1 residues is being used to systematically transform ApolPBP1 into an
OfurPBP2 mimic, and characterize the mutants at each step using a
multidisciplinary approach, to gain insight into the unique structure-function
relationship and mechanism of lipid binding and release in Ostrinia furnacalis.
Nature-inspired design of fatty-acid mimetics is being performed through
structure-based organic synthesis, to develop a competitive inhibitor of
ApoIPBP1 as a model system, and establish a design strategy for odor inhibition
in the Ostrinia furnicalis pest. This combined, complementary data on two key
PBP proteins is deepening the understanding of distinct mechanisms of chemical
sensing, and providing a foundation for the rational design of eco-friendly
biomimetic inhibitors for insect control. Educational and outreach efforts are
leveraging the successful NSF REU program at Oklahoma State to recruit and train
undergraduates techniques, with students actively recruited from HBCUs
(Historically Black Colleges and Universities) and PUIs (Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.