* 1807397
* OP: Towards Electrically Pumped Perovskite Quantum Dot Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lih Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 414,908.00

Photonic integrated circuits with miniature component sizes and high integration
density have been regarded as the technology that can potentially provide
breakthrough advancement in modern computing and communication systems, as it
aims to achieve an optical analogy of VLSI that can overcome several bottleneck
electronic technologies encounter such as speed, bandwidth, and power
consumption. Key components in photonic integrated circuits include lasers,
waveguides, modulators, and photodetectors that can be lithographically defined
and fabricated on low-cost Si platforms to achieve ultimate system
compatibilities. Among these, lasers have been the most challenging to integrate
with Si due to the incompatible fabrication processes between laser gain
materials and Si. In addition to computing and optical fiber communications,
lasers that feature facile integration on Si can find vast application scopes in
free-space communications, projection displays, lighting, spectroscopy, sensing,
biomedicine, etc. Wavelength spectra ranging from UV, visible to IR are all
desirable depending on the applications. Although heterogeneous optoelectronics
based on chip-level bonding and III-V epitaxial growth on Si in bulk, nanowire
or quantum dot (QD) forms have been pursued, the fabrication processes are
elaborated which is likely to keep the cost high. Solution-processed materials
such as organic materials offer a promising route to overcome this challenge as
they can be fabricated on a wide variety of substrates, and organic LEDs have
achieved impressive performance and are commercially available now. But the
material has not been able to achieve laser operations chiefly due to low charge
mobility. &lt;br/&gt;In recent years, hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskite
materials have emerged as a highly promising newcomer among photonic materials.
These materials exhibit high charge mobility, sharp optical absorption edges and
high absorption coefficients comparable to GaAs, as well as an unusual defect
tolerance. Although lasing in perovskite materials in various resonant-cavity
forms have been achieved, perovskite lasers with designed resonant cavities
suitable for photonic integrated circuits have not been demonstrated.
Furthermore, stability of the perovskite materials is still a main concern in
this field, and electrical pumping remains a challenging, overarching goal for
perovskite lasers. The objective of the proposed research is to improve and
optimize key parameters for achieving electrical pumping in perovskite lasers,
and to assess the feasibility of perovskite laser operation under current
injection. We will investigate perovskite material properties to improve the
charge mobility and material stability. Engineering of the electron and hole
transport layers, as well as the device design, will be explored to further
enhance the overall device stability. A vertical cavity laser will be designed
and fabricated, and optimization of the resonant cavity based on the PI's prior
work on optically pumped perovskite QD vertical cavity lasers will be pursued. A
waveguide distributed feedback (DFB) laser that can be lithographically defined
and fully compatible with Si photonic integrated circuit fabrication will also
be explored. These edge-emitting waveguide lasers are expected to achieve lower
lasing threshold due to longer gain length and highly confined optical modes.
Pulsed current injection with temperature control will be employed to assess the
feasibility of electrical pumping. Through the proposed research, key issues for
electrically pumped perovskite lasers will be probed and addressed by
investigating several aspects of device design and fabrication simultaneously,
including material processing, electrical interfaces, optical structures and
resonant cavities. The results will contribute to necessary knowledge for
realizing electrically pumped perovskite lasers, which provide a promising route
to integrated lasers on Si chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.