* 1807394
* Synthesis and Spectroscopy of Complex Halide and Chalcogenide Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 674,255.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor nanostructures are critical
components of many energy and information technologies, and they will be central
to numerous future technologies including advanced forms of communications and
data processing. This research is generating new forms of matter on nanometer
length scales made from semiconductors with complex and unexplored compositions.
This project is enabling capabilities that will allow researchers to synthesize
these new classes of semiconductors, and it is advancing the fundamental
understanding of such materials through combined materials development and
physical characterization studies, thereby expanding the frontiers of
nanoscience. In addition to yielding new scientific knowledge and new forms of
matter, this project is also providing technical training for participating
undergraduate and graduate students to prepare them for future careers in
science, engineering, education, and related fields. The impact of this project
is broadened by integrating research and education at early-career levels
through engagement of undergraduates, incorporation of research concepts into
undergraduate curricula, collaboration with faculty from undergraduate
institutions (and hosting such faculty and their undergraduate students), and
mature community outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This project is targeting discovery and development of new complex
semiconductor nanostructures, development of new synthetic methodologies, and
use of spectroscopic, analytical, and computational tools to elucidate key
structure/function relationships in these complex materials, with the
overarching goal of accelerating technological innovations involving these
materials. The project focuses specifically on colloidal ternary, quaternary,
and doped haloperovskite-type semiconductor nanocrystals, including mixed-metal
elpasolites, and colloidal ternary, alloyed, and doped chalcopyrite-type
nanocrystals, including CuInS2. These materials offer timely new opportunities
to access unprecedented physical properties with technological value. This
project is also advancing the chemistries and physical understanding of lead-
and cadmium-free semiconductor nanocrystals that may ultimately replace well-
known systems based on these ions as workhorses in future technologies. Overall,
this project is yielding new materials, new fundamental knowledge, advanced
training for participants, and ultimately new materials platforms for future
energy conversion, information processing, sensing, and other optoelectronic
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.