* 1807480
* RUI: Biophysical Characterization of Reduced Flavin-Dependent Two Component Monooxygenase Sulfur Assimilation Enzymes: SfnG, MsuC, and MsuD
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Denyce Wicht, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 294,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is funding Dr. Denyce
K. Wicht at Suffolk University and Dr. Daniel P. Dowling at UMass-Boston to
research proteins involved in extracting sulfur from naturally occurring organic
molecules. The cycling of sulfur-containing substances is important to
understanding how living organisms (including humans) play a role in moving this
specific element between earth's water, atmosphere, and land components. The
interconversions of compounds containing carbon-sulfur bonds and sulfur-oxygen
bonds are observed across a range of microorganisms, but the order in which the
chemistry proceeds only recently was discovered. Therefore, these chemical
transformations remain largely unexplored. This research entails a collaborative
effort by Dr. Wicht and Dr. Dowling to perform fundamental biochemical analyses
and obtain structural information for how these events take place. Research
assistants at the undergraduate and graduate level gain experience with
enzymology, biochemistry, and protein crystallography. Additionally,
participants engage in outreach activities with middle school students and
receive specific feedback on lifelong learning skills important to the
production of a modern STEM workforce. Strong scientific mentorship provided by
PI Wicht and co-PI Dowling contributes to the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The recently reported
bacterial sulfur assimilation pathway from naturally occurring dimethylsulfone
to inorganic sulfite is the central focus of the work. There are three
monooxygenases involved in the biochemical reactions: SfnG (for sulfone
utilization), MsuC (for methanesulfinate utilization), and MsuD (for
methanesulfonate ultilization). All three enzymes are reduced flavin dependent
monooxygenases that require three substrates: an organosulfur molecule, O2, and
FMNH2. The kinetic landscape of the novel biochemical pathway from
dimethylsulfone to sulfite is unknown, therefore the immediate goal of the
proposed research activities is the determination of the apparent steady-state
kinetic parameters for each protein in the pathway using visible spectroscopy.
The kinetic analyses of purified recombinant enzymes are coupled with substrate
specificity data determined by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. For each
monooxygenase, a maximum rate of enzyme turnover and the specificity constant
for the preferred organosulfur substrate is defined. High-resolution X-ray
crystallography is used to determine the molecular details of enzyme active
site(s) and reaction chemistry. Together, the experimental results are used to
formulate a proposed overall enzyme mechanism consistent with the cleavage of
two C-S bonds and the formation of one S-O bond. Mapping the active site
environment of these enzymes guides future mechanistic studies by identifying
important amino acid residues involved in bond-making and bond-breaking to
sulfur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.