* 1807928
* Collaborative Proposal: Quest for an Electric field-Induced Half-Metallic State in Metal Monochalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Chun Ning Lau, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,917.00

Non-technical Description: Materials that are only a single or few atomic layers
in thickness exhibit electronic properties that are profoundly altered with
respect to those of bulk materials. These behaviors can be exploited for
engineering new classes of optoelectronic devices with novel functionalities.
The goal of this research project is to investigate a class of such extremely
thin materials that are only one or few atomic layers thick, and seek to endow
them with specific magnetic and electronic properties. The team envisions a
material that, at the flip of a switch, can become electrically conducting or
insulating, magnetic or non-magnetic. Such a material would be vital for the
development of new technologies such as high-density memory storage devices and
ultra-sensitive magnetic or optical sensors. These research efforts are
integrated with plans to mentor and train the next generation of physicists and
material scientists. In addition, both team members are active in recruiting and
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented groups,
while also reaching out to high school teachers and students. The team
collaborates with the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State
University to develop hands-on instructional materials for schools in
surrounding North Florida counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
The ultimate goal of this research project is the achievement of gate-tunable
ferromagnetism due to half-metallicity in monolayer and few-layer metal
monochalcogenides, based on a recent theoretical proposal. These compounds, i.e.
(In,Ga)(S, Se, Te), have been shown to exhibit high-room-temperature carrier
mobility, thickness-dependent band gaps and high photoresponsivities. Although
monochalcogenides are nonmagnetic, a recent first principles calculation
predicts spin-split valence bands in their monolayers, with both the magnetic
moment and the spin polarization energy depending strongly on density. Thus, a
normal metal-ferromagnet-normal metal transition is expected as the hole density
is tuned, with ferromagnetism and half-metallicity emerging when atomically thin
monochalcogenides are hole-doped to ~10^13/cm^2. This research project strives
to achieve this ambitious goal by overcoming a number of critical challenges,
including synthesis of high quality material, device fabrication and
optimization, and efficient gating techniques. Successful implementation of the
research plan is expected to lead to new half-metallic systems that can be
combined with other layered compounds in heterostructures to produce novel
functionalities. In addition to training graduate students, both principal
investigators continue their established efforts at mentoring undergraduate and
high school students, while also recruiting and mentoring students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.