* 1807568
* SemiSynBio: Collaborative Research:  DNA-based Electrically Readable Memories
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Yonggang Ke, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 401,206.00

For decades engineers have aimed to develop a universal memory technology that
was low cost, reliable, high density, and non-volatile. Ideally, this technology
could be quickly written, read, or erased, and would last indefinitely in any
defined state. However, current technologies have limited lifetimes, are often
arduous to write, consume significant amounts of power, and are not capable of
sustaining the current global data growth. Biological systems on the other hand,
solved this problem billions of years ago using deoxyribonucleic acids (DNA)
coupled with enzymatic methods for reading, writing, and erasing the data. In
fact, the average human writes 40 exabytes of data each day while consuming
comparatively little energy. Moreover, this data can be stored for hundreds or
thousands of years. Thus, DNA represents a unique and interesting platform for
developing memory technologies for the next generation of electronic devices.
However, in order to leverage its phenomenal storage capabilities and become a
viable memory technology contender, a number of important technical and
fundamental hurdles must be examined and overcome. As an initial step toward
this goal, this proposal aims to create a DNA-based Read-Only Memory (ROM) that
can be patterned, placed, and programmed as desired, can be read electrically,
and is capable of interfacing with conventional semiconductor electronics for
long-term data storage and retrieval. To achieve this goal, we have established
a collaborative, multidisciplinary team working at the nexus of biological
systems electrical and computer engineering and charge transport physics. This
Team has expertise in the control and assembly of DNA nanostructures, nano- and
molecular electronic systems, and the theory and modeling of nanoscale
electronic devices. Together, this team will work with students and junior
researchers to understand and control the charge transport properties of DNA-
based nanostructures, to assemble DNA-based memory devices and circuits, to
develop tools for modeling and programming these systems, and to train a new
generation of scientists and engineers capable of working at the interface
between biology and nano/electrical engineering. Graduate students involved in
this project, will obtain interdisciplinary training involving electrical
engineering, device physics, chemistry, biochemistry, and material science. In
addition, this transdisciplinary research project is also integrated with an
outreach program aimed at expanding the enrollment of under-represented
minorities and female students in STEM fields, providing research experience for
undergraduate students, and introducing K-12 students to cutting edge science
and engineering problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fully harness the advantages
of DNA for a general memory platform within semiconductor-based systems, it must
be possible to access and read information from it electronically. To develop
this translational capability, several technological and fundamental advances
are required. It is the goal of this project to develop methods for creating an
electrically readable DNA-based memory system. Specifically, this proposal aims:
i) to optimize and control the charge transport properties of DNA-nanowires
grown using bottom-up self-assembly techniques using a combination of molecular
and ionic dopants, and templated growth of inorganic structures; ii) to develop
design rules for creating DNA-based multi-level memory cells by examining the
effects of sequence, structure, and length on the transport properties; iii) to
combine this knowledge to develop DNA-based cross-wire (X-wire) read-only memory
systems; iv) to develop predictive transport models to simulate the
functionality of this memory architecture; and v) to develop Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) tools that can be used to program the self-assembly of large-scale
memory architectures. The success of this approach will create translational
capabilities for carbon-based electronics, memory technologies, and DNA-based
nano-assemblies, and the breadth of this project will result in new knowledge in
a variety of realms. It will: i) enhance our fundamental understanding of the
inherent charge transport properties of DNA; ii) provide insights into how to
chemically control these properties to achieve the desired electrical responses;
iii) provide new insights into how to scale-up the self-assembly of DNA
nanostructures; iv) aid the development of new CAD tools for modeling and
controlling the assembly and addressability of DNA-based memories; v) provide
foundational information about how to interface biological materials with
conventional semiconductor technologies; vi) advance the utility of DNA self-
assembly to a novel manufacturing platform for nanoscale electronic materials;
vii) enable new methodologies for modeling transport in these bottom-up hybrid
systems; and viii) provide information about novel memory architectures for
next-generation computation. The knowledge developed in these areas will enable
the design of carbon-based, nanoscale electronic devices with desired
functionality from the bottom-up. And more generally, the success of this
project will provide a broad, systematic framework that can be followed to
develop unique electronic device paradigms for nanoscale electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.