* 1807313
* Understanding Intermolecular Interactions using Metastable Clusters and Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* S Alex Kandel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 479,222.00

Solids are formed when molecules stick together. The strength of the attraction
is not the same for all orientations of two molecules, however, as some parts of
a molecule are stickier than others. Thus, even simple molecules have complex
interactions that make it difficult to predict the structure of a crystal based
on the chemical structure of the individual molecules. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor S. Alex Kandel of the University of Notre Dame is exploring
how molecules crystallize from solution. The insights gained from the project
are advancing our understanding of materials science, as well as have far-
reaching commercial implications in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals. The
project includes training of graduate students, and involvement of undergraduate
and high-school students in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
clusters and crystals are formed by injecting microliter-sized droplets of
solutions containing small organic molecules into vacuum. As the solvent
evaporates, solid structures are formed, deposited onto clean substrates, and
characterized using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The deposition method
captures a range of geometries and molecular configurations, not just the
structures near the thermodynamic minimum-free-energy state. The ability to
characterize multiple metastable structures provides detailed insight into the
complex potential surface created by several interacting functional groups on
two or more molecules. The experimental approach compares a range of chemically
similar systems to determine how, for a given molecule, each specific functional
group contributes to the intermolecular interactions that ultimately control the
formation of clusters and larger structures. Molecular-scale STM images are also
compared with measurements made on gas-phase ionic clusters using electrospray-
ionization mass spectrometry, and the results of both are examined in the light
of theoretical calculations of cluster geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.