* 1807106
* Volumetric Chemical Imaging of Cell Metabolism by Stimulated Raman Projection
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ji-Xin Cheng, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 09/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Systems and Synthetic Biology program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Cheng at Boston University is
developing an imaging tool to examine chemical species at a micron resolution,
in a three-dimensional (3D) fashion, and at high speed. Professor Cheng
envisions the technique he develops can be used to monitor small biomolecules in
cells and understand their metabolism in situ. Professor Cheng plans to make the
technique, once developed, available to other users through commercialization.
In addition to working with students on the project, Professor Cheng also
provides summer research opportunities to undergraduate students. He also
organizes a 2-day workshop to teach students about label-free spectroscopic
imaging and develops a lab module on the concept of chemical microscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volumetric imaging enables quantitative and global
measurements of a 3D complex system. It allows quantitation of molecules in the
whole volume of a specimen, and has proven to be invaluable in the studies of
cell metabolism, brain function, and developmental biology. The simplest way to
image a volume is through optical sectioning in the axial direction. Such a
method requires tightly focused laser beams and good axial sectioning
capability. One approach for volumetric imaging is through tomography, in which
images are collected from many different angles around the sample. The 3D
information can be then reconstructed using the angle-dependent images.
Professor Cheng develops a Bessel-beam-based stimulated Raman projection (SRP)
microscopy and tomography for high-speed volumetric chemical imaging. The SRP
method is built upon the concept that the detected signal is an integration of
SRS intensity along the Rayleigh length of the input Bessel beams, which remain
their focuses along axial direction for a long distance. Compared to the
Gaussian beam SRS microscopy, the Bessel beam SRP microscopy is able to quantify
the total chemical compositions of a 3D volume in a 2D scan. Professor Cheng
plans to integrate a two-day workshop on label-free spectroscopic imaging with
the annual symposium of the Boston University's Photonics Center to present
innovations in label-free chemical imaging to ~250 scientists attending this
symposium. Furthermore, Professor Cheng leverages Boston University's CityLab to
connect with middle and high school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.