* 1807343
* Core-shell nanoparticles for direct detection of radioisotopes in aqueous environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Craig Aspinwall, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Craig Aspinwall and his research group at the
University of Arizona (UA) are developing new and selective sensors to probe
complex systems. The measurement tools being developed offer unprecedented time
resolution and selectivity for analysis of a diverse set of target molecules,
potentially enabling improved understanding of biological and other complex
functions. The work provides opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students from UA (a Hispanic Serving Institution) and the Arizona community
college system to participate in modern, interdisciplinary chemical research,
thereby helping to build a diverse science, technology, engineering and
mathematics work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aspinwall group is developing
novel core-shell nanomaterial sensors capable of real-time detection of low-
energy radioisotopes. Radioisotopes have been a cornerstone of biological
research for nearly a century because of the ubiquitous nature of the most
common radioisotopes of C, H, S, and P in chemical and biological systems, and
because their incorporation is less invasive compared to fluorophores. Common
methods of detection for radioisotopes are typically incompatible with
living/functional biological systems/components and as such provide little
information about system dynamics. The novel nanomaterial sensor (termed
"nanoSPA") being developed by Dr. Aspinwall provides a water-soluble,
biocompatible platform to enable real-time analysis of radioisotope-labeled
compounds with high selectivity and sensitivity. The project focuses on
development and characterization of nanoSPA sensors with emphasis on key
variables that affect sensor function and performance. The work targets
optimization of light output and multiplexing capabilities via integration of
new scintillant materials; identification of novel biofunctionalization
approaches; and performance evaluation in model biochemical systems. The project
provides educational and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students at UA and Yavapai College to broaden exposure to interdisciplinary
chemical research and enhance the nation's science
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.