* 1807476
* RUI: Experimental Study of Dipolar Solid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Ray, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 217,465.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;With its two protons and two neutrons,
helium-4 is one of the simplest atoms next to hydrogen. However, although
apparently simple, helium has very complex behavior at low temperatures due
quantum mechanical effects. One type of these effects is that helium will not
freeze under normal pressures, but rather will remain a liquid all the way down
to absolute zero (T = 0 K). In order to get helium to freeze, it must be
squeezed to over 25 times atmospheric pressure, essentially forcing the atoms
into a solid. Another consequence of the quantum nature of helium is the
possibility that this strange solid can display superfluid properties (i.e. flow
without friction). This is an idea that, although very strange, is predicted to
occur under the right conditions, but experiments have had mixed results in
detecting such a phase. This project studies the electronic properties of helium
and exploits these properties to develop a new route to creating solid helium.
This new method of growing solid helium crystals gives researchers a certain
amount of control over system parameters that have been typically inaccessible
to other solid helium experiments. The research also studies quantum effects in
solid helium grown using this new method, with the goal of observing
superfluidity in solid helium. Finally, this project engages undergraduate
students in low temperature physics experiments at California State University,
Sacramento (Sacramento State), which is primarily an undergraduate institution
serving a large, ethnically diverse student body. Through this research, under-
represented minority students, develop a range of highly technical skills,
helping to bring diversity to the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid properties have so far been conclusively
observed in liquids and gasses. This begs the question: can superfluid
properties exist in solids as well? This question has captivated low temperature
physicists for over 50 years. Due to its quantum nature, it is believed that
solid helium has the best chance of displaying superfluid behavior, although
experimental searches have been met with varying success. This project brings a
new perspective to solid helium research by studying electronic properties of
solid helium in order to develop a new method of creating solid helium.
Specifically, an external electric field is used to control the dipole-dipole
interactions that are the basis of inter-atomic interactions between neutral
helium atoms. Given the right conditions, these dipolar interactions cause the
atoms to form a lattice, creating "dipolar solid helium". With this method, the
low temperature research team at California State University, Sacramento,
studies the differences in the behavior of a classically-behaved solid and a
quantum solid leading to the possibility of observing superfluid behavior in the
solid, or a, "supersolid" phase. Specific goals of this project are to: 1)
observe the formation and behavior of dipolar solid helium under varying
interaction strengths; 2) measure the electronic properties of both conventional
and dipolar solid helium; and 3) build a low temperature cryostat that is
conducive to undergraduate research. These experiments build a framework for a
large range of future experiments that will study the behavior of a dipolar
quantum solid. Such experiments offer insights into the behavior of materials
that are important as technologies get smaller, and approach the limit where
quantum effects become important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.