* 1807739
* Probing the Mechanisms and Structure-Activity Relationships for  Hydrated Electron Reactions with Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Timothy Strathmann, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the NSF Chemistry Division funds
this project from Professors Timothy Strathmann, Shubham Vyas, and Christopher
Higgins of the Colorado School of Mines. They seek to better understand how to
transform and degrade highly persistent poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances
(PFASs) that contaminate water. PFASs are critical components in many commercial
and industrial products, including fire-suppressing foams. There is growing
evidence that PFASs are contaminating many drinking water sources throughout the
country. There are significant human risks of exposure to PFASs. The exceptional
chemical stability of PFASs prevents destruction with conventional approaches to
water purification. However, recent research reveals that hydrated electrons,
strong reducing agents that can be generated by UV light, can effectively treat
some PFAS chemicals. Broader development of this promising strategy requires a
better understanding of the fundamental reaction mechanisms and links between
PFAS molecular structures and their reactivity with hydrated electrons. The
research provides opportunities to teach K-12 students and teachers, and
undergraduate college students about the sources, impacts, and treatment of
fluorochemicals and other contaminants of emerging
concern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A serious environmental issue is the motivation
for this research. The project aims to advance fundamental mechanistic
understanding and structure-activity relationships of PFAS reactions with
hydrated electrons. The study combines laser flash photolysis and high-
resolution mass spectrometry (LC-QToF-MS) experimental methods with quantum
chemical calculations. This allows the establishment of quantitative structure-
activity relationships (QSARs) for predicting reaction rates between hydrated
electron and diverse PFAS chemical structures. The resulting QSARs are valuable
for the further development of more effective and sustainable technologies for
purifying and remediating contaminated drinking water
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.