* 1807825
* Breakthroughs in Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting Devices by Silicon Nanowires
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Jaeho Lee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 12/31/2021
* USD 350,271.00

Non-technical: Thermoelectric energy harvesting devices create useful electrical
energy from waste heat. Such devices are attractive sources of renewable power
as they have reliable solid-state operation and can be scaled to large areas.
However, low energy conversion efficiency and high cost in devices based on
conventional materials have been technological bottlenecks to commercialization.
Here, the PI will investigate an energy-efficient and cost-effective solution to
these problems that is based on silicon nanowires. Two areas of innovation in
thermoelectric devices will be targeted. First, silicon nanowires with
engineered roughness will be used on the hot side of thermoelectric devices to
convert heat to electricity in an efficient manner. The PI will measure
individual nanowires and nanowire array structures at the high temperatures
needed to recover waste heat. Second, metal-coated silicon nanowire arrays will
be used on the cold side as a selective emitter to maximize radiative cooling.
The nanowire-based radiative cooling surface will provide a substantial
temperature gradient in the thermoelectric device without relying on active
coolers or costly heat exchangers. The outcomes of this research will strengthen
the areas of renewable energy production and waste heat recovery in the United
States. The research will be integrated with educational activities through
student mentoring and broad outreach efforts. The PI's integrated education plan
will spark scientific interest of high school students and inspire undergraduate
and graduate students to advance their interests at the intersection of
materials science and device engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
project seeks to answer how the nanowire surface boundary influences
thermoelectric properties of individual nanowires over a wide range of
temperature (10-700 K) by utilizing the PI's unique thermal metrology and
controlling the roughness in silicon nanowires via metal-assisted chemical
etching. While nanowire thermoelectric properties have been extensively studied,
there remain gaps in our knowledge of fundamental determinants at the nanoscale
and the properties at temperature ranges that are relevant to thermoelectric
energy harvesting or where abundant low-and mid-grade heat sources are
available. The project will investigate the effects of artificial periodicities
in the roughness-controlled nanowires and identify thermal conductivity
reduction mechanisms through theoretical, numerical, and experimental
approaches. The project also seeks to answer how artificial periodicities lead
to selective emission properties that are unachievable by natural materials and
present a new pathway for radiative cooling by developing a nanowire-based
selective emitter. Spectral emissivity computations based on rigorous coupled
wave analysis will guide designs of nanowire arrays and keep the emissivity low
in the near-infrared, which will minimize solar absorption, while keeping the
emissivity high in the mid-infrared, which will maximize atmospheric cooling.
Optical measurements based on reflectance and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy will reveal the limits of artificial spectral control in nanowire
systems and lead to a predictive model for radiative cooling in the ambient
environment. The proposed investigations will establish new understanding of
temperature-dependent transport phenomena with respect to roughness in
individual nanowires and new understanding of spectral emissivity variations
with respect to pitch and coating dimensions in nanowire arrays, which will
ultimately elucidate how artificial periodicities interact with heat,
electricity, and light. While synthesis and processing methods of silicon
nanowires are well established, the project will explore their novel phononic
and photonic properties as the thermoelectric material and as the surface
cooling material to advance breakthroughs in thermoelectric devices. The
outcomes of this project will further promote the progress of nanomaterial-based
energy harvesting device research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.