* 1807126
* RUI: Charge Modified Antibody for Robust and Directional Adsorption onto Gold Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jeremy Driskell, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 344,866.00

The need to protect against biological threats and to develop effective drug
therapies requires the development of novel detection strategies. The unique
properties of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) make them candidates for materials used
in detection technologies. Critical for the success of emerging detection
technologies is the attachment of proteins, i.e., antibodies, onto the surface
of the AuNPs. Despite extensive efforts in the area of antibody-AuNP conjugation
chemistry, current attachment chemistries are not universally applicable to all
antibodies, often diminish the function of the antibody, and result in compounds
with limited stability. In an effort to address these challenges and to realize
the full potential of AuNP-enabled assays, Dr. Jeremy Driskell and his research
group at Illinois State University are investigating the underlying principles
of the antibody-AuNP interaction. This research is conducted with the support of
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program. These studies will
promote the rational design of highly active and stable antibody-AuNP
conjugates. The project provides an intense research experience to undergraduate
students who learn advanced analytical techniques and gain an appreciation for a
multidisciplinary approach to problem solving. Additionally, Dr. Driskell and
his undergraduate students participate in the Illinois Summer Research Academy,
an educational outreach program that provides high school students from across
the nation with an opportunity to work in a research laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite many successful examples of antibody-AuNP
conjugates, immobilization chemistry still presents a challenge. Direct
adsorption of the antibody onto AuNPs is often effective; however, adsorption
conditions vary among proteins in an unpredictable manner and the activity of
the conjugate is variable. Dr. Driskell's research seeks to identify the
underlying principles that cause some antibodies to adsorb onto AuNPs to form
stable, highly active conjugates, while other antibodies adsorb weakly and/or
exhibit poor binding activity. Dr. Driskell's lab investigates the adsorption
dynamics of antibodies onto AuNPs by measuring the adsorption affinity,
orientation, reversibility, and displacement by other proteins. Antibodies are
chemically modified to precisely alter the protein charge. A systematic
investigation into adsorption elucidates the foundational principles needed to
build a predictive model for effective surface modification. These efforts
support Dr. Driskell's long-term goal of developing a strategy to immobilize
antibodies onto AuNPs to form highly active, oriented, and stable conjugates for
use in AuNP-enabled immunoassays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.