* 1807891
* Plasmon-Enhanced Scanning Probe Spectroscopy for Chemical Mapping of Nanoscale Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 02/28/2023
* USD 452,400.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Tao at University of California, San Diego, studies and
develops new tools for surface analysis. Although surfaces and interfaces play a
critical role in dictating key chemical processes, adequate tools for nanoscale
surface analysis are lacking. Professor Tao is studying and creating optical
probes that are capable of focusing light down to nanoscale volumes (the
diameter of a human hair) that could be used in applications such as bioimaging,
catalysis, plasmonics, and solid-state surface science. This project provides
unique research opportunities for undergraduates, graduates, and high school
students to learn about optics and nanomaterials. Professor Tao collaborates
with a nanomaterials start-up company, which provides her students with direct
and personal insight into the entrepreneur roadmap. Professor Tao is also
interested in enhancing the diversity of the engineering community at UC San
Diego. This research contributes to chemical industry by ensuring product
quality as well as helping to improve synthetic methods by reducing defects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) for carrying out multi-modal measurement
of both the chemical and mechanical properties of surfaces and surface binding
events. AFM-TERS carries out point-by-point acquisition of chemical information-
rich Raman spectra by using a metallic optical antenna to facilitate near-field
amplification of both the incident and Raman-scattered light. This work
investigates the chemical and physical properties of colloidal AFM-TERS probes
that are fabricated by the assembly of shaped metal nanocrystals onto AFM tips.
Silver nanocube probes serve as a model system to understand the light-matter
interactions that are critical for achieving large Raman enhancements and low
background signals. These studies provide new fundamental insight into how near-
field optical probes interact with molecular and surface analytes, clarify how
near-field optical confinement is supported at the tip-substrate junction, and
investigate how the enhancement of other optical processes (e.g. inelastic
scattering, multiphoton absorbance) affect TERS readouts. Both experiments and
models are used to identify and develop design rules for nanocrystal optical
antennas to maximize Raman sensitivities and imaging resolution. The resulting
nanocrystal-based AFM-TERS platform are applied toward the chemical and force
imaging of nanomaterials and biological surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.