* 1807234
* Materials Chemistry of Superprotonic Solid Acids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sossina Haile, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 429,056.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Materials with the ability to transport protons
are essential for a wide range of technologies, from electricity production to
ammonia synthesis. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on the
discovery of new proton conducting materials with exceptional transport due to
structural disorder. Such materials combine remarkable "liquid-like"
conductivity with the mechanical integrity of solids. Aiming to discover the
design rules for creating new superprotonic conductors that meet a broad range
of application needs, Prof. Haile and her group create new knowledge about the
fundamental features of superprotonic conductivity through this study. Insights
from their research will help, for example, to improve fuel cells for
electricity production, to improve electrolyzers for hydrogen production, and to
find new routes for ammonia synthesis. Beyond the specific scientific principles
that are elucidated, the project advances the education of students across all
levels, from engaging K-12 students through outreach activities, to guiding
undergraduates and graduate students in cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, this project advances the science of superprotonic solid acids,
materials which are of increasing technological importance in a range of
applications. Solid acid compounds can be described by the generic stoichiometry
MnHm(AX4)p, where M is an alkali metal; A is an element such as S, P, or Se; X
is oxygen or hydrogen; and n, m, and p are integers. A superprotonic solid acid
is one in which rapid reorientation of AX4 polyanion groups facilitates fast
proton conductivity. Typically, this disordered state is encountered at slightly
elevated temperatures, and the transition to the superprotonic phase is
accompanied by 3-4 orders of magnitude increase in conductivity. Through
targeted chemical modifications to known superprotonic conductors the origins of
the superprotonic transition and the magnitude of the conductivity in the
superprotonic phase are elucidated. The research encompasses: (1) synthesis and
structural characterization of solid acids with controlled substitutions on
cation and polyanion sites; (2) measurement of transport properties; and (3)
determination of phase stability. The insights gained are used to develop
advanced materials that overcome the remaining technological barriers facing
known superprotonic conductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.