* 1807530
* Organic Aerosol Dynamics: Molecular Interactions, Single Particles and Modest Driving Forces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Fine particles play a key role in atmospheric chemistry, and effect human health
and weather. The physical and chemical properties of fine particles are critical
in controlling their behavior. The properties of these particles are
significantly different from liquids or solids. Typical particles are about 300
nanometers in diameter and contain roughly 10 million individual molecules. Well
over half of those molecules are organic (carbon containing) compounds, and even
a single particle often contains hundreds of thousands of different organic
molecules, most of which have never been isolated or synthesized by chemists.
These organic molecules stick to the tiny particles rather than letting go of
the particle and floating (volatilizing) into the air. Some of the organic
compounds resemble asphalt or complex sugars. This research advances fundamental
understanding of how combustion processes and products related to energy
production may influence human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Neil
Donahue and his graduate students at Carnegie Mellon University study the
behavior of a number of model systems using sophisticated mass spectrometers
that can measure the composition of individual 300 nm particles along with
complementary chemical ionization mass spectrometers that can measure individual
molecules in the gas and particle phases. They generate organic particles
mimicking those found in the atmosphere with progressively higher degrees of
oxidation to see if the particles become more viscous in a way that matters - by
directly testing if semi-volatile organics can diffuse into the particles and
whether two initially distinct populations of particles with semi-volatile
constituents evolve toward each other because of mixing. The researchers conduct
these experiments over a wide range of relative humidity conditions as humidity
varies widely in the atmosphere and because wet particles are known to be much
less viscous and more diffusive. Via a collaboration with colleagues at
Northwestern University, they use synthesized molecules containing the stable
carbon isotope, 13C, to cleanly separate molecules from different particle
populations using mass spectrometry. The project prepares doctoral students for
a research career. Professor Donahue is an ambassador in the Science and
Engineering Ambassadors Program founded by the National Academies. He brings a
focus on the coupling between energy use and environmental health
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.