* 1807385
* Collaborative Research:  Adsorption Equilibration of Binary Mixtures on Planar and Porous Sorbents
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Maria Calbi, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 168,923.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a mixture of two gases is
introduced into a container where an absorbing material has been placed, the
pressure and the ratio of the two gases of the mixture inside the container
change with time, as particular molecules bind to the absorbing surface. After
enough time elapses, the pressure and the composition of the gas reach constant
values, and a condensed phase forms on the surface, in equilibrium with the gas
phase. This project studies the kinetics of adsorption, that is, the evolution
of this process from the introduction of the gas mixture until equilibrium is
reached, and how it depends on parameters such as the composition and
temperature of the starting gas mixture, how strongly each of the gas molecules
attaches to the sorbent, and how fast the different molecules reach their final
state. While this is a very complex process, with numerous aspects that are not
well understood, most practical applications of adsorption (such as gas
separation or gas storage) either depend on, or are limited by, these dynamics.
A more complete understanding of the mixture adsorption dynamics will allow for
better control of the process and more efficient practical applications. The
kinetics of adsorption is studied by performing computer simulations for model
systems, and comparing the results with those obtained through experiments in
which pressure and composition are determined, as a function of time. The
computer simulations provide a microscopic understanding of the process, and the
experiments are a test for the validity of the simulations. Graduate and
undergraduate students participating in the project can gain a broader
perspective of the investigated phenomena provided by the experimental-
theoretical character of this partnership. Special efforts are made towards
recruitment and retention of students from underrepresented groups, through
summer programs for local high school students and one-on-one mentoring programs
that provide critical student support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the question of how a
mixture of gases approaches adsorption equilibrium as it interacts with various
kinds of solid surfaces and/or is confined within small pores. This is achieved
by combining results from a series of studies that involve theory, experiments
and simulations. Information on the equilibration of a single component (which
is itself often difficult to find for many systems) is not sufficient to
understand the sorption kinetics of mixtures, where the interplay between the
species has a distinct and defining role. Understanding and taking full
advantage of the adsorption characteristics of a sorbent when two distinct
species compete to become adsorbed onto its surfaces requires further and
explicit investigation of the kinetic processes present in the mixture that
eventually lead to the final equilibrium state of the adsorbed phase. Three main
aspects of these phenomena are investigated:&lt;br/&gt;a) How does the
adsorption rate of a binary mixture of gases (and of its individual components)
depend on the partial pressures and temperature? (experiments and simulations);
b) What are the elementary processes involved in the competition during
equilibration, and how do they affect the adsorption rates? (theory and
simulations); c) How does the spatial distribution of each component on the
surface change with time? (theory and simulations). These questions are
addressed for two kinds of sorbents (planar and porous) and two kinds of
adsorbates (spherical and linear), with a focus on the role of molecular
interactions (especially between the distinct species), the effects of the
orientational degrees of freedom of the adsorbates and, those of the confinement
imposed by the porous sorbents. The experiments are conducted in a specially
built setup that allows for volumetric adsorption measurements as well as for
the determination of the composition of the gas mixture through mass
spectrometry as the system approaches equilibrium, and which allows control of
the temperature over extended periods of time. The modeling and simulation
studies explore the same systems and behavior studied in the experiments by
using a Kinetic Monte Carlo approach to simulate adsorption
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.