* 1807441
* Chaotic synchronization of surface chemistry and vesicular assembly in hydrothermal microenvironments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yassin Hassan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Victor Ugaz and Yassin Hassan of Texas A&amp;M University are supported by the
Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to understand
the interplay between thermal convection, chaotic mixing, and surface chemical
reaction kinetics in microscale, pore-mimicking surroundings. The Cellular and
Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) also contributes to this award. An
unanswered question is how long-chain molecules were first synthesized from
elementary building blocks. Pore networks permeating mineral formations near
underwater hydrothermal vents such as those discovered recently in the Lost City
and Mid-Atlantic Ridge have emerged as potential hot spots for such biochemical
processes, both on Earth and elsewhere. However, the detailed synthesis
mechanism remains unclear, because concentrations of the precursor compounds in
the surrounding ocean waters would have been too dilute to initiate
polymerization. Ugaz and Hassan's research is exploring a new transport process-
chaotic thermal convection-that naturally arises in hydrothermal
microenvironments. This process continually shuttles molecular precursors from
the bulk fluid to targeted locations on catalytically-active solid boundaries.
The investigators are quantitatively mapping the enrichment of biomolecular
species that can be achieved via this process, utilizing a new experimental
platform to probe its influence on surface reaction kinetics within microscale
pore surroundings. The research is also exploring the use of this transport
mechanism to orchestrate the assembly of macromolecular species into protocell-
like vesicular bodies, to package long-chain molecules and maintain localized pH
gradients. The design and construction of such protocells can provide valuable
insight into cellular function, and has practical application to the design of
biosynthetic reaction systems for biomanufacturing. The project is enhancing
student education and training through innovative hands-on modules to design,
build, and operate microscale convective reactors representative of prebiotic
hydrothermal scenarios and key physicochemical processes central to the origin
of life. Companion computational modules integrate practical simulations of
convective flow (using lava lamps as a relatable example) with biochemical
reaction kinetics, through combined lectures and computer
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Ugaz and Hassan are performing coordinated
experiments and simulations to understand how microscale chaotic thermal
convection synergistically promotes mixing of chemical species in the bulk,
while simultaneously accelerating enrichment and vesicular protocell assembly
and packaging at discrete locations in a microfluidic reactor. A coupled 3D
computational flow and reaction model is being developed to quantify how bulk
flow characteristics govern surface reaction and vesicular assembly kinetics.
This framework is being applied to identify the role of chaos in mediating
targeted enrichment, and in defining the range of thermal and geometric
conditions conducive to accelerated surface reactions and protocell formation.
These results are laying the foundation to elucidate the ability of chaotic
thermal convection to mediate assembly of macromolecular species and their
encapsulation in protocells, under conditions representative of subsea
hydrothermal networks. The knowledge and insights gained from these studies are
providing a deeper understanding of possible pathways through which the
necessary precursors to metabolic and replicating systems can spontaneously
emerge, both on Earth and elsewhere. Important processes beyond biochemistry are
also catalyzed in hydrothermal microenvironments, suggesting a compelling role
for thermal convective phenomena in governing the transport and reaction of
carbon dioxide. The conceptual simplicity and relatability of microscale
convective flows is providing the foundation for innovative hands-on educational
experiences that guide students through the process of designing, building, and
operating microscale convective reactors representative of hydrothermal
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.