* 1807486
* Synthesis and Recognition Properties of Cucurbit[n]uril Type Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lyle Isaacs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 651,788.00

Containers have a variety of uses, such as to preserve foodstuff, to organize
collections of objects, and to hold objects during their shipment to specific
destinations. In the chemistry realm, molecular containers are used to isolate
molecules that smell, to extend the lifetime of unstable compounds by not
allowing them to react with other molecules, and to change important molecular
properties like solubility. At the University of Maryland, Professor Lyle
Isaacs' research group studies next generation molecular containers known as
cucurbiturils. By creating a series of new cucurbituril-type containers,
studying their basic container properties, and showing how they may be
integrated into complex systems, the Isaacs' group enables other academic and
industrial labs to adapt cucurbituril molecular containers to applications such
as drug delivery and sensing of addictive over-the-counter drugs. Isaacs'
research data is used to stimulate interactions with computational chemists via
the program Statistical Assessment of the Modeling of Proteins and Ligands
(SAMPL) Challenges. The researchers also conduct outreach activities with pre-
schools, and disseminate problem sets for use in spectroscopic methods
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the development of the
synthetic and supramolecular chemistry of a family of molecular container
compounds called cucurbit[n]uril (CB[n]). An important aim of this project is to
develop structure affinity relationships that refine the understanding of the
extraordinarily tight binding affinity of CB[n] toward cationic diamondoid
molecules. The new acyclic cucurbituril containers have triptycene derived
aromatic walls that allow tailoring of the surface to enable chiral recognition
and guest selectivity. By linking the CB[n] containers to metal-organic
polyhedra, the research team investigates how guests are take up inside the
CB[n] containers, further promoting chemical reactivity inside the metal-organic
polyhedra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.