* 1807573
* Vapor-Phase Epitaxy of Single-Domain Halide Perovskites for Quantum Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Richard Lunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Thin film halide perovskite semiconductors have
emerged as game-changing materials for many electronic applications and for
solar energy conversion. Perovskite semiconductors are composed of earth-
abundant elements, and are capable of achieving high performance comparable to
traditional semiconductors such as Si and GaAs. However, there is still very
little understanding how to grow thin film single crystals that could help lead
to the highest potential for this class of material. This project, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, expands the knowledge of accessible single-crystal growth
dynamics for halide perovskites. The researchers study precisely controlled
thin-film deposition of inorganic and hybrid halide perovskites. This
fundamental research enables the realization of next generation thin-film
perovskite quantum applications, designer multilayers, high speed transistors,
and guides the development of stable and low-cost halide perovskite solar cells.
To complement the technical project, a coordinated outreach and educational
effort expands "Sustainable- and Solar-Energy Tinker-Space" workshops to include
new modules on "The Magic of Diffraction" for hands-on energy education on the
Michigan State University campus. Additionally, the researchers develop an
annual art competition to raise awareness of innovative Materials Science
research. This research ultimately brings the U.S. closer to the widespread
application of the highest performance halide perovskite electronics and quantum
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, furthers the understanding of the bottom-up synthesis of halide
perovskite epitaxial films and superlattices with controlled order and
properties. Compared to their oxide analogues, the study of emergent phenomenon
occurring at the interface for halide perovskite system has been underexplored
and underexploited. Control over crystalline order, orientation, strain, and
quantum confinement are therefore fundamental to the optimization of energy
migration in these halide perovskite materials for the next generation high
performance photovoltaics, optoelectronics and quantum degenerate two-
dimensional electron systems. Employing vapor growth, the researchers explore
and uncover heteroepitaxial growth modes of perovskite films that also enable
the fabrication of quantum confined multilayers using real-time and in-situ
diffraction techniques optimized for growth on both insulating and
semiconducting substrates. Routes to tailoring the crystalline phase,
stoichiometry, strain, and doping profiles of epitaxial films and quantum wells
are established to realize electronic many-body phases in high-quality two-
dimensional electron systems and determine the connection between structure and
quantum properties that can guide future device development. To complement the
technical project, a coordinated outreach and educational effort expands
"Sustainable- and Solar-Energy Tinker-Space" workshops to include new modules on
"The Magic of Diffraction" for hands-on energy education on the Michigan State
University campus. Additionally, the researchers develop an annual art
competition to raise awareness of innovative Materials Science research. This
research ultimately brings the U.S. closer to the widespread application of the
highest performance halide perovskite electronics and quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.