* 1807622
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: ReaxFF2:  Efficient and Scalable Methods for Long-time Reactive Molecular Dynamics Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hasan Metin Aktulga, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,818.00

This project aims to enable long-time simulations of reactive molecular systems
through efficient&lt;br/&gt;and scalable techniques. Long-time reactive
simulations are critical for several scientific problems&lt;br/&gt;such as
catalysis, battery interfaces, biological simulations involving water, and
emerging&lt;br/&gt;areas like surface oxidation and chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) growth. However, progress on&lt;br/&gt;these fronts is limited because
long-time simulations of large-scale systems are very difficult,
if&lt;br/&gt;not impossible, to perform using existing methods. The Reactive
Force Field (ReaxFF) method is in principle &lt;br/&gt;ideally suited for this
purpose. However, the short time steps required in current ReaxFF simulations
&lt;br/&gt;and the computationally expensive force field formulation limit
ReaxFF's temporal capabilities to &lt;br/&gt;narrow simulation time ranges. This
project aims to overcome such limitations by creating ReaxFF2,&lt;br/&gt;which
will extend time scales by one to two orders of magnitude - thus making large-
scale, &lt;br/&gt;long-time RMD simulations accessible to a wide community.
Codes developed will be made publicly &lt;br/&gt;available and results from this
project will be highlighted on a dedicated website, and they will also be
&lt;br/&gt;incorporated into workshops by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
creating ReaxFF2, the PIs will enhance the Reax force field formulation
significantly, and develop &lt;br/&gt;innovative algorithms and software
implementations for scalable simulations. More specifically,
&lt;br/&gt;alternative ReaxFF interactions will be formulated to eliminate sharp
derivatives in energy terms &lt;br/&gt;and enhance ReaxFF time step lengths by
at least a factor of four. To accelerate the dynamic charge
&lt;br/&gt;distribution models needed in RMD, scalable parallel preconditioning
techniques for the iterative &lt;br/&gt;solvers will be developed. A task
parallel approach to compute interactions, hierarchical problem
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition, vectorization of the key kernels, and use of mixed
precision arithmetics constitute&lt;br/&gt;the main techniques that will be
utilized to fully leverage the performance capabilities of
large&lt;br/&gt;computer clusters. Finally, capabilities of accelerated RMD
concepts in the proposed ReaxFF2 &lt;br/&gt;formulation will be evaluated and
inlined trajectory analysis tools for RMD will be developed &lt;br/&gt;to
facilitate the study of long-time RMD simulations. This project will
significantly enhance the PIs' &lt;br/&gt;software development, community
building, and sustenance efforts for the RMD community. Codes,
&lt;br/&gt;functional forms, and parameter sets developed will be made publicly
available, enabling fast and &lt;br/&gt;accurate modeling of diverse reactive
systems beyond the scope of this project. For community outreach,
&lt;br/&gt;results from this project will be highlighted on a dedicated website,
and they will also be incorporated &lt;br/&gt;into workshops by the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
&lt;br/&gt;and the Division of Chemistry within the NSF Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.