* 1807291
* Flow Visualization Study of Quantum Hydrodynamics in Superfluid Helium-4
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Wei Guo, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 335,023.00

When liquid helium is cooled to about -271 degrees Celsius, it becomes an
inviscid superfluid and can do things that other fluids cannot, such as seeping
through ultra-thin cracks and climbing over container walls. The fascinating
hydrodynamics of superfluid helium has many important scientific and engineering
applications. For instance, it supports the most efficient heat-transport
mechanism as a coolant material, and it also allows the generation of violent
turbulent flows in compact laboratory equipment for model testing of airplanes
and ships. However, the lack of quantitative flow measurement tools in this cold
fluid has impeded progress in understanding and utilizing its hydrodynamics. In
this project, the research team aims to elucidate the nature of emergent
properties of various turbulent flows in superfluid helium by employing a newly
developed molecular-tagging flow visualization technique. This research is
expected to produce fundamental knowledge indispensable for better applications
of superfluid helium. The research team is composed of graduate and
undergraduate students. These students can gain experience in fluid dynamics,
cryogenics, and advanced laser technologies. These skills give the students the
technical dexterity necessary to excel in today's science- and technology-
dominated market. In addition, the research team plans to conduct demonstrations
involving superfluid helium in various educational and outreach programs at the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory to introduce profound scientific
concepts to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
research work is to apply a newly developed molecular tagging velocimetry (MTV)
technique to tackle outstanding problems in two forms of flows in superfluid
helium: thermal counterflow that can be produced by an applied heat current and
quasiclassical flow that can be generated via mechanical forcing. Preliminary
study on counterflow in the principle investigator's lab has revealed a novel
form of turbulence. Understanding this turbulence is now regarded as one of the
most challenging problems in quantum turbulence research. Using the MTV
technique, the research team plans to conduct systematic study on how the energy
spectrum of the counterflow turbulence may vary with heat flux in a wide range
of temperatures. This information can form the base for the development of a
theoretical understanding of the intriguing counterflow turbulence. In the
experiment on studying towed-grid generated quasiclassical turbulence, flow
visualization is combined with second sound attenuation method for probing the
motion of the two fluid components in superfluid helium. The research team plans
to examine the two-fluid coupling model and measure emergent flow properties
that cannot be reliably determined in the past. This work is expected to pave
the way for various exciting applications of superfluid helium in future
turbulence research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.