* 1807889
* NMR Studies of Nematicity in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems under Uniaxial Strain
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nicholas Curro, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 401,676.00

Nontechnical Abstract: In high temperature superconductors an electronic state
with zero resistance emerges at low temperatures. Superconductivity is a quantum
mechanical phenomenon that has a wide range of potential applications, including
magnetic levitation and energy transport without dissipation, capable of
changing the society and economy in a transformative way. But superconductivity
is still poorly understood and is seen in various types of materials. A
particularly interesting case occurs for nematic materials, in which the
electronic behavior spontaneously becomes anisotropic. This behavior can be
induced in the laboratory by applying strain to the crystal, which may alter its
physical properties. We aim to investigate the microscopic behavior using
magnetic resonance to study the electronic response to strain. This project will
support the education of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a broad
audience of senior citizens via a new course on quantum mechanics without
equations for the public through the university extension office.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The objective of this project is to
develop a fundamental understanding of quantum critical nematic fluctuations in
strongly correlated electron materials. Electronic nematic order has been
observed in the iron and cuprate superconductors, and evidence suggests that
nematic fluctuations may be responsible for the superconducting pairing
mechanism and the non-Fermi liquid behavior at optimal doping in these
materials. However, the presence of multiple types of order parameters and their
fluctuations complicate the interpretation of experiments and preclude the
identification of the essential physics behind these phenomena. Recent evidence
suggests that electronic nematic fluctuations may be responsible for
superconductivity in some cases. However, multiple types of electronic order
parameters can be present simultaneously, and by their very nature strongly
correlated systems are highly sensitive to impurities, giving rise to
microscopic inhomogeneity that obfuscates experimental observations. As a
result, there is no clear picture as to what extent electron nematicity is
central to the fundamental physics of high temperature superconductivity in the
iron and cuprates materials, or whether it is simply a curious epiphenomenon.
This project will answer this question through nuclear magnetic resonance
studies of cuprates, vanadates, iridates and iron pnictide materials under
uniaxial strain in regimes of phase space that have never been investigated.
These investigations will disentangle the roles of disorder, nematicity, and
antiferromagnetism at play in the normal state of the high temperature iron and
cuprate superconductors, and will also explore new regimes of phase space using
uniaxial strain as a thermodynamic tuning variable. The outcome of this project
will be a more complete understanding of the role of quantum critical nematic
fluctuations and the essential physics of strongly correlated electron
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.