* 1807931
* Control and Characterization of the Morphology and Photophysics of Conjugated Molecules in Isolation and in Aggregate
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2022
* USD 620,454.00

Polymers are long chains of hundreds or thousands of molecules, called monomers.
When many polymer chains are aggregated together they form plastics, whose
properties depend on the monomer's chemical structure. While some polymers are
made to be stiff or flexible, others are designed to absorb light, transport
excited state energy (called excitons), and conduct electricity, giving rise to
electronic devices that are thin, light, and flexible. While such polymers have
been known for some time, designing materials that have the same performance as
traditional electronics materials (e.g. silicon) is difficult. The movement of
excitons through a polymer involves both motion along a single chain, as well as
transfer between chains, and studying this interchain hopping is a challenge.
With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Laura Kaufman at Columbia University is
using sophisticated microscopies to study the flow of excitons through polymer
aggregates. The insights gained from the project could help pave the way to
inexpensive solar cells and flexible electronics, which would have significant
societal benefits. The project is also providing training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, who will enter the Nation's science and
technology workforce, and Professor Kaufman and her students are engaging with
local elementary school students to promote interest in scientific exploration
and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is exploring the excited state
properties of individual polymer chains, as well as polymers that are organized
together as aggregates. The focus is on polyfluorenes, perylene diimides, and
polyacenes, each of which are promising for optoelectronic applications.
Professor Kaufman and her students use approaches recently developed in her
laboratory to control the assembly of single polymer chains into aggregates of
particular size and structure through variation in solvent mixture and swelling.
Preparation of aggregates of different packing densities is accomplished by
careful selection of molecular properties and by tuning the aggregation to be
driven by Ostwald ripening or coalescence. Spectroscopic properties (e.g.
absorption, emission, anisotropy) are characterized on chromophore-by-
chromophore basis using polarization modulation and super-resolution
microscopies, which provide a detailed picture of the correlation between
polymer conformation and excited state photophysical properties. Through the
combination of controlled aggregate formation and detailed spectroscopic
measurement, the research team is attempting to ascertain whether morphological
ordering on mesoscopic length scales can be used to tune exciton diffusion
length and other photophysical characteristics of
aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.