* 1807455
* Progress Towards Understanding Neurotransmission: Temporal Mapping of Phospholipase D Activity in Exocytosis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michelle Knowles, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is supporting the research of Dr. Michelle Knowles at the University of
Denver to study a crucial aspect of the transmission of impulses from cell to
cell, as in the nervous system. Chemical signals are packed into vesicles in a
"sending" cell that are expelled in the direction of a "receiving" cell. Many
molecules must organize in space and time to trigger the fusion of a vesicle
with the receiving cell membrane. In doing so, cells are capable of releasing
hormones and neurotransmitters on demand. The research examines two of these
critical fusion-inducing molecules and their relation to one another. This work
allows undergraduate and graduate students to be trained in the field of
biophysical chemistry where they master cutting-edge technology for observing
the behavior of cells. Throughout this project, research and education are
integrated into outreach events for students in Denver Public Schools and in the
education of non-science majors at the University of Denver. The scientific
results of this work are disseminated at scientific conferences and through
publications to ensure incorporation of the new found knowledge into the bigger
picture of how cells function in the brain and nervous system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of membrane fusion requires an input of energy
to merge the vesicle lipid bilayer with that of the plasma membrane. In doing
so, the membrane quickly transforms from a relatively flat bilayer to a
negatively curved tube to form the fusion pore. Although SNARE proteins drive
fusion, it is hypothesized that certain lipids aid in the formation of the
negatively curved pore. The formation of phosphatidic acid (PA), a lipid that
forms negatively curved membranes in vitro, is thought to occur at the fusion
site to stabilize the membrane shape changes. Evidence shows that inhibition of
the enzyme that makes PA, Phospholipase D1, reduces the amount of PA at the
plasma membrane and membrane fusion is blocked. Despite knowing that the
presence of PA dramatically affects exocytosis, a clear picture of the timing of
PA formation and accumulation at the fusion site is not known. Using high
resolution, fluorescence imaging methods, the location of PA and Phospholipase
D1 are mapped in time during secretion. This research uses a combination of
biochemical reconstitution studies in conjunction with mammalian cell culture to
characterize how PA is recruited to the fusion site and how PA affects membrane
curvature. Ultimately, the findings determine how PA facilitates exocytosis and
lead to a molecular understanding of lipid sorting in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.