* 1807789
* The Role of Reciprocal Play in Fostering Early Altruism
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Andrew Meltzoff, Cortes-Barragan         Rodolfo
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Andrew N.
Meltzoff at the University of Washington's Institute for Learning &amp; Brain
Sciences, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the role of social interaction and reciprocal play in fostering
early altruism. Reciprocal play is a specific form of social play involving
turn-taking. The Fellow's prior work showed that reciprocal play can trigger
young children's altruism in the immediate context. This project will examine
how reciprocal play may foster altruism across contexts and time. Promoting
altruism in children is a desirable societal goal, and thus the research has
potential to have a broad impact. This results can be disseminated to help early
educators and children at risk. Such information would be especially useful for
parents, teachers and other practitioners working with children who commonly
seek to promote positive social development in children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves four interlocking studies that will:
(a) examine how reciprocal play can encourage the spread of altruism across
contexts, (b) examine how reciprocal play may maintain altruism over time, (c)
assess whether other types of play show similar effects, and (d) examine how
merely observing reciprocal play among others might potentially encourage
altruism. Although developmental psychology has long held that positive
interactions in early childhood are important in promoting a general prosocial
interaction, this research will examine how specific everyday aspects of
childrens' social experience that can shape altruism. The findings promise to
have impact on developmental theory as well educational practice. The proposed
work also sets the stage for the future design of intervention studies, which
could provide information to educators and scientists on how to engender and
promote social skills, including altruistic behavior, in young
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.