* 1807218
* RUI: Development of a Biocompatible Visible-Light-Catalyzed Thiol-Ene Coupling Reaction to Study Redox Active Disulfide Bonds.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Andrew Wommack, High Point University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 172,465.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Andrew J. Wommack from High Point University to examine the functional and
structural consequences of sulfur-sulfur or disulfide bonds in proteins. The
disulfide bond serves important roles in biology ranging from structural effects
in proteins to cell signaling and control of metabolic pathways. This sulfur-
sulfur chemical bond can be found in opened or closed states under different
biological conditions, such as during different physiological stresses or within
unique cellular locations. To study the functional impact of the disulfide bond
in a permanently closed state, one sulfur atom is replaced by a carbon atom to
generate an alternative bond that is locked in place under all biologically
relevant conditions. In addition to inventing new chemical methods for exploring
how disulfide bond status affects biological processes, this project directly
impacts the training of undergraduate research students and also facilitates
development of new engaging materials for the undergraduate science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) are
present in cells at various concentrations, depending on cell type, subcellular
location, and physiological state. As an evolved response to the levels of
ROS/RNS in oxidative metabolism, glutathione (GSH) is installed as a protected,
but redox-reversible, covalent change to solvent-accessible cysteine thiols. By
replacing the internal cysteine of GSH with an alkene-containing side chain,
this modified GSH is irreversibly attached to solvent-accessible cysteines with
optimized methods for thiol-ene coupling (TEC) in aqueous media. Initial targets
include peroxiredoxins 1 &amp; 2 (Prx1 &amp; Prx2) and sulfiredoxin 1 (Srx1),
where glutathionylation is critically involved in ROS/RNS equilibria and
signaling. Mutagenesis of existing cysteine residues, followed by TEC reaction
with the alkene-containing GSH, is assessed with LC-MS analysis, gel-filtration
chromatography, spectrophotometry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and x-ray
crystallography to explore how glutathionylation affects protein function and
structure. With the developed TEC methodology, this project further contributes
to the fundamental understanding of glutathionylation as a response to
ROS/RNS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.