* 1807870
* RUI: Light-driven selective chemoenzymatic C-H functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Lionel Cheruzel, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 367,361.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems are funding Dr.
Lionel Cheruzel from San Jose State University for his proposed work on merging
chemical catalysis with light-activated enzymes. Selective functionalization of
inert C-H bonds in small molecules is very challenging. The Cheruzel lab is
using visible light in conjunction with suitable light-harvesting compounds to
promote selective chemical and enzymatic functionalization of such bonds. This
technology aims at expanding the toolbox of organic chemistry and meeting the
demand for green and sustainable synthesis of fine chemicals. In addition to
fostering undergraduate students' interests in light-driven processes, the PI is
also bringing experiments related to protein engineering into high schools as
part of the outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses
on the development of selective light-driven chemoenzymatic approaches by
cobining the advantages of chemocatalysis with the unique selectivity of
engineered hybrid cytochrome P450 biocatalysts. The chemoenzymatic approach
targets multi-step selective C-H bond functionalizations and C-C bond formations
towards the production of valuable sought-after synthons. Recent automation is
facilitating the protein engineering of the next generation of light-driven
biocatalysts. In addition, optimization of the photochemical processes involves
instrument development to maximize the irradiation time, surface area and
reaction yields. The proposed methodology paves the way for future efforts in
chemoenzymatic reactions initiated by visible light irradiation. Special
emphasis is placed on enhancing the scientific educational experience of
undergraduate and high school students in the San Jose
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.