* 1807152
* Oligopyrrole Macrocycles: Synthesis, Electronic Structure, Switching, and Communication
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Jonathan Sessler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 11/30/2020
* USD 355,037.00

Professor Jonathan L. Sessler and his team at The University of Texas at Austin
supported by this award are exploring new analogues of the pigments that make
blood red, vitamin B12 purple, and grass green. Also targeted for study are the
principles of chemical communication that biology uses to transmit signals over
short distances and long as exemplified, for instance, by neuroregulators and
skunk sprays, respectively. By using small molecules to trigger downstream
chemical events it could become possible to probe the complexity of biology
within the chemical laboratory. With such long-term goals in mind, new molecules
have been designed that are expected to advance our understanding of how
molecular structure affects key properties, such as color, stability, and an
ability to interact with other chemical entities. This is expected, in term, to
lead to the development of new molecular systems that can be used to create
information storage arrays or being used in the context of new medical
modalities, such as photodynamic therapy, where light is used to treat diseases.
This project involves work that spans the gamut of chemistry sub-areas. It is
thus expected to enhance coworker training and provide a technically savvy
workforce. It also should also provide an opportunity for young researchers to
develop the skills needed to pursue academic or non-academic research-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of specifics, this project focuses on two
classes of oligopyrrole macrocycles that have benefited from prior NSF support,
namely expanded porphyrins and calixpyrroles. These molecules, alone and in
concert, are being used to pursue the following specific aims, which involve
respectively: 1) The preparation of new two- and three-dimensional expanded
porphyrins. These systems allow explorations of the effects of oxidation,
reduction, and donor-acceptor interactions on both ground and excited state
(anti)aromaticity. They also allow determinations of which design features
control localized vs. delocalized aromaticity and radical vs. closed shell
conjugation pathways and thus advances in basic structure-function understanding
as it relates to blood pigment analogues; 2) the synthesis of functionalized
calixpyrrole systems that can access multiple discrete states, such as helices,
capsules, and discrete monomers. In the context of this aim, off-equilibrium
effects are being explored using chiral, non-racemic pyridine-functionalized
calixpyrroles and their interactions with metalated expanded porphyrins; 3)
further explorations of a previously reported benzotetrathiafulvalene
calixpyrrole-TCNQ ensemble, particularly in the context of its ability to
release ionic and molecular messengers and mediate various downstream chemical
reactions. Combinations of monomeric and capsule-type calixpyrroles with
expanded porphyrins, are being explored with a view to creating more complex
information transfer systems. In this way, the effect of structure on cascade-
like signal transduction in completely synthetic constructs can be assessed.
Ultimately, this could lead to systems capable of highly dense information
storage or able to perform rudimentary computing functions. This project is
expected to be accomplished in four years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.