* 1807073
* New Nickel Environment for Biology:  Cofactor Assembly and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jian Hu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2022
* USD 567,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Robert Hausinger and Dr. Jian Hu from Michigan State
University to characterize how a microorganism interconverts the two mirror
image structures of lactic acid, a central element of carbohydrate metabolism.
The enzyme that does this, called lactate racemase, requires both a protein
component and nickel. Nickel is very rarely found in biology. Even more
remarkably, the nickel in lactate racemase is present in a unique environment
never before observed. This project investigates how the bacterium makes the
cofactor that creates the unique environment. This effort provides training to a
postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and undergraduate students in the
areas of structure and biochemical mechanisms. These researchers also
participate in hands-on educational activities for the public related to this
topic that will engage lifelong learners of all ages at the annual Science
Festival at the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research elucidates
structure-function aspects of the four proteins required for lactate racemase
activity. It characterizes how LarB catalyzes a new reaction, carboxylation of
the pyridinium ring of nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide while hydrolyzing the
phosphoanhydride linkage to produce pyridinium-3,5-dicarboxylic acid
mononucleotide. Additional studies of LarE, a sacrificial sulfur transferase,
establish how the two carboxylic acid groups are transformed into
thiocarboxylate groups and define whether the resulting dehydroalanine side
chain of the enzyme can be regenerated to cysteine. This work uncovers how LarC
catalyzes the CTP-dependent installation of Ni into
pyridinium-3-5-dithiocarboxylic acid mononucleotide, the first biological
example of a cyclometallation reaction, to create the cofactor. Finally, these
investigations show how the cofactor is bound to different LarA species and
identifies other potential transformations catalyzed by the enzyme. In
combination, the biosynthesis and roles of this novel nickel-containing cofactor
can be described. This innovative research expands our understanding of nickel
biochemistry and establishes a new paradigm for redox chemistry involving a
tethered nickel-pincer cofactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.