* 1807913
* Ammonia, Acids and Environmental Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mary Jane Shultz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 600,543.00

In this project, the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of
Chemistry is funding Professor Mary Jane Shultz of Tufts University to
investigate environmental reactions related to ammonia and acids. Synthesis of
ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen has been called the greatest invention of the
20th century; indeed, it is responsible for feeding half the world?s population.
It also consumes more than 2% of the World?s energy. Unfortunately, only 15% of
the ammonia created and converted into fertilizer is useful for food production.
As much as 50% of the ammonia produced ends up in the air or in water supplies.
The fate and impact of the ammonia released into the atmosphere is largely
unknown however, mitigating the loss of ammonia produced could have a major
economic impact on food producers as well as reducing negative effects of runoff
on water supplies. Modeling results suggest a catalytic role for ammonia in
transforming sulfur oxides into particles that generate clouds. Clouds in turn
modulate Earth's radiation balance. Understanding particle formation is one of
the grand challenges associated with climate and weather modeling. This work is
aimed at understanding the role of ammonia in the environment, especially in
terms of energy consumption, food production and clean water supplies. The
project is also expected to contribute to the technological workforce; students
gain experience with inventing and applying forefront tools for probing
surfaces. Data are shared with local secondary schools through the chemistry
department COOP program; the Shultz laboratory is a host for COOP
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines emerging spectroscopic
techniques with surface science to probe ammonia-surface interactions. Surfaces
play an outsized role both in soil-ammonia and ammonia-atmospheric-aerosol
interactions. Probing complex mixtures that exist on these surfaces presents a
challenge to most traditional surface science techniques. There is one technique
that meets the challenge: nonlinear, surface-specific vibrational spectroscopy
coupled with nonlinear interferometry. Applying this technique to soil and
aerosol interfaces is expected to yield insight into interactions that impact
water and air quality. Additionally, a deeper understanding of soil chemistry
could lead to improved fertilizer formulations for controlled release impacting
both food and water supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.