* 1807046
* Gravitational Wave Astrophysics in the High Event Rate Regime
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Ben Farr, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

After decades of research and development, the search for gravitational waves
has finally succeeded, and their detection has forever changed the field of
astronomy. During the first two observing runs NSF's Advanced LIGO detectors
have already detected at least five binary black hole mergers and one binary
neutron star merger. While these detections have already validated the theory of
general relativity at new levels, enabled novel cosmological measurements, and
greatly advanced our understanding of compact objects, they have only scratched
the surface of what these detectors can achieve. LIGO and Virgo's next observing
campaigns will bring hundreds more observations of compact binary mergers. The
goal of this work is to use those detections to answer the questions: 1) How are
compact binaries formed? and 2) Are we missing unmodeled physics? The group
conducting this work will include a teacher from a local high school for two
consecutive summers, enabling the integration of topics in gravitational wave
astronomy into the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next 2-3 years,
LIGO's improved sensitivity will increase detection rates from one per month to
one per day. This award will support the development and employment of the next
generation of source characterization tools to enable new science in the regime
of high-event-rate observation, including rapid and automated event follow-up,
binary population characterization, and constraints on deviations from predicted
signal models. New Bayesian hierarchical modeling tools will be developed and
deployed to assess compact binary formation environments. Alternative signal
models will also be developed, which will be sensitive to a range of unmodeled
physics (e.g., tidal disruptions of neutron stars, excitation of neutron star
resonances, deviations from relativity), that current characterization
techniques could miss. To enable this science an improved analysis
infrastructure is necessary, capable of handling much higher event rates. This
award will support the development of a new open-source gravitational wave data
analysis library that incorporates the models developed as part of this work, as
well as other techniques necessary for characterizing compact binary mergers
detected by LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.