* 1807336
* Collaborative Research: Quantum cascade laser transceivers for terahertz wireless communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Alexey Belyanin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 151,582.00

The terahertz is a region of the electromagnetic spectrum lying between
microwaves and the infrared range, also known as the "terahertz gap" due to the
lack of suitable technologies for its generation and manipulation. On the one
hand, conventional electronic devices used to produce microwaves cannot operate
at higher frequencies, while on the other hand optical sources such as terahertz
lasers typically require cryogenic operation, which is impractical. Thus, novel
approaches are needed to develop convenient terahertz sources. The goal of this
project is to demonstrate a new class of terahertz sources based on a high-power
mid-infrared semiconductor laser (so-called quantum cascade laser) designed to
generate a comb of frequencies separated by precisely equidistant terahertz
frequency intervals. The resulting terahertz radiation sources will show room
temperature operation, narrow linewidth, and wide tunability. These would be
attractive for many applications, especially remote sensing. Indeed, hundreds of
chemicals from gases to drugs, explosives, and biomolecules have telltale
absorption and emission features in the terahertz range. Terahertz sensing would
allow one to monitor the ozone depletion, climate change, and environmental
pollution. It would give insights into the formation and decay of stars in our
galaxy and beyond. Such terahertz sources would also be very valuable in the
studies of materials, since many fundamental excitations in matter such as
plasma oscillations and sound waves exhibit resonances in the terahertz.
&lt;br/&gt;The core of the proposed new device architecture consists of a mid-
infrared quantum cascade laser generating an optical frequency comb with a
terahertz spacing between longitudinal modes, named a harmonic frequency comb.
However, instead of using infrared light emitted from the laser as in typical
frequency combs, here the intracavity beating of the optical modes constituting
the comb is exploited to generate a coherent terahertz signal at room
temperature. The focus of this project is to demonstrate such new terahertz
sources for sensing applications. These devices will benefit from unprecedented
compactness, having a footprint smaller than 1 square centimeter. Thanks to the
nature of a frequency comb, they will generate terahertz tones with narrow
linewidth (in the Hz range) and high stability. Moreover, they will be able to
operate at room temperature with a broad tuning range, from microwaves to the
terahertz region, as a result of the fast electron dynamics of the laser. By
connecting and synchronizing an array of such devices, it will be possible to
coherently scale up the emitted power and enable terahertz beam control, such as
beam steering and shaping. Because of these unique features, the proposed
sources will rival and potentially outperform other existing systems for
terahertz sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.