* 1807465
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Experimental and Computational Studies for Understanding the Interplay of Photoreactive Materials and Persistent Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Nan Jiang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 251,674.00

This award is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Division of Chemistry. Professors Danmeng Shuai and Hanning Chen at The George
Washington University and Professor Nan Jiang at the University of Illinois at
Chicago collaborate to understand the transformation of persistent organic
contaminants in a natural aquatic environment. A broad range of persistent
organic micropollutants, such as pharmaceuticals and personal care products
(PPCPs), endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs), and agrochemicals, have been
detected in natural water. These substances are of concern because of adverse
impacts to human health and ecological systems even at very low concentrations.
Their removal in the natural system is therefore important. The research team
uses an integrated simulation and experimental approach. They study an important
yet overlooked process of contaminant transformation in the natural system that
involves photochemical reactions on naturally occurring and anthropogenic
materials. The project trains students in creative ways, and offers them hands-
on research experience in environmental chemistry. The project also introduces
students from diverse backgrounds and educational levels, particularly those
from underrepresented groups, to cutting-edge scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a multi-faceted approach. It
includes the synthesis and characterization of photocatalysts that represent
natural minerals and anthropogenic materials. It aims at a mechanistic
understanding in a model system. The impact of complex water matrices on
contaminant transformation is evaluated. Molecular simulations, advanced
spectroscopic and microscopic characterizations, and the evaluation of reaction
kinetics and pathways are conducted. This sheds light on the interactions of
photocatalysts and contaminants at an atomic/molecular scale. It also elucidates
the impact of complexity and heterogeneity of environmental systems for
contaminant transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.