* 1807890
* PIC: Mobile in Situ Fourier Transform Spectrometer on a Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2022
* USD 419,400.00

Optical spectroscopy excels at chemical identification and is ubiquitous in the
sciences as a highly specific and noninvasive probe of molecular structure.
Moving forward the integration of miniaturized optical spectrometers into mobile
platforms will have unprecedented impact on applications ranging from unmanned
aerial vehicles to mobile phones. To address this demand, silicon photonics
stands out as a manufacturable platform capable of delivering compact and cost-
effective devices and systems. Its implementation in silicon photonics
manufacturing will contribute to bringing broadband operation and fine
resolution to the chip scale enabling such attributes as compactness, power
efficiency, real time operation and low cost. Thus integrated spectrometers will
have a profound impact by incorporation into various mobile platforms and
creation of distributed sensor networks towards large scale internet of things
applications. The proposed research will advance the basic science and
technology of engineered CMOS manufactured Si-Photonic integrated systems on a
chip. We anticipate that the spectrometer will find applications in monitoring
environment, healthcare, national security, and defense applications. The
project will provide scientific training for students at graduate and
undergraduate levels as well as serve as a platform for outreach, education and
collaborative efforts with middle and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Significant efforts have been directed towards the realization of
miniaturized, embedded optical spectrometers for spectral analysis in numerous
areas of science and technology including remote sensing, planetary sciences,
medical research, and pharmaceutical processes. The state of the art Optical
Fourier Transform spectroscopy has thus far been relegated as a benchtop
instrument owing to the large footprint and mechanical stability necessary for
accurate operation. To overcome this limitation, we propose to develop an
integrated chip-scale Fourier transform spectrometer that is fully CMOS
compatible. This approach will improve the measurement speed, and relax the
sampling rate and dynamic range requirements compared to conventional ones, and
retain the strong advantages that Fourier transform spectrometers possess
compared to other conventional designs, such as superior performance in power
throughput, operation in noisy environments, and accuracy. To reach these goals,
we propose to achieve the following objectives: (1) design a chip-scale
spectrometer on a chip (2) fabricate it as a monolithic integrated device, (3)
experimentally test and characterize the performance of the constructed device
and (4) devise signal processing algorithms for concatenation of the detected
channelized signals to construct high resolution broad band resultant spectra.
Rapid prototyping and testing will be performed at UCSD with full scale runs
performed at the AIM Photonics foundry. The proposed research is transformative
in nature as it will not only mark the first step toward integration of
inexpensive, compact, high resolution sensitive spectrometers into mobile phone
technology, but also offer a route to ultra-compact networked sensor systems for
environmental management, medicine, and security. The project will provide
scientific training for students at graduate and undergraduate levels as well as
serve as a basis for outreach, education and collaborative efforts with middle
and high schools. Engagement of students of diverse ethnicity, gender and
economic backgrounds in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
will be continued via the ongoing RET, REU, and COSMOS
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.