* 1807773
* RUI: Understanding Cu(I) Interactions with Zinc-Metalloproteins: Impact of Cu(I) on Structure and Function of the X-Linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kathryn Splan, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 292,737.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program to Profesor Kathryn
Splan of Macalester College supports research that investigates the interaction
of copper ions with zinc-binding proteins. Many proteins require metal ions for
proper function, and replacement of the usual metal ion with one exhibiting
different chemical properties is likely to alter protein structure, and
therefore, function. While metal-ion substitution has clear ramifications in the
context of metal-ion toxicity, changes in protein function upon metal-ion
substitution may also constitute a desirable functional strategy. The
experiments reveal the susceptibility of zinc proteins toward substitution by
copper and characterize the impact of this substitution on the protein's
function. The project trains students in biochemical preparation and
characterization techniques, thereby building solid technical skills in
preparation for further study and/or entry into the work force. The results from
the project also inform the fields of cell biology, neurochemistry, and
neurobiology, particularly in those areas concerned with the molecular basis of
diseases that are characterized by mis-regulated metal ion
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the impact of Cu(I) on metalloprotein
function is further investigated by characterizing the interaction of Cu(I) with
the X-linked Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein (XIAP), a Zn(II)-metalloprotein
recently implicated in copper homeostasis. Multiple Zn(II) protein structural
motifs have been shown to be susceptible to displacement by Cu(I), owing to the
shared thiophilic character of both metal ions. Cu(I) substitution at the Zn(II)
structural sites of XIAP is one possible mechanism by which XIAP function may be
modulated by changing copper concentrations. A variety of spectroscopic and
biochemical approaches are utilized to detect the displacement of zinc ions upon
the addition of copper and the resulting structural and functional changes.
Understanding Cu(I) interactions with this target at the molecular level deepens
the understanding of metalloprotein susceptibility toward disruption by Cu(I) in
general and clarifies the role of Cu(I) in XIAP
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.