* 1807233
* Interactive Microscopy of Hybrid Scattering Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Alex Zettl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 749,999.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how
electrical current flows in small devices where it encounters obstacles whose
size is on the order of the size of a single atom. This is important for
miniaturizing electrical devices in order to make computers faster and more
energy efficient, but it also creates new problems as the devices begin to reach
sizes comparable to the distance between constituent atoms. In this size regime
tiny defects such as a single misplaced atom - which might not have mattered in
the past - suddenly can become very significant. The importance of this project
is that it helps to clarify precisely how different atomic-scale objects affect
electrical current in small devices, thus helping technology to be successfully
miniaturized to the greatest extent possible. The difficulty here is the need to
image atomic-scale structure inside actual operating devices to determine the
cause-and-effect relationship between atomic-scale structure and device
performance. This is accomplished using a scanning tunneling microscope that can
see single atoms and also image electrons as they flow around the smallest
possible obstacles, like water in a stream, according to the rules of quantum
mechanics. Other types of microscopes are used that involve focused electron
beams and helium ion beams to intentionally create atomic-scale structures that
are not naturally occurring and thus intentionally manipulate the structure of
electrical devices over the smallest distances possible. The broader impacts of
this project lie in its strong education and outreach components and the fact
that it provides high-level scientific training to graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students, preparing them for careers in STEM
fields. Outreach efforts are performed at all levels by the investigators and
team members and include creation of educational materials on nanoscience and
technology for the Berkeley School/University Partnership Outreach
Implementation Plan, as well as participation in the Bay Area Science in Schools
program. Underrepresented minority students will be offered 5-week internships
in the laboratories through the Summer Math and Science Honors Academy program
at Berkeley, as well as mentoring opportunities through partnership with the UC
Leadership Excellence through Advanced Degrees
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to better understand how electrons in 2D materials interact with
different structures at the atomic-scale under both equilibrium (i.e., zero
transport current) and nonequilibrium (non-zero transport current) conditions.
Conventional fabrication and imaging techniques are unable to access the atomic-
scale for operational devices and so a gap has opened up in the understanding of
how atomic-scale structures in 2D materials alter device functionality. This
project will help to fill that gap by developing new techniques to synthesize
atomically-precise structures in 2D devices and also to image them at the
atomic-scale during device operation. A central question that is addressed is
how the equilibrium electronic properties of microscopic scattering structures
lead to their nonequilibrium response under high current density and differing
device conditions. Specific objectives include the control and visualization of
this behavior for point scatterers, quantum dots, and 1D superlattices at the
surfaces of single-layer graphene field-effect transistor (FET) devices. Novel
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and
focused ion beam based synthesis techniques are used to modify boron nitride
substrates with unprecedented spatial precision to engineer the electronic
properties of graphene FET capping layers. This project combines the principal
investigators' TEM, device fabrication, and scanned probe microscopy expertise
to explore a unique set of nanoscale experimental systems. The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the fact that it allows access to physical regimes
that have never been explored, including the nonequilibrium properties of
different atomic scale scatterers such as Coulomb impurities, resonant
scatterers, and sp3 defects that break sublattice symmetry. The smallest
possible atomically-precise quantum dots are explored in graphene, creating
opportunity to visualize new types of edge-state behavior as well as electron
lensing. Quantum dot wavefunctions are imaged with unprecedented resolution,
enabling long-standing theoretical predictions to be tested. Defect behavior is
studied in systems with engineered electrical anisotropy, a new frontier in 2D
materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.