* 1807590
* Pixel-level 3D nanophotonic structures for multi-modality image sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Euan McLeod, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 335,487.00

Consumer cameras typically capture a two-dimensional (2D) image of a scene, or
record a movie. Specialized optical imaging devices can also capture additional
information such as the polarization of the light or even a three-dimensional
(3D) image of objects in a scene. This extra information is helpful in a wide
range of applications, such as in sensors for self-driving cars, for identifying
different types of cells and tissues in biomedical imaging, or for keeping a
richer historical record than is offered by a simple 2D image. While devices
already exist that can record 3D and polarization information, they are
typically much larger and bulkier than a standard cell phone camera. In this
proposal, approaches to significantly reduce the size and weight of such devices
will be studied. This involves not only new optical designs, but also new
approaches to the processes of designing and constructing 3D optical devices out
of building blocks that are much smaller than the wavelength of light. In
addition to enabling particularly small devices, such small building blocks
interact with light based on different physical principles than those that apply
to large optics. The research will be incorporated into a course at the
University of Arizona, and undergraduate students and high school teachers will
also partake in the research. Native American students and their educators, who
are often disadvantaged in terms of their exposure to science and engineering,
will be a major demographic target.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal of this
proposal is to use three-dimensional (3D) nanophotonics to enable imaging
devices with angle, wavelength, and polarization sensitivity in significantly
more compact and lighter weight systems than is currently possible. In existing
angle-sensitive 3D light-field imaging approaches, the diffraction limit imposes
a minimum useful pixel size. Although not previously demonstrated, nanophotonics
offers the potential to significantly reduce the minimum pixel size, which can
in turn allow for reductions in the size of any external optics. Novel high-
speed optimization-based algorithms will be used to design 3D nanophotonic
structures composed of metallic and/or dielectric nanoparticle building blocks.
On individual pixels, different structures will selectively receive incoming
light with specific incidence angles, polarizations, and/or wavelengths.
Photonic nanostructures that cover entire blocks of pixels will also be designed
to sort incoming light based on incidence angle, wavelength, and polarization.
The nanostructures will be fabricated using an optical tweezer-based rapid
prototyping approach. Colloidal nanoparticle building blocks will be chemically
functionalized to bind when brought in contact with each other using the optical
tweezers. After the nanophotonic structures have been fabricated on the image
sensors, they will be tested under well-controlled lighting conditions using
monochromatic laser sources directed at particular angles with particular
polarizations, as well as in everyday broad-band, wide-field scenes. A compact
and light-weight multimodality imaging device will be created. Its performance
will be compared to existing light field imagers, hyperspectral imagers, and
polarimeters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.