* 1807255
* Visualizing Nanoparticle Packing at Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* David Hoagland, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2021
* USD 686,704.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles, objects not much larger than
molecules, assemble in two- and three-dimensions into materials with unique and
technologically important properties. Until recently, this assembly could not be
directly seen because of the very small size of nanoparticles. For this
proposal, a new imaging method has been developed that can resolve the structure
and motions of individual nanoparticles assembled on a liquid interface. The
method combines the high resolution of electron microscopy, about 100-1000 times
greater than optical microscopy, with the nonvolatility of ionic liquids,
essentially liquid salts, to probe the two-dimensional assembly of nanoparticles
as a function of nanoparticle size, geometry, bulk chemistry, surface chemistry,
and degree of liquid wetting. Unlike larger particles, nanoparticles can
interact with each other over distances as large as the particles themselves, a
feature that facilitates assembly into well-ordered structures. Also unlike
larger particles, these interactions are weak, allowing the particles to "jiggle
around" so as to find the best arrangement. In many experiments, different sorts
of nanoparticles are mixed, increasing the diversity of the ordered structures,
or in other cases, creating a frozen disordered "jammed" state. Determining
conditions under which nanoparticle particles organize, understanding how these
changes affect organization, and uncovering ways to make completely disordered
systems are the key project objectives. This research is performed by
undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral fellows, and the outcomes are often
striking images or movies easily understandable by everyone. In the long term,
the tools and techniques emerging from this research should apply easily to
other technologically important materials such as gels, emulsions, liquid
crystals, and suspensions, all of which display bulk properties determined by
nanoscale features and events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Despite a need to impose vacuum, scanning electron microscopy
can be performed on open liquid specimens when the components are wetted by, or
dispersed in, a nonvolatile ionic liquid. At an imaging resolution of 3-5 nm,
several frames per second can be acquired over an unlimited time. Preliminary
experiments established the feasibility of scanning-electron-microscope, single-
particle tracking even for dense nanoparticle packings and non-spherical
particle shapes. The method functions much like optical video microscopy but at
10-100X greater magnification. Two-dimensional nanoparticle ordering on ionic
liquid surfaces is now pursued comprehensively and quantitatively, examining
effects of nanoparticle size, geometry, bulk chemistry, surface chemistry (i.e.,
polymer ligand type), and degree of liquid wetting. In addition, different types
of nanoparticles are mixed. Unlike larger colloidal particles, nanoparticle
interactions are typically weak, allowing equilibrium assembly under Brownian
motion alone. The interaction potential will be evaluated for all listed
parameters, with greatest attention on ligand type, which controls the
interaction length scale, reaching or exceeding the particle size. Ligands also
affect the contact angle, which dictates how deeply the interface-trapped
particle protrudes into the underlying liquid, and, in turn, this depth
influences particle dynamics. A new transmission-electron-microscopy approach to
nanoparticle contact angle is being assessed, and by the new scanning-electron-
microscopy tracking method, the associated interfacial nanoparticle dynamics are
being quantified. Both ordered and disordered dense nanoparticle packings are
being studied, with the latter facilitated by mixing particles of different
size/shape. To control nanoparticle areal density, a unique device for control
of interfacial area is placed inside the microscope, with areal adjustments made
in situ as image sequences are collected. Assembly into dense structures is
analyzed by calculating translational and orientational parameters. Lastly, an
interesting and unexplained coupling between the electron beam of the microscope
and solid metallic or metal-coated nanoparticles is being pursued to create
precise nanoparticle patterns on liquid surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.