* 1807686
* Understanding the Effect of Ordered Twinning on  Electromigration Failure in Advanced Metallic Interconnects
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Rodrigo Bernal Montoya, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2023
* USD 386,998.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Electromigration is a type of failure that
occurs in metals used both in the semiconductor industry and in new technologies
such as wearable and flexible electronics. In this type of failure, small
metallic lines used to conduct electricity (so-called interconnects) develop
microscopic voids and ultimately break due to a large amount of electrical
current, leading to the overall failure of the electronic device. It is known
that electromigration is controlled by the structure of the metallic material,
in particular how its atoms are arranged. In typical metals, certain regions
(called grain boundaries) display large levels of disorder in the atomic
arrangement, and this is known to facilitate failure by electromigration. In
this project, new kinds of nanoscale metallic materials with well-ordered atomic
structures (so-called twin boundaries), and thus a high potential to prevent
electromigration, will be studied. Electromigration is a barrier for the
progress of the electronic industry, hampering further miniaturization and
greater reliability. In the case of the new wearable and flexible electronic
technologies, it limits broader mass-market applications. The understanding of
electromigration in metals with twin boundaries emerging from this research will
contribute to remove these difficulties, and enable new directions in the design
of interconnects. Furthermore, mentoring and research opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate and high school students will be enabled by this grant.
The graduate students will engage in mentoring of undergraduates participating
in the project, and of high-school students hosted in the PI lab through the
Nanoexplorers program at UTD. By doing meaningful research related to this
project, the high school students will be inspired to pursue careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Electromigration is a
diffusion process where electrons travelling in a conductor in a high-current-
density scenario- promote the diffusion of atoms in the metallic lattice,
leading to voids and eventually failure. Diffusion depends on the
microstructure; in fact, grain boundaries are known to facilitate
electromigration due to their loosely-packed structure. Twin boundaries, on the
other hand, promise to slow diffusion by several orders of magnitude due to
their ordered atomic structure. The proposed research aims to investigate the
potentially-beneficial role of materials with well-defined and repeatable twin
boundaries, as interconnects with increased resistance to electromigration. The
proposed research program is experimental in nature, and aims to gain insights
into the electromigration behavior of twinned interconnects by conducting tests
where high current densities and controlled temperatures will cause failure. A
combination of high-throughput ex-situ electrical tests for statistically-
significant quantification of failure, and in-situ transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) tests to understand the evolution of the twinned microstructure
during electromigration, will be conducted. The objectives of the research are:
i) To quantify the electromigration parameters in twinned interconnects; ii) To
characterize in-situ TEM the electromigration behavior to obtain structure-
property relations; and iii) to compare the electromigration performance of
twinned interconnects with respect to published data from interconnects
currently used in the electronic industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.