* 1807637
* Constructing Endohedral Fullerenes Using Open-Cage Fullerenes and Heterofullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Alan Balch, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 561,047.00

Professors Alan L. Balch and Marilyn M. Olmstead of the University of
California-Davis are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop new methods for
the preparation of endohedral fullerenes (nano-sized soccer ball-like carbon
cages encapsulating metal ions). The synthetic methods are designed to
carefully, and selectively, control the insertion of metal atoms into
fullerenes, where the atom will be stabilized. Endohedral fullerenes have only
been prepared in minute quantities in a gas phase process. They have already
shown promise in medical imaging technology as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
contrast agents (using paramagnetic gadolinium) and X-ray contrast agents (using
the strong X-ray absorber lutetium). The project is focused on the development
of new methods for the preparation of endohedral fullerenes in large quantities
to facilitate their practical use for such diagnostic medical imaging and other
possible technological applications. Students at college and high school levels
are involved in the project and trained in state of the art synthetic and
structure characterization techniques. Several outreach activities, including a
chemistry peer mentoring program, and seminar courses, such as " Symmetry in Art
and Science" and "Chemicals and their Effect on California History" are being
developed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, known chemical procedures are
used to fashion holes in the fabric of the fullerene cages of C60 and C70 to
form open-cage fullerenes. These open cage structures frequently have Lewis base
sites suitable for metal ion bonding near the orifice. Subsequently, metal ions
are attached to these open cage fullerenes and eventually inserted into their
interior. Reduction of the cage is used to attract the metal ion through the
opening and into the interior. These reactions are monitored by spectroscopic
means and the products, including metal ion complexes of the open cage
fullerenes with metal ions on the outside and on the inside, are isolated and
structurally characterized, particularly by single crystal X-ray diffraction.
Once the metal center enters the cage, chemical reactions are used to begin to
close the hole in the fullerene network. Physical properties, such as ability to
function as MRI contrast agents and X-ray contrast agents, of the new endohedral
species will be examined. The project is also designed to examine two new
synthetic routes to make macroscopic amounts of metallo-heterofullerenes, carbon
cages with some of the carbon atoms replaced with metal atoms. Such metallo-
heterofullerenes have never previously been obtained as solids that can be
characterized through spectroscopic and X-ray crystallographic
means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.