* 1807818
* Lead free organic-inorganic halide perovskite ferroelectrics with large piezoelectric responses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Yanfa Yan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Non-technical Description: Ferroelectricity describes the spontaneous electric
response of certain materials to external electric field. Flexible ferroelectric
thin films are attractive candidates for use in low-cost wearable sensors,
energy conversion systems, and personal electronics. However, the current
materials for this type of applications are ceramic, which are not sufficiently
flexible and contain toxic lead element. Recently, a newly discovered, lead-free
flexible organic-inorganic perovskite ferroelectric material show properties
rivaling conventional rigid ceramic thin films. This project aims to explore the
origin for the ferroelectric properties observed in this new organic-inorganic
material and to design new materials of this type with improved properties. The
project seeks to develop techniques for producing practical wearable and
implantable ferroelectric devices using this newly-developed ferroelectric
material. The integrative nature of theoretical investigation and experimental
synthesis trains graduate and undergraduate students in cross-disciplinary
skills that are essential for developing innovative solutions in the burgeoning
field of wearable and implantable devices. Research results are expected to be
available to the public via Ohio's Wright Center for Photovoltaics Innovation
and Commercialization at The University of
Toledo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project includes both
theoretical and experimental study of the mechanisms determining the large
piezoelectric coefficient observed in organic-inorganic trimethylchloromethyl
ammonium trichloromanganese (TMCM-TCM) perovskite, as well as development of
synthesis methods for depositing high quality TMCM-TCM perovskite thin films.
The theoretical study focuses on understanding how the TMCM molecules, the
inorganic framework and the coupling between these two affect the
ferroelectricity and piezoelectric coefficient of TMCM-TCM using density
functional theory calculations. The theoretical study also includes searching
for other molecules and inorganic octahedral frameworks that can form new
organic-inorganic perovskite materials with enhanced ferroelectricity and
piezoelectric coefficients. Additionally, the theoretical study provides
understanding of the influence of point defects and lattice defects on the
ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties. The experimental study focuses on
developing synthesis processes including spin-coating, blade-coating and vacuum-
thermal evaporation to deposit high quality organic-inorganic perovskite
ferroelectric thin films. Characterization efforts, employing X-ray diffraction,
scanning electron microcopy, UV-Vis spectroscopy, photoluminescence
spectroscopy, and differential scanning calorimetry provide key assessments on
the quality of the synthesized TMCM-TCM thin films. The experimental part also
includes the investigation of the influence of various substrates on grain size,
grain orientation, surface roughness, defect density, and uniformity of the
synthesized TMCM-TCM thin films. If successful, the results provide pathways to
realize efficient wearable and implantable ferroelectric and piezoelectric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.