* 1807640
* An Approach to Understanding Electrocatalytically Relevant Structure-Property Correlations in the Methanol Oxidation Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Stanislaus Wong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 446,040.00

A fuel cell (FC) is an electrochemical device that converts chemical energy into
electrical energy through catalyzed reactions. Recent efforts in developing
alternative, renewable and sustainable energy sources have led to increased
research aimed at building viable FC configurations. FCs could be used in many
applications from portable electronics, commercial buildings, and residential
power, to utility-scale applications. Conventional, commercial FC catalysts are
often based on platinum (Pt) and similar precious metals, but these systems tend
to have serious performance problems and can be cost prohibitive. In this
project, Dr. Stanislaus Wong of Stony Brook University is designing new classes
of cheaper and better-performing FC catalysts by investigating catalytic
efficiency and cost-effectiveness. These objectives are achieved through a
holistic consideration of key reaction variables such as the size, shape, and
composition of the underlying catalyst support. His research group correlates
these factors with the FC performance to improve cost efficiency and
sustainability. Professor Wong seeks to ensure the full participation of
underrepresented minority students in science. To do this, he creates the SCI-
LIFE discussion initiative, to provide students with the opportunity to receive
important career information from professional researchers and scientists. SCI-
LIFE invites researchers and scientists from academia, industry, and government
to give informal talks to the students, describing not only their research
interests but how they address and tackle potential career concerns, fears,
questions, and misconceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Wong is probing the morphology- and composition-dependence of the
catalytic behavior of novel nanoscale electrocatalysts. He is examining the
fundamental, individual mechanistic roles of the effects of a one-dimensional
morphology, a core-shell motif, the deliberate addition of a transition metal
dopant (i.e. alloy core composition), and the effect of the underlying support
upon the associated methanol oxidation reaction activity and kinetics. Nanoscale
electrocatalysts are being synthesized, consisting of platinum monolayer shells
supported on and circumscribing ultrathin nanowire cores. These model systems
are then immobilized onto either perovskite or hybrid supports. The structure
and electrocatalytic properties of the ultrathin, one-dimensional, core-shell
system are then examined with a suite of complementary characterization
techniques, including in situ methods. These studies address the structural and
electronic origins of catalytic enhancement within novel catalyst-support
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.