* 1807814
* Spin and Charge Dynamics: Competing Orders and Quasi-Particle Formation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Adrian Feiguin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing the properties of
quantum materials and their different quantum phases is paramount in order to be
able to develop new alternative technologies beyond the semiconductor paradigm
for applications in energy conversion, electronic devices, and light harvesting.
This award supports research and education that will not only have technological
implications but will also tackle fundamental questions in physics that could
lead to unanticipated discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest for materials
with novel functionality is driven by the study of quantum systems where
interactions among the constituent electrons are very strong. These interactions
can give rise to complex and intriguing phenomena that take place when the
physics is mostly governed by the collective behavior of the electrons inside
the material. One particular example occurs when considering electrons confined
in low spatial dimensions: the confinement forces electrons to move by "pushing"
instead of passing around each other. Same as oscillations of a string, the
natural excitations of such a confined system of electrons can be better
understood in terms of waves. As a consequence, electrons lose their individual
identities as particles. This project focuses on understanding how electrons
lose or recover their identities as individual excitations and how their
behavior is subsequently transformed, giving rise to different phases in the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though these problems are theoretically very
challenging due to their underlying complexity, they are amenable to numerical
methods. The focus of the research is computational in nature and will also
involve the development of new innovative algorithms based on quantum
information and machine-learning ideas. New tools for scientific discovery will
be developed and will be made available to the community as open-source software
that may find applications in other disciplines beyond condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research and education
focused on tackling urgent questions concerning different instabilities in
strongly correlated materials due to the presence of antiferromagnetic long-
range order and van Hove singularities. This project tackles a paradigmatic
problem in condensed matter from a new perspective. In order to overcome the
limitations of the Mermin-Wagner theorem, chains and ladders will be studied in
the presence of long-range interactions that can realize actual spontaneous
symmetry breaking and true antiferromagnetic order. The research will address
questions of a very fundamental nature: i) How do spinons evolve into magnons
and what are their signatures in the excitation spectrum? ii) Is it possible to
realize fractionalized excitations and coherent excitations simultaneously in
different regions of the Brillouin zone? iii) How do coherent quasiparticles
form (if at all), in the presence of long-range order? Will we still observe
signatures of spin-charge separation in the spectrum? iv) What is the interplay
between long-range antiferromagnetic order and pairing? v) What terms in the
Hamiltonian would give rise to competing instabilities such as those observed in
superconducting cuprates? The method of choice will be the density matrix
renormalization group and its time-dependent variants, which were co-developed
by the PI and have had a remarkable success expanding our knowledge of
correlation effects to the time domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
complemented by the development of novel computational approaches to tackle
higher-dimensional systems based on new original ideas that bridge quantum
information and machine learning: i) The use of lapped orthogonal orbitals that
interpolate between real- and momentum-space representations, ii) Quantum
disentanglers and natural orbitals to construct the wave functions of the
elementary quasiparticle excitations, and iii) Using restricted Boltzmann
machines to calculate the single-particle Green's functions, and therefore
reconstruct the entire excitation spectrum of the quantum many-body problem.
These new tools will be made available to the community as open-source software
that may find applications in other disciplines beyond condensed matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.