* 1807737
* Chemical Grafting, Exfoliation and Dynamics of One and Two-Dimensional Boron-Nitride Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Matteo Pasquali, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Advances in nanotechnology have been central to the creation of novel biomedical
applications, energy transport and storage systems, aerospace materials, and
solar energy conversion. This research explores novel nanostructures made of
boron nitride (BN). Graphene is one type of nanocarbon in which a honeycomb
arrangement of carbon atoms forms a thin sheet. When graphene is seamlessly
rolled, it forms carbon nanotubes, a well-known material. Alternating boron and
nitrogen atoms can replace carbon in carbon nanotubes to form BN nanostructures,
BN nanostructures are wide band gap semiconductors with outstanding thermal
stability, in contrast to their carbon analogs. Concentrating on these special
differences, Professors Angel Marti and Matteo Pasquali of Rice University, are
exploring how to tune the properties of BN nanostructures by attaching chemical
groups to their surfaces and by monitoring their movements in solution. This
information may enable the assembly of these nanostructures into sophisticated
systems with tailored physical, chemical, and mechanical properties. This
research may accelerate discovery and innovation in producing insulating films,
corrosion protections, and UV optoelectronics. Professors Marti and Pasquali
disseminate their research to the greater community through press releases and
YouTube videos. They provide cutting-edge nanoscience activities such as
workshops, talks, and summer research opportunities by reaching out to high
school, college, and graduate students, paying particular attention to
underrepresented groups. The research team recruits and mentors undergraduate
students from Puerto Rico via the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) Program. LSAMP facilitates the training of
underrepresented students in cutting-edge nanoscience research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of NSF's Chemistry Division, Professors Marti and Pasquali
are addressing fundamental challenges of BN nanostructures such as surface
functionalization, exfoliation, dispersion, and imaging. BN nanostructures are
functionalized with a variety of groups by virtue of organic radicals produced
under Billups-Birch conditions (lithium in liquid ammonia). The properties of
these functionalized structures are studied in different environments and
solvents. Furthermore, the dispersibility of BN materials are studied in
surfactants having different charges and polarities to understand the conditions
that lead to their dispersion in aqueous solution. Dispersed structures are
studied by fluorescence microscopy, using special fluorescent surfactants, to
understand the dynamics of the BN nanotubes in solution. Overcoming these
challenges advances fundamental knowledge of the chemistry and properties of
one- and two-dimensional BN nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.