* 1807709
* Metal Coordination and DNA Interactions Control Sulfur and Selenium Antioxidant Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Julia Brumaghim, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 12/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

Iron and copper ions naturally present in living systems can generate radicals
that damage DNA. The control of this damage is vital. Thione and selone
antioxidants, which contain sulfur and selenium, respectively, prevent DNA
damage by binding iron and copper ions. Very little is known about the specific
ways in which the binding of the thiones and selones to the metal ions results
in antioxidant activity or how these antioxidants or their metal complexes
interact with DNA to prevent radical damage. With this award, the Chemistry of
Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Julia Brumaghim
from Clemson University to investigate how sulfur and selenium antioxidants
prevent DNA damage. The proposed investigations advance the understanding of
cellular radical damage and its prevention. The investigations also represent
opportunities for interdisciplinary graduate and undergraduate student training.
Dr. Brumaghim contributes to the education of middle and high school teachers
and students by designing an inquiry-driven lab experiment about prevention of
DNA damage using tea antioxidants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brumaghim's research
focuses on a unique class of sulfur and selenium antioxidants whose biological
effects are vital but poorly understood, namely thiones and selones. The study
of the redox behavior of these molecules and of their biologically-relevant
metal complexes leads to information that may be applicable to a wide variety of
bioactive molecules that contain the same functional groups. In contrast to
widely studied sulfur- and seleno-amino acids that prevent only copper-mediated
DNA damage, thione and selone antioxidants prevent more DNA damage from iron
than from copper. This research examines the coordination chemistry of the two
antioxidants with Fe(II) and Cu(I) in an effort to elucidate the differences
between their activity and that of sulfur- and selenium- containing amino acids.
The research produces also information on the molecular mechanism underlying the
ability of thiones and selenones to prevent DNA
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.