* 1807316
* Non-Asymptotic Approach in Random Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Mark Rudelson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The proposed research is intended to provide new connections between two areas
of mathematics, probability and functional analysis. One of the main objects of
investigation is a random matrix, a large rectangular array of random data. The
PI strives to understand the properties of such arrays which hold with high
probability and the dependence of those properties on the nature of random
entries and the structure of the matrix. This study will have potential
applications beyond the realm of pure mathematics, as random matrices are used
in statistics, computer algorithms, and wireless communication. The PI plans to
put a special emphasis on the study of sparse matrices as these matrices
naturally appear in signal reconstruction and big data analysis. Another
direction of the proposed research is the study of random graphs, which are
random networks of nodes connected by roads (edges). Besides representing real
transportation networks, graphs can be used to model interaction of atoms in a
material, internet communities, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main direction of
this research is the non-asymptotic theory of random matrices, a new and rapidly
developing area of research analyzing spectral characteristics of a random
matrix of a large but fixed size and striving to obtain bounds valid with high
probability. The PI intends to study singular values, eigenvalues, and
eigenvectors of different ensembles of random matrices of a large size. The
results obtained in this direction would have important applications within the
random matrix theory in proving limit laws for the spectral characteristics of
random matrices. They would be also useful in computer science, as the singular
values control the rate of convergence of many numerical algorithms. Another
part of the proposed research will address the problems arising in geometry of
random graphs This direction is strongly related to random matrix theory as
well. The PI will study delocalization and nodal domains of eigenvectors a
random graph. The information about them would be valuable in mathematical
analysis of congestion in transportation networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.