* 1807142
* Collaborative Research: Learning and Optimizing Power Systems: A Geometric Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Baosen Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,001.00

The transformations of the electrical grid present a plethora of challenges to
system operators and utilities. They must adapt to manage a set of highly
uncertain and distributed resources such as electric vehicles and solar PVs,
while at the same time operating a grid infrastructure that was designed decades
ago. These challenges are particularly acute in the distribution system, where
the networks are traditionally not monitored closely, and operators lack the
essential information to obtain an accurate real-time operational state of the
system. At the same time, the number of outages in distribution systems has
started to increase as the system ages, and the loads become more dynamic. The
goal of this proposal is to overcome these challenges by developing novel
algorithms and new insights that increase the efficiency and resilience of the
distribution systems. Educational activities would be developed around these
research thrusts to ensure diverse student participation and outreach to the
broader community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three thrusts:
i) system topology estimation using the wealth of data made available by smart
meters and other sensors, where the network may contain loops and the data may
be highly heterogeneous; ii) characterization of the feasibility of operating
points using a new geometric understanding of power flow that leads to provably
efficient and optimal algorithms; and iii) restoration of service right after
outages through line switching by using the results from the first two thrusts.
These investigations bring in tools from power system analysis, optimization,
and statistical learning to enable fundamental advances in the distribution
system operations. In particular, these thrusts allow us to leverage recent
advances in both technology and theory to develop timely and rigorous algorithms
that solve some pressing engineering problems for the power grids. Successful
application of our proposed project will allow distribution system operators to
answer various "what now" and "what if" questions deriving from those highly
volatile grids with large amounts of distributed
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.