* 1807998
* Resilience of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems: A CRISP/RIPS Grantees Workshop - September 25-26, 2018 - Fairfax/Arlington, VA
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Elise Miller-Hooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

NSF's Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) annual solicitation aims to enhance and improve scientific knowledge in
the areas of complex, interconnected and interdependent infrastructure systems
of physical, cyber and human components. These systems of systems are designed
to provide critical goods and services. Thus, their collective resilience to the
range of disruptions from mild to catastrophic, of malicious, technological or
natural cause, is crucial to the nation's economic competitiveness and, more
generally, societal well-being. An underlying principle that has guided the
solicitation and selection of awards is that to tackle such complex human-cyber-
physical systems problems or create new opportunities through their inherent
properties requires integration of cyber, engineering and societal perspectives.
Consequently, an important objective of the CRISP solicitation has been to
foster an interdisciplinary research community of engineers, computer and
computational scientists and social and behavioral scientists. To this end, a
grantee workshop will be held. This workshop will involve activities designed
to: (1) enable the sharing of research developments and findings from funded
CRISP/RIPS projects; (2) promote interactions among awardees, including students
and postdoctoral fellows; (3) foster the creation of new interdisciplinary
approaches; (4) enhance and strengthen the resilience and socio-technical
systems community; and (5) enable new collaborations and the formulation of
novel ideas. The meeting will contribute to the enhancement and improvement of
scientific engineering and education activities through lectern presentations, a
workshop-wide poster session, lectures on focus topics, activities, and
organized discussions. Outcomes of the workshop, including newly generated ideas
from the meeting, future research needs and more, will be documented in a final
report.

The workshop will enhance and improve scientific knowledge in the areas of
complex, interconnected and interdependent infrastructure systems of physical,
cyber and human components. Participants will share their knowledge and research
advancements in these difficult multi-temporal, multi-spatial, stochastic and
dynamic socio-technical systems. The workshop will also stimulate new research
paths in these areas and beyond. Designing, planning for, operating and
controlling resilient infrastructure systems, as well as understanding how
failures propagate across systems and over time when not prevented, are crucial
for building and maintaining a vibrant, well-functioning, prosperous and secure
civil society. Bringing together experts from across disciplines and technical
specialties to share their knowledge in these areas will aid the nation in this
purpose. It will also foster new ways of thinking and innovation. Ways to foster
a lasting CRISP/RIPS community of persons with diverse backgrounds will be
explicitly considered in the planning and execution of the meeting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.