* 1807896
* Reconfigurable Liquid-Metal RF Circuits and Antennas Using Electrical Actuation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Aaron Ohta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 380,000.00

The proposed research will investigate electrically controlled actuation of
liquid metals, helping to create the foundation for the design of reconfigurable
devices and circuits that use liquid metals. Reconfigurable electronics have the
unique ability to change their operational parameters, allowing them to adapt to
specific tasks or environments. The amorphous nature of liquid metal allows for
the creation of dynamic conductors whose shape and position can be altered to
adapt to changing environments or operating parameters. Imagine, for example, a
mobile electronic device that can reconfigure its communication system to
provide the highest efficiency, and thus the longest battery life, in a variety
of environments. This research has the potential to impact the electronics and
telecommunication industries, and can enable more effective and efficient use of
the wireless frequency spectrum. In addition, the research into the actuation
methods has applications to fields outside of reconfigurable electronics,
including microfluidics and lab- on-chip systems. This project will also support
the inclusion of underrepresented Native Hawaiian students, will involve
undergraduate students in the proposed research, and will support outreach to
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will investigate low-voltage
electrically controlled actuation methods for the actuation of liquid metals,
and tailor these methods to applications in reconfigurable radio-frequency (RF)
circuits. The actuation methods that will be focused on include a novel hybrid
form of electrocapillary and electrochemical actuation, electrical capillary
actuation coupled with quantized shapes of liquid metal, and continuous
electrowetting. Reconfigurable circuits using each type of actuation method will
be demonstrated: liquid-metal antennas that can shapeshift to change their
operating characteristics, and microwave-frequency switches that have the
potential for low insertion loss, high isolation, and high reliability. The
proposed research will also address an important issue in liquid-metal devices:
loss at microwave frequencies due to the use of aqueous electrolytes. Device
architectures will be developed that are agnostic to this effect, take advantage
of the loss, or minimize the loss by removing or displacing the electrolyte. The
adaptation of each proposed liquid-metal actuation method to the unique
constraints and requirements of reconfigurable circuits is novel. The actuation
methods will be showcased by creating new types of reconfigurable circuits
operating at microwave frequencies. The resulting devices will have performance
characteristics that are unique or that exceed the current state-of-the-art in
reconfigurable electronics. Thus, this research will advance the field of
liquid-metal circuits, and create new technologies for realizing reconfigurable
RF circuits. New knowledge of liquid-metal actuation will be
generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.