* 1808204
* Building a Platform of Impact-Energy Absorbing Materials: How Molecular Manipulations Translate into Macroscopic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Brent Sumerlin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 348,536.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique property of polymers is
their ability to absorb mechanical energy during impact events by transferring
that energy into molecular motions of the individual polymer chains. This
project is focused on studying the fundamental materials properties for a
platform of energy-absorbing polymers and developing a toolbox to introduce
molecular mechanisms to increase toughness, energy dissipation, and the
potential for nanoscale self-healing that will increase the lifespan of the
material. This platform is based on polymer network materials called "thiol-ene
network thermosets". They can be made through chemistry that offers fast
reaction times and highly homogeneous networks, like a chain-link fence,
resulting in high energy absorption capacity. Previous work in the Savin group
has demonstrated the ability to make molecular-level changes in the network and
have this translate into macroscopic changes in the physical properties of the
materials. These changes can be done in a modular way using facile chemistry.
The resulting materials have applications in sound damping, shatterproof
coatings, personal protective equipment (e.g., mouthguards and multi-impact
foams), and ballistics protection. Advances in scientific discovery will be
incorporated into the education and training of students, integrating a broad
range of disciplines including chemistry, physics, biochemistry, and polymer
science. Group members will gain a comprehensive understanding of polymers in
many areas of synthesis, characterization, morphology, scattering and rheology,
from both a fundamental and an applied standpoint. This multidisciplinary
approach is beneficial not only for education, but also to produce well-rounded
graduates who are attractive to a variety of employers in both academic and
industrial settings. Diversity and involvement in K-5 elementary science
outreach are also strongly emphasized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to study the
fundamental materials properties for a platform of energy absorbing polymers
based on thiol-ene network (TEN) thermosets. Previous research on TENs has shown
the ability to make molecular-level manipulations through chemistry and have
this translate to changes in macroscopic performance and function. The goal of
this research is to exploit advances in TEN modification to synthesize new
monomers where we introduce mechanisms to increase toughness, as well as the
potential for self-healing that will ultimately increase the life span of the
material. This will be done for both slab (Aim 1) and foam (Aim 2) materials. In
the proposed research, we will introduce these molecular-level mechanisms for
energy dissipation and toughness through dynamic-covalent sacrificial,
mechanochemical linkages, and incorporation of photo-responsive, liquid
crystalline azobenzene substituents. Building a toolbox of network modifications
will allow us to discover materials that have the potential to transform the
field of energy-absorbing materials by expanding functionality. The modified TEN
materials platform that will be developed in this proposal is completely modular
and can be applied to applications such as personal protective equipment,
curable coatings, ballistics protection, dental restoratives, and polymer
composite materials. Successful completion of the proposed research will yield a
platform of materials with improved impact-energy absorption properties, as well
as an understanding of how molecular design and manipulation translates into
dynamics and macroscopic function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.