* 1808553
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: A Computational Framework for Reconstructing and Visualizing Myocardial Active Stresses
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Suzanne Shontz, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 343,568.00

The normal heart functions by contracting and pushing the blood from the left
ventricle into the rest of the body. Due to various diseases, the contraction
capabilities of the heart become diminished in certain regions of the heart
chamber wall, compromising the overall function of the heart. In order to
identify and select optimal treatment, it is critical to identify the regions of
the heart wall that exhibit reduced contractions. Unfortunately, contractions
cannot be easily measured. This project will estimate the stress (contraction
power) developed within the heart muscle by combining medical imaging and
mechanical modeling of the heart. These stresses will serve as a quantitative
measure of the contractile function of the heart and help detect and localize
disease. Therefore, this research has the potential to evolve into a future tool
to diagnose cardiac function. This project will also feature a synergistically
integrated education and outreach program. We will foster research opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students in computer science, biomedical
engineering, mathematics, and imaging science at Rochester Institute of
Technology and the University of Kansas. The PIs will develop innovative hands-
on workshops to inspire and educate K-12 students from underrepresented groups
on biomedical computing and medicine.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to develop a method that enables non-invasive appraisal and
visualization of the active stresses developed in the myocardium to serve as a
direct means to assess the bio-mechanical function of the heart. The PIs will
develop open-source cyberinfrastructure and integrate it into a novel
computational framework for cardiac biomechanics that will reconstruct the
active stresses from cardiac deformations. The PIs will accomplish this goal by
developing and integrating techniques for medical image computing, high-order
meshing, and inverse-problem bio-mechanical modeling. This research will address
a currently unexplored niche in the cardiac modeling field, specifically the
reconstruction and visualization of myocardial active stresses, to enable direct
appraisal of cardiac function. This research will contribute to medical image
computing through the development of algorithms for medical image processing and
visualization. The PIs will develop and implement novel high-order meshing
techniques and integrate them with the fiber architecture to enable accurate and
efficient scientific modeling and computing. The project will contribute new
knowledge in mathematical modeling and simulation by implementing efficient
nonlinear least-squares solutions for inverse cardiac biomechanics. Lastly, the
PIs will release the resulting cyberinfrastructure to the scientific computing
community for research and education use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.