* 1808690
* Carboxycellulose Nanofibers from Underutilized Biomasses for Water Purification
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2022
* USD 540,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance our
understanding of the structure-and-property relationships of carboxycellulose
nanofibers (CNFs) that can be extracted from a diverse range of underutilized
biomass resources (e.g. agricultural waste, grass, weeds and shrubs), as well as
explore their potential usage for water purification. The intellectual merit of
this proposal entails: (1) The preparation of new, high-valued CNF-based water
purification materials from low- or no-valued biomasses, using a simple nitro-
oxidation method with significant benefits in terms of energy and chemical
savings. (2) The fundamental knowledge gained from the synthetic and
characterization aspects, which can enable the development of new and innovative
water purification technologies using CNFs as effective adsorbents and/or
filtration materials toward low-cost and sustainable water treatments. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as research experiences and outreach opportunities to high-
school students and teachers. It will also be integrated with broader activities
on sustainability and clean water aimed at improving the quality-of-life for
humankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is to investigate the
colloidal and flow behavior of carboxycellulose nanofibers (CNFs) prepared
directly from a broad range of untreated (raw) biomasses. The planned research
activities will involve the investigation of the relationships of structure,
property and chemical conditions for extraction of CNFs from varying
underutilized non-wood plant fiber sources using a newly developed nitro-
oxidation method. They will be followed by the study of the colloidal behavior
and flow properties of extracted CNFs, consisting of different aspect ratios and
charge densities, in aqueous suspensions, under different conditions of
counterion valency, ionic strength and pH level. Techniques to be used will be
primarily synchrotron X-ray scattering and high-resolution transmission electron
microscopy in combination with mixing flow-cell and rheology. Lastly, new water
purification technologies will be developed using CNFs as adsorbents and/or
filtration materials to treat a broad range of water contamination problems,
especially due to toxic metal ions, to advance effective, low-cost and
sustainable water purification solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.