* 1808082
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of hierarchical microstructure formation under rapid solidification of functional Heusler alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Markus Chmielus, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 399,116.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Functional magnetic materials
can have outstanding properties. Magnetic shape memory alloys change from one
shape to another with the application of a magnetic field, and can potentially
replace mechanical actuators that currently need several moving parts that are
difficult to assemble and might break easily. Magnetocaloric materials have a
characteristic that allows them to cool or heat when exposed to a magnetic
field, and might be used as cooling devices without the need of liquids and
compressors currently required in refrigerators. Presently, it is difficult to
fabricate complex parts of functional magnetic materials. Advanced, laser or
electron beam manufacturing techniques offer the ability to print very complex
shapes, but create challenging microstructures that result in non-functional
parts. This award supports research that will establish a fundamental
understanding between advanced manufacturing parameters, composition,
microstructure and properties, and enable advanced manufacturing of magnetic
materials with a targeted set of functions, or behaviors. The approach employs
an innovative combination of rapid cooling and solidification processing and
small-scale experiments, with extensive computational modeling, and validation
experiments and characterization. The gained knowledge is expected to reduce
barriers for further adoption of functional magnetic materials beyond prototypes
in a large variety of fields and currently out-of-reach applications, e.g.
printable actuators, pumps and solid cooling devices. The combination of
functional materials, computer modelling, and advanced manufacturing will be
used to create experience-based STEM outreach activities for K-12 students,
their teachers and parents. These demonstrations and hands-on experiments will
take place at local schools, summer schools and outreach events which serve
especially economically challenged and underrepresented students populations.
The training of undergraduate and graduate students in this multidisciplinary
research environment will enhance the students' preparedness for fast-changing,
multifaceted and collaborative work place. The results of this research will be
presented in research journals and conferences, but also through blog-posts,
social media and openly accessible
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional Heusler alloys such as magnetic
shape-memory alloys or magnetocaloric materials induce up to 10% strain under an
applied magnetic field and actuate nearly as fast as piezoceramics, or enable
solid-state cooling with up to 30% better efficiency than traditional
technologies. Presently, the fabrication of complex shaped parts with good
functional properties is very limited, compromising a broad application of these
materials. Advanced, laser and electron beam manufacturing techniques enable
complex build design, but create challenging microstructures due to rapid
heating, melting and solidification, and result in non-functional or low
functionality parts. This award supports an integrated experimental and
computational research that aims to improve our fundamental understanding
between composition, microstructure and functional properties in Ni-Mn-Ga based
Heusler alloys subjected to rapid solidification and cyclic heating in layer-
based advanced manufacturing and post-processing. Research efforts pursue the
following goals: (A) Identify fundamental relations between alloy composition,
microstructure and properties under far-from-equilibrium rapid solidification
and cyclic heating conditions, (B) develop CALPHAD-based predictive models for
nonequilibrium phase formations, micro-segregation behavior and magnetic
properties, and (C) establish composition and grain size control in layered
deposits of functional Heusler alloys through targeted rapid solidification
processing and post-heat treatment. The outcome of this research will enable
laser-based deposition of Heusler alloys and permit functional, complex shaped,
self-limiting actuator components (magnetic shape-memory alloys) and highly
efficient solid-state cooling devices (magnetocaloric
materials).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.