* 1808073
* RUI: Boronic Ester Modified Polysaccharides for Oxidation-Responsive Delivery Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kyle Broaders, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 187,284.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of drug delivery aims to
improve or control how bioactive molecules get to their intended target. This is
most often accomplished using carrier "vehicles" that are designed to locally
release their payload at a desired time, rate, and location, often in response
to a specific signal molecule. Hydrogen peroxide is an oxidizing agent that is
frequently used as this signal molecule because it is generated as a part of the
immune response and in ischemic events like heart attacks and strokes. Boronic
esters are chemical groups used to give materials sensitivity to hydrogen
peroxide; this research investigates the effects of making changes to the
molecular structure surrounding these boronic esters. The PI synthesizes new
materials by modifying biologically derived polymers with a range of boronic
esters, and then we measure whether and how those modifications lead to
materials capable of carrying payload molecules and releasing them in response
to oxidizing environments. This research aims to discover design parameters that
might be used to make the next generation of drug delivery vehicles. Mount
Holyoke College is the oldest women's college in the US, and serves a diverse
student body. The students who engage in this research will learn modern
laboratory techniques and scientific communication skills, and their experiences
will prepare them for future endeavors in a wide variety of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
arylboronic esters to endow molecular sensors and delivery vehicles with
sensitivity to hydrogen peroxides has become widespread in the past 15 years.
The large majority of these contain pinacol (2,3-dimethylbutane-2,3-diol) as the
esterifying group. The identity of this diol influences the rate of degradation
in response to hydrogen peroxide, and may additionally affect the interactions
between boronic esters and biomolecules. This project will explore the effects
replacing this group with more rigid or sterically hindered diols in the context
of modified polysaccharide-based polymeric materials. These materials will be
evaluated based on their solution-processability, hydrolytic stability, and
sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide. Additionally, esterifying diols will be
modified with hydrophobicity-modulating groups or releasable bioactive
molecules, and their ability to encapsulate and release molecular payloads will
be evaluated. This research will result in improved understanding of the design
parameters for boronic ester-containing molecules and materials. Mount Holyoke
College is the oldest women?s college in the US, and serves a diverse student
body. The students that engage in this research will learn modern laboratory
techniques, scientific communication skills, and their experiences will prepare
them for future endeavors in a wide variety of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.