* 1808084
* Investigating Fundamental Chemical and Physical Processes Affecting Gas-Particle Partitioning Using Levitated Droplet-Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Frank Keutsch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 584,959.00

This award is supported by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the
Division of Chemistry. Professor Frank Keutsch of Harvard University and his
students investigate the fundamental processes involved in separating compounds
between the air and the surface of particles (aerosols) in the atmosphere. This
portioning between the air and the surfaces of solids that are present in the
air is poorly understood however, one phase may be preferred over the other due
to incomplete mixing, physical barriers, and/or chemical reactions on the
aerosol particles. Laboratory studies are conducted on single aerosol particles
to isolate and investigate how and why compounds stick to their surfaces. These
experimental studies provide fundamental parameters for improving computer
models on aerosol formation and changes in these particles with time (ageing).
This research is important as it may ultimately improve regional and global
models of aerosols, which are relevant to air quality and human and animal
health. Professor Keutsch also designs laboratory experiments to introduce a
systems approach to undergraduate education. This approach considers not only
individual reactions but the coupled chemical and physical feedbacks that exist
between different parts of the whole system (in this case, the gas and solid
phases). His students learn about instrumentation design and reactions at and
far from equilibrium. In addition, underrepresented high school students at
Cambridge, MA high schools are mentored and work in the research laboratory
learning to communicate their research to others in the field and gaining
confidence in their abilities to participate in scientific fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new approach is used to study aerosol partitioning that
combines levitation of individual micron-sized particles with mass-spectrometric
(MS) detection. This technique allows the measurement of the molecular-level
evolution of a droplet over atmospherically relevant time scales. Molecular-
level detection is a novel approach that may advances trapped droplet methods.
After further optimization of the trapped-droplet MS, specific research
questions related to the role of non-ideal mixing, oligomer formation,
transition metal complex photochemistry, and aerosol physical properties in gas-
particle partitioning are addressed. This research is done in collaboration with
chemists and atmospheric sciences. Results are compared with state-of-the-art
models which improve the representation of the fundamental chemical and physical
processes in the models, and hence, improve predictive
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.