* 1808370
* Chemical Biology Approaches to Interrogate Interspecies Communication in Streptococci
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Yftah Tal-Gan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2023
* USD 523,023.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yftah Tal-Gan from University of Nevada, Reno to
investigate how bacteria communicate with each other. It has been well-
established that bacteria utilize chemical signals to communicate, assess their
population size, and alter their behaviors. Thus far, the focus was on studying
the communication of bacteria within each species. However, the role of inter-
species communications between different bacterial species in shaping the
overall bacterial population was largely unexplored. Through the development of
synthetic signal mimics that alter the behavior of one or more bacterial
species, the effects of communications on the behavior of complex communities of
bacteria (microbiomes) is determined. The discoveries of this project may
provide means to manage bacterial communities in diverse ecosystems such as
agriculture, biomanufacturing, and environmental management. This study allows
high-school, undergraduate and graduate students, along with postdoctoral
fellows to acquire specialized training in synthetic chemistry, analytical
chemistry, microbiology, and molecular biology techniques. This project also
integrates into two outreach programs to introduce high school and undergraduate
students to research at the interface of chemistry and biology. Undergraduate
students and faculty from Moravian College, a small liberal arts college in
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, participate hands on research. Many of these students
come from socioeconomically disadvantaged and first generation college
backgrounds and are trained for excellent jobs in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes chemical tools to study the
role of interspecies communication between streptococci. Bacterial species rely
on a cell-cell signaling mechanism, termed quorum sensing (QS), and this allows
related phenotypes to thrive in their natural habitat. Streptococci species
utilize QS, an intra-species communication mechanism, to communicate with other
streptococci species (i.e. inter-species communication) and employ different
strategies to interfere with the communication of other streptococci as a means
to dominate in a mixed bacterial population. This interdisciplinary project
integrates chemical biology approaches with molecular biology techniques to
delineate the molecular mechanism for QS interference between streptococci and
define the role of QS in the interactions between streptococci in mixed
bacterial milieu. Discoveries resulting from this project may improve the
understanding of bacterial communication interference and competition beyond
streptococci, and fundamentally advance the growing field of QS and
sociomicrobiology. Moreover, the chemical probes to be developed in this study
have the potential for broad applicability and can be used to study complex
bacterial communities in their natural niches
(microbiomes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.