* 1808794
* Gauge Theory and Trivalent Graphs in Three-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Tomasz Mrowka, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2021
* USD 253,971.00

In this research project, the principal investigator will continue work that
aims to provide a human-readable proof of the four color map theorem. The four
color map theorem was first proved in 1976 by Appel and Haken; the proof
involved a huge amount of case checking, so much so that the only feasible
method of attack was via computer. This machine-assisted proof, however, cannot
be directly checked by a human. Although there have been some subsequent
simplifications and clarifications, the general brute-force approach has seemed
to be the only line of attack. The four color theorem can be rephrased, though,
as a question about the topology of three-dimensional manifolds, and in
particular new tools inspired by high energy physics give novel ways to approach
a conceptual proof of the four color theorem. This project explores and develops
these new insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and
collaborator define a version of instanton Floer homology for trivalent graphs
embedded in three-manifolds. This theory enables them to place the four color
map theorem firmly in the context of gauge-theory-inspired invariants of three-
manifolds. They have proved a fundamental non-vanishing theorem for this Floer
homology group, reducing the four color map theorem to a question about
computing this invariant for general planar graphs. They are developing new
tools for the computation of these and related invariants, and they have
discovered a spectral sequence relevant to this computation. The collapse of the
spectral sequence for planar graphs would imply the four color
theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.