* 1808599
* Achieving Molecular Level Control Over the Chemical, Electrochemical, and Electrical Properties of Crystalline Si Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nathan Lewis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 590,000.00

Professor Nathan S. Lewis of California Institute of Technology is supported by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the
Division of Chemistry to study the changes in the reactivity of technologically
important semiconductor surfaces that accompany the transition from small
molecules to nanocrystals and two-dimensional materials, as well as from
nanocrystals and two-dimensional materials to bulk crystalline solids. The aim
is to gain fundamental insight into the transition in behavior from materials
comprised of individual bonds to materials formed by extended one-, two-, and
ultimately three-dimensional bonding. The project promotes the progress of
science by developing novel reaction pathways that exploit the size-dependent
changes in surface reactivity. Si surfaces, small-molecule models of Si
surfaces, and Si nanocrystals are selected as a critical example to provide
insight into the chemical continuum from the nanoscale to the macroscale. The
novel reaction pathways being developed may enable a new generation of solar
cells, new interfaces for sensors and electronic devices and new approaches to
other related Si device constructs. Graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds are involved in the project. In addition, the research
results are incorporated into Freshmen chemistry course material, integrated in
outreach program towards high schools, such as Juice from Juice and Project SEAL
hands-on science modules, and communicated to non-professional audiences at all
levels and through multiple media outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, new classes of reactions that are enabled by changes in the electronic
structure of semiconductors that result from changes in the size and
dimensionality of the material are explored. The project is focused on
determining: 1) which classes of reactions are influenced by the underlying
electronic structure of the solid, 2) whether such reactions can be used to
systematically achieve beneficial electronic coupling between nanoparticles,
and, 3) whether such reactions can be used to covalently link three-dimensional
materials, such as bulk crystals, to two-dimensional materials while also
providing control over the electronic coupling of the structurally dissimilar
materials. The scope of the project includes reactions on Si surfaces, small-
molecule models of Si surfaces, and Si nanocrystals. The project also includes
reactions on two-dimensional materials such as graphene, hexagonal boron
nitride, and transition-metal chalcogenides anchored to Si surfaces. This
project is also developing methods to covalently functionalize two-dimensional
materials, such as graphene, to allow robust electronic connections and strong
interactions between layers and in heterojunction stacks. Functionalized two-
dimensional materials are being attached to linkers covalently bonded to the Si
surface, and more layers are being added to the stack using sequential addition
of layers and linkers until the behavior approximates that of the bulk material
on Si, as determined by XPS and optical characterization methods. This work is
developing an understanding of the point at which stacks of two-dimensional
materials begin to behave in the same was as bulk
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.