* 1808705
* Chemical and Bio-enzymatic nucleotide labeling for RNA Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kwaku Dayie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is funding the research
of Professor T. Kwaku Dayie of the University of Maryland at College Park to
examine the structural and dynamic basis of RNA regulation. RNAs are involved in
many critical processes in the cell that range from sensing chemicals, speeding
up chemical reactions, to controlling virus infections. Yet even though in
humans more than 98% of the DNA is used up for making RNA and less than 2% for
making proteins, more than 95% of the structures contained in the Protein Data
Bank, a repository of 3D structures of biological molecules, belong to proteins
and less than 2% of the structures belong to RNAs. This huge disparity stems
from the properties of RNAs that make it harder to determine the structures of
the RNAs. Professor Dayie develops new methods for the determination of the RNA
structure and fill in this critical knowledge gap. These new strategies make RNA
more amenable for structural and dynamic studies and facilitate biotechnology
applications. The new reagents generated by the research are made available to
the community of scientists who study the structure of RNA, including those from
industry and from outside USA. Professor Dayie contributes to an outreach
program that introduces high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
methods for the study of the structure of RNA and helps them understand how RNA
controls signaling in cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies provide
critical and new solid phase labeling technologies that can enable the filling
of a major gap in RNA structural biology, namely the paucity of RNA structures
in PDB. These structures can be used to decipher the molecular basis for the
dynamic regulation of gene expression by RNA, which is still poorly understood.
Dr. Dayie combines high resolution NMR spectroscopy and small angle x-ray
scattering (SAXS) with chemical labeling technologies to study the dynamic basis
of RNA signaling. Information from this study provides new insights into
biological ligand-induced RNA binding/cell signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.