* 1808100
* Optomechanical antennas for silicon photonic beam-steering
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Amir Safavi-Naeini, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Photonic circuits - circuits that control light in the way electronic circuits
control electrical currents - are a powerful platform for manipulating and
processing optical radiation. They have already revolutionized
telecommunications by transmitting and receiving our messages, transactions, and
multimedia across vast distances. The goal of this project is to extend this
revolution deeper into our daily experience: can we use the same photonic
circuits to process, detect, and analyze light that is freely propagating in our
environment? To do so we will develop an on-chip means of forming and directing
a beam of light off of a chip: a microscopic "radar" for optical fields that can
sweep a laser beam across a room and also detect light coming from different
directions. Our approach uses the fact that acoustic waves, tiny ripples
generated on the surface of a chip, can scatter light in very precise and
programmable ways. By discovering new ways to shape the propagation
characteristics of both the acoustic and optical waves, we endow photonic
circuits with the ability to address their surrounding environment in new and
powerful ways. Such an advance will enable sensors to perform optical detection
and analysis tasks of major importance in domains ranging from consumer
electronics to national security. Our work is especially timely considering the
growing presence of autonomous systems, such as self-driving cars, drones, and
low-power sensors on mobile devices. These emerging technologies necessitate the
development of systems such as the one we are developing as mass-manufacturable,
ultra-low-power, and efficient optical sensing and communications platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Rapid and low-power control over the direction of a
radiating light field is a major challenge in photonics and a key enabling
technology for emerging sensors and free-space communication links. This program
will determine whether optomechanical interactions in guided-wave structures can
be used to implement practical and low-cost beam-steering systems on mass
manufacturable silicon chips. The resulting devices will demonstrate orders of
magnitude lower power and more rapid beam steering than competing approaches.
The objective of this research is to develop and demonstrate silicon photonic
circuit to steer a radiating optical beam rapidly with low power using guided
optomechanical interactions. The approach is to fabricate waveguides that
support highly-confined guided optical and mechanical waves with wavevectors
matched such that optomechanical scattering couples guided and radiating light
fields. To achieve this, silicon nanophotonic design and fabrication techniques
will be extended and combined with emerging nanomechanical guided-wave
structures and efficient piezoelectric materials to demonstrate revolutionary
new beam-steering capabilities. In contrast to previous work, the demonstrated
devices, will enable fast and fully 2D beam-steering of a fixed frequency laser.
They will also realize simultaneous generation of multiple beams, low
electrical/mechanical power consumption, large field of view, high sidelobe
suppression, and large bandwidth. These capabilities are well beyond that which
is achievable with current chip-based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.