* 1808689
* Design and self-assembly of amphiphilic supracolloidal analogues of bimolecular and trimolecular compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Zhihong Nie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 11/30/2018
* USD 63,955.00

Chemists can arrange atoms within molecules with extraordinary precision.
However, it is extremely challenging to exert the same level of control over the
structure and composition of nanoparticles, which are assemblies of hundreds to
thousands of often diverse atoms. The precise organization of those atoms within
nanoparticles is crucial in determining their overall properties and potential
applications. In this project, Dr. Nie of the University of Maryland College
Park develops new strategies to control the directional bonding of nanoparticles
to form structures that resemble the geometry of small molecules. One goal of
creating such molecule-like architectures from nanoparticles is to enable new
technologies for applications in medicine, optoelectronics, energy production,
and/or energy storage. Dr. Nie is also actively engaged in training students at
different levels in the fundamental principles of polymers and nanoscience.
Outreach activities of this project include hosting local high-school students
for summer research projects, creating research positions for first-year
undergraduate students and organizing one-day science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) events for middle to high school students.&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Nie designs a new class of supracolloidal analogues of
polar molecular compounds comprising two or more elements. The project explores
the assembly behaviors of these supracolloids at interfaces and in solutions. A
combination of experimental and computational tools are used to achieve a deep
fundamental understanding of colloidal interactions and properties. Some of the
major questions to be addressed are how to break the symmetry of spherical
nanoparticles to produce asymmetric supracolloids, how these supracolloids
behave in assembly, and what optical properties can be expected. This work may
lead to new research opportunities in many fields ranging from materials science
to optoelectronics. Dr. Nie is actively engaged in outreach activities involving
events for pre-college science, technology, engineering and mathematics (K-12
STEM) students. His group provides high-school student summer internships and
undergraduate research positions with or without course
credit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.