* 1808675
* On the origin of plasmons in metal nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Rongchao Jin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

Nontechnical description: Using atoms as elemental building blocks to construct
nanoscale functional materials is of major importance in materials research.
This project focuses on the development of new methodologies for precise
assembly of metal atoms into functional nanoparticles, and the investigation of
how the properties of these materials depend on nanoparticle size. This project
offers new opportunities for exploring the novel properties of atomically
precise metal nanoparticle materials, bringing broad impact across several
important areas. Leveraging our capability of manipulating the bonding between
atoms to achieve new functionalities, this project is set to impact fields such
as catalysis, energy conversion, chemical sensing and biomedicine. This research
effort additionally enables impact on regional outreach and educational
activities. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in this project
receive interdisciplinary training, which contributes to their future careers in
the increasingly competitive and fast-moving area of materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Metal nanoparticles (e.g. Au, Ag)
are being intensely pursued owing to their unique plasmon properties. Ultrasmall
metal nanoparticles (&lt;3 nm) no longer exhibit metallic properties, with the
plasmon disappearing due to quantum size effect. However, the fundamental origin
of plasmons has not been elucidated due to the difficulties in controlling the
atomic monodipsersity and structural uniformity of ultrasmall nanoparticles.
This project tackles the challenges of creating atomically precise
nanoparticles, and conducts a systematic investigation of the evolutionary
behavior from the quantized state to the metallic/plasmonic state. The proposed
research expands the current understanding of metal nanomaterials. Probing the
transition behavior in gold nanoparticles is used to establish a model approach
for future studies of other metal nanoparticle systems (e.g., Ag, Cu, bimetals.)
The educational component of the project broadens student participation by
engaging high school students and teachers, some of whom are from
underrepresented minority groups. The educational efforts help attract students
into science and technology by cultivating their research interests and through
participation in materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.