* 1808034
* RAPID: Wildfire, Wine, and Water Quality: Immediate Changes to Biogeochemical and Hydrological Flows from Vineyards After the Northern California Fires
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Eve-Lyn Hinckley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

In early October 2017, multiple wildfires ignited across Northern California's
(CA) premier winegrowing region, incinerating vineyards and neighboring
communities, with as yet unknown consequences for hydrology, biogeochemical
cycling, water quality, and human and ecosystem health. This is a particularly
important region to study the impacts of wildfire, as changes to soils and
hydrology will likely affect the fate of the large reactive sulfur (S) loads
applied to vineyards each year for powdery mildew control. Widespread S use may
have consequences for adjacent ecosystems similar to those of inadvertent
atmospheric S deposition (i.e., 'acid rain'), such as stimulating production of
methylmercury, a potent neurotoxin. Given that wildfire may accelerate
mobilization of S and other materials to adjacent aquatic ecosystems, the need
to pursue this research has now become urgent. The study will address the
immediate effects of wildfire on hydrological flow paths and mobilization of S
from vineyards to streams. The project team will instrument a burned and
unburned vineyard catchment with subsurface soil water and surface water (runoff
and stream) collectors. They will conduct field observations of hydrologic flows
during the first large rain events of the wet season to quantify mobilized S, C,
and sediment, perform a laboratory experiment to determine chemical losses from
burned and unburned soils over time, and develop methods to trace S in the
environment. This study will provide a dataset critical for proceeding with
longer-term efforts to develop field studies, experiments, and models to
elucidate the ultimate fates and consequences of agricultural S use at the basin
scale - a new area of research to understand human manipulation of the S cycle.
This one-year project will be led by a female assistant professor, train a
female graduate student, and provide data that will be important for farmers and
other stakeholders. The research group will communicate their findings broadly
in multiple workshops within the study region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this one-year field- and laboratory-based study is to provide an important
dataset detailing the effects of recent, widespread wildfire on mobilization of
agricultural sulfur (S) from vineyards to streams in the North Coast California
winegrowing region. These data are a critical baseline to capture prior to
initiating a new wave of research: determining the unintended consequences of
high S applications in regional agricultural systems. The biogeochemical and
ecological effects of high S use may be similar to those of inadvertent
atmospheric S deposition (i.e., "acid rain"), but they have not yet been studied
in vineyards or other crop systems. In particular, agriculturally-derived S may
stimulate production of methylmercury in aquatic ecosystems downgradient of
source areas, threatening the health of humans and wildlife. This study will
make the first measurements of S, carbon (C), and sediment mobilized from burned
vineyards to streams during the onset of the rainy season, and develop new
geochemical and isotopic methods for tracing agriculturally-derived S species in
the environment. To this end, the project team will instrument a burned and an
unburned vineyard catchment with runoff collectors, ISCO stream samplers, soil
water samplers, and soil moisture sensors to quantify hydrological flow paths
and assess their chemical composition. They will also conduct burned and
unburned soil core leaching experiments to determine the evolution of chemical
losses over the course of a simulated wet season. These activities will test two
hypotheses: (1) If the heat input from fire has dramatically changed surface
soil properties relative to unburned vineyards, moderate-to-high intensity rain
events will cause surface runoff that rapidly (minutes to hours) transports S,
C, and sediment from burned vineyards to streams, and (2) If surface runoff
dominates the hydrologic response in burned vineyards, then mobilized S species
will have a light isotopic value, reflecting minimal interaction with the soil
matrix.