* 1808892
* Hexagonal Ferrite-Ferroelectric Core-Shell Nanofibers, Field-Assisted Assembly of Superstructures and Studies on Magnetoelectric Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 448,736.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Nano-materials "by design" can be capable of conversion
of a magnetic field into an electric field or vice versa. There are very few
materials in nature capable of such field conversion and most of them have
either poor efficiency or can function only at low temperatures. This project
focuses on the fundamental physics of engineered nanomaterials with two phases.
One is ferromagnetic that deforms in an applied magnetic field and the other a
ferroelectric that converts this deformation to produce an electric field. Since
the conversion is critically dependent on the surface contact between the two
phases, the research focuses on coaxial nanowires with a much higher surface
area-to-their volume ratio than bulk composites. The coaxial fibers are
synthesized by a technique called electrospinning and characterized in terms of
field conversion efficiency and sensitivity. These composites are ideal for use
as ultrasensitive, miniature magnetic field sensors and arrays for imaging
applications such as magneto-cardiography (MCG) and magneto-encephalography
(MEG) that are powerful tools for diagnosis of disorders associated with the
heart and brain. The nanomaterials also have the potential for applications in
signal processing and energy harvesting. Other significant impacts of the
research are human resources development at all levels in advanced materials
synthesis and characterization. The PI and Co-PI plan to recruit undergraduate
science and engineering majors for participation in the research. High school
students, women and minorities in particular, are to be recruited to participate
in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Proposed research
focuses on fundamental physics and synthesis of coaxial nanowires of
ferrimagnetic hexagonal ferrites and ferroelectric lead zirconate titanate
(PZT), assembly of nanostructures into superstructures with the aid of magnetic
and/or electric fields, and studies on the intrinsic nature of coupling between
magnetic and electric subsystems. The primary focus is on fibers with Y- or
W-type hexagonal ferrite due to their high anisotropy field and self-magnetic
bias characteristics that will give rise to strong magneto-electric (ME)
coupling without the need for an external bias magnetic field. Specific tasks
are as follows. (i) Synthesis of core-shell fibers with (Ni, Zn) Y-type or (Co,
Zn) W-type hexaferrites, with the choice of Zn-substituted ferrites aimed at
control of magnetic order parameters for ME studies at low frequencies and at
resonance modes over a wide frequency range, from 1Hz to 110 GHz. (ii)
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning probe microscopy (SMM) of
nanocomposites and arrays, where Lorenz-TEM and SMM studies are planned for
imaging the fibers and interfaces in terms of magnetic, ferroelectric, and
electromagnetic parameters. (iii) Investigations of ME effects on individual
nano-wires and assemblies under local mechanical, electrical and magnetic
excitations to establish correlations among ME coupling strengths,
symmetry/connectivity of composites, and field-directed assembly parameters, and
optimize the morphology of the nanocomposites to achieve a maximum ME response.
(iv) Modeling of field directed assembly and ME interactions in individual
nanocomposites and assemblies for comparison with data. Overall, the research
not only enhances fundamental understanding of ME effects in nanomaterials, but
is also useful for a new family of sensors and signal processing and energy
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.