* 1808169
* EPCN:Solving Electricity-Expansion Problems Efficiently via Decomposition (SEEPED)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Ramteen Sioshansi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2023
* USD 307,203.00

The goal of this project is to transform the manner in which electric power
system capacity-expansion problems are modeled. Capacity-expansion problems are
large-scale and complex, due to the nature of power systems (spanning continents
and including thousands of nodes and branches) and the numerous uncertainties
plaguing long-term planning decisions. This includes large-scale uncertainties,
such as long-term demand growth, changes in fuel prices, energy-policy choices,
and technology development; and small-scale uncertainties, such as weather
events affecting real-time demand and wind and solar availability. This project
will develop modeling paradigms that capture the multiple scales of planning
decisions and the uncertainties that affect them within a coherent framework.
This is a timely and fundamentally important endeavor to ensure an efficient
transition to more sustainable and resilient power system designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will tackle this challenging problem by developing two
complementary approaches to modeling power system capacity expansion. Both
approaches model multi-scale uncertainties and decisions and represent system
operations in sufficient detail to capture system flexibility needs. The first
approach uses a multi-stage stochastic optimization approach, in which
investment decisions are made at coarse (e.g., decadal) timescales and operating
decisions are made at fine (e.g., hourly) timescales, with full representation
of the temporal sequence of these decisions. Large-scale uncertainties are
modeled explicitly in the scenario tree, while small-scale uncertainties are
captured through different operating conditions. The other approach is an
adaptive robust stochastic model, in which planning decisions are made to be
robust or distributionally robust to large-scale uncertainties and take
stochastic operating conditions into account. These complex and large-scale
models are accompanied by decomposition algorithms. The progressive hedging
algorithm will be adapted to tractably solve the multi-stage stochastic
optimization model while column-and-constraint algorithms will be developed for
solving the robust model. We will also explore the use of clustering and
importance sampling techniques to select representative operating periods to be
modeled between investment epochs. The use, tractability, and power of the
proposed modeling techniques will be demonstrated using large-scale case studies
based on North American power systems. The PIs will also engage with electricity
industry members. They will also use industry- and government-advisory positions
to advance industry dissemination. These steps will ensure that the results of
the research are used by industry members while at the same time industry can
provide vital feedback and input to model and case study
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.