* 1808384
* Brain network biomarkers of plasticity in aging
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Courtney Gallen, Gallen                  Courtney       L
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Adam Gazzaley
at the University of California, San Francisco, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist examining the neural mechanisms that
predict cognitive and brain plasticity in older adults. Cognitive control
comprises a set of neural processes that are critical for goal-directed
behavior. Non-pathological declines in cognitive control functions are common in
healthy older populations, such as pronounced distractibility during working
memory performance. There have also been numerous efforts to develop non-
invasive methods to enhance cognition in aging, such as cognitive training
interventions. However, there is typically heterogeneity in the magnitude of
cognitive and neural plasticity across older adults, both in terms of cognitive
abilities and training outcomes. The proposed research seeks to identify neural
predictors of these individual differences in plasticity in healthy older
adults. This work provides important advances in our understanding of the neural
mechanisms of cognitive declines in aging and, importantly, offers methods to
ameliorate declines in an optimal, personalized manner. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses fMRI, functional connectivity, and
cognitive training to identify neural predictors of individual differences in
plasticity in older adults. The project builds on previous lines of work by
examining the predictive relationship between brain network properties and (1)
short-term plasticity as assessed during cognitive control tasks that tap
aspects of selective attention and working memory and (2) long-term plasticity
as assessed by training-related cognitive gains. The central hypothesis of this
project is that cognitive and neural plasticity in older adults can be predicted
by aspects of brain network organization, in particular brain network
modularity, a metric that quantifies the degree to which brain regions belonging
to the same sub-network are more connected to each other than the rest of the
network. The expected outcomes of this research plan are significant because
they contribute to our understanding of the neuroscience of cognitive plasticity
and, importantly, how these functions can be improved in older adults. More
broadly, the outcomes of this proposal further our mechanistic understanding of
how properties of large-scale brain networks support complex behaviors. It is
anticipated that the outcomes of this proposal serve as a foundation to develop
targeted, personalized interventions to enhance cognitive control in older
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.