* 1808042
* Coherent Quantum Dynamics of Indirect Excitons and Valley Pseudospins in Atomically Thin Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Xiaoqin Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Scientists have been exploring methods of controlling
material properties by confining electron motions to lower dimensions for nearly
four decades. These quantum materials have led to improved light emitting
devices, such as light emitting diodes and lasers, and information processing
and communication devices (e.g. computers and cell phones) that have transformed
our lives. It is now possible to create a sheet of matter just a single atom
thick. These ultrathin materials, known as monolayer materials, represent the
ultimate thickness limit of two dimensional (2D) materials. This project asks
how we may create better and more complex 2D materials by stacking two or
several of these ultrathin sheets together. Ultrafast laser light pulses, akin
to a camera with very fast shutter speed, are used to probe the stacked
structures and capture the motion of electrons in the materials. Ultimately,
these studies teach us how to control the properties of materials by
manipulating individual electrons. New insights on these novel materials guide
the development of new energy harvesting and information processing
technologies. This project also provides valuable training opportunities for
young researchers in areas critical to sustaining the nation's technological
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: An emerging class of
heterostructures consisting of atomically thin layers represents two-dimensional
quantum materials in the ultimate thickness limit. By stacking two monolayer
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD), a semiconducting vertical
heterostructure (VHS) is formed. Because of the type II band alignment typically
found in TMD VHSs, electrons and holes rapidly transfer to different layers
following optical excitation, leading to the formation of interlayer excitons.
The research group investigates coherent quantum dynamics associated with
interlayer excitons and valley pseudospins in a TMD VHS using a powerful
nonlinear spectroscopy tool known as two-dimensional Fourier transform
spectroscopy. Understanding the coherent properties of these pseudospins (i.e.,
excitons and valley index) guides the development of quantum devices based on
these novel two-dimensional materials, enabling transformative impacts on
information communication and processing technologies. This project also
provides valuable training opportunities for young researchers as future
workforce, placing the U.S. in a globally competitive position in the emerging
market of quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.