* 1808277
* 2D Grain Boundary Phases: Establishing an Electronic Basis for Engineering Superior  Copper Alloy Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kathleen Dunn, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 310,617.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Metals and alloys (blends) such as bronze have
been used by mankind for millennia before the atomic nature of matter was known.
Even today, the details of how atoms interact are known only for a few
combinations of metals, because the tools for studying materials at the atomic
level have only recently become available. Those details have become
increasingly important as modern technological advances demand smaller, lighter,
and more compact designs with increased capabilities. This project will explore
why adding certain metals make copper more flexible while others make it more
brittle, (or more/less strong, or more/less conductive). The origin of this
behavior can be traced to the interaction of the atoms and their electrons at
internal defects called grain boundaries, where the atoms are packed together
imperfectly. These boundaries are found throughout all metals, and greatly
impact the behavior of metal parts, from wires in computer chips to seat
brackets in airplanes. Understanding these interactions will allow engineers to
design alloys from the atom level upward for the first time, enabling them to
tailor properties of the alloys to reduce the power used in manufacturing, to
prolong the service life of metal parts, or to create complex designs without
compromising performance. The results of this work will be shared with the
scientific and industrial communities at national and international technical
conferences by students who, when they graduate, will become highly educated and
practically trained members of the workforce. Participating in this project will
also expose students to outreach and mentoring opportunities through several
existing programs at SUNY Poly, including the continuing education of secondary
school teachers, summer science camps for high school students, and a general
science seminar series at a local branch of the public library. The professor
and her team are committed to these efforts to de-mystify technology and make
science (and scientists) accessible to all.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Grain boundaries
strongly impact a range of properties and behavior of polycrystalline metals; in
nanostructured materials this effect can be even more dramatic because the
number of atoms participating in those boundaries constitutes an appreciable
fraction of the total atoms in the sample. As a result, observable properties
are often dominated by interface, not bulk, material properties. Solute
segregating to some or all of these interfaces can change the energy, mobility,
structure and cohesion of boundaries through electronic interactions with the
surrounding matrix. The nature of these interactions will be examined using a
combination of analytical transmission electron microscopy, electron energy loss
spectroscopy, and density functional theory. These results will be used to
elucidate the correlations between the atomic and electronic structures at grain
boundaries and observed electro-mechanical properties of select copper alloys,
to enable future materials-by-design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.