* 1808368
* Collaborative Research: Fully Integrated Power and Energy Systems with Multi-Infeed AC/DC Architecture: Developing Advanced Controls, Protections, and Hardware-In-the-Loop Simulati
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Masoud Karimi-Ghartemani, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 163,019.00

The U.S. Department of Energy defines the microgrid as a group of interconnected
loads and distributed energy resources within clearly defined electrical
boundaries that acts as a single controllable entity with respect to the grid;
it can connect to and disconnect from the grid to enable it to operate in both
grid-connected or island-mode. The modernized microgrid (MG) mimics large power
systems, but it has its own characteristics which must be effectively addressed.
In this project, fully integrated power and energy system (FIPES) concept will
be introduced and investigated as a new trend in the integration of MGs. The
FIPES-based MGs will be able to supply a high power, including more flexibility
in loads, improve power quality, and will be able to integrate an increased
number of battery energy storage systems (BESSs) to benefit from their dynamic
response and/or energy arbitrage. This research develops advanced MG's
protections, controls, and automation and helps them merge into one single
process. The developed theories of this project can be tailored and broadly
developed for many networked-type of systems in other domains, including control
engineering applications; advanced naval power systems; communication-based
automated energy systems; multi-agent systems; and process control systems.
Moreover, the hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) simulation systems enhanced here can be
broadly utilized. The project will give specific attention to the involvement of
underrepresented minorities at Georgia Southern University and Mississippi State
University in STEM research and learning. They will be engaged in
multidisciplinary topics in modernized power grids with renewables' integration.
The project developments will be used to enhance public knowledge through
outreach programs and public presentations. Improvement of existing and
development of new STEM curriculum topics will be given close
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal performs fundamental
investigations into synthesis and development of robust and advanced control
algorithms, protection schemes, and simulation methodologies for a fully
integrated power and energy system (FIPES) concept as the future trend in an MG.
This fundamental research will be based on high penetration of fast,
bidirectional power electronic converters to fully integrate renewables and
BESSs in a multi-infeed ac/dc architecture. Here, the control, stability,
performance, and protection objectives are closely tied and shall be addressed
integrally by adopting advanced power electronic devices. This research also
considers the power quality, in addition to fault-tolerance aspects, and will
also investigate and address the associated cybersecurity concerns via an
innovative approach that models cyberattacks through fault-tolerant systems. The
architectural complexity and components diversity yield to a highly complex
dynamical system where the conventional linear approaches are not competitive
enough to address the required objectives. They need to be addressed by
developing advanced nonlinear and robust approaches which are also able to take
into account the coupling dynamics; frequency-variable conditions; and fast,
tight time-constants. Therefore, the power system's design and performance goals
will be achieved at lower hardware capacities and requirements using hybrid
ac/dc structure. This project will thus address those aspects by developing
robust, advanced control and protection systems for FIPES-based MGs using an
approach that consists of integrating multiple dynamics and deploying nonlinear,
dynamical systems theories. Control-/power-hardware-in-the-loop (C/PHIL) testing
and digital real-time simulations will be utilized to assess the functionality
of proposed control philosophies and protection schemes. As regards the
stability and performance of PHIL testing, new improved PHIL methods will be
proposed accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.