* 1808234
* Conducting Cyclic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Adam Veige, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2021
* USD 465,000.00

Professors Adam S Veige and Brent S Sumerlin of the University of Florida are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to synthesize cyclic polymers. Most plastics are
composed of linear polymers (chains of relatively small molecular fragments
known as monomers that are joined together). This project aims to develop a new
and improved class of plastics by eliminating the polymer chain ends and
creating cyclic polymers. The cyclic polymers are characterized and their
properties are compared with their linear analogs. The ability to manipulate the
composition and structure of polymers to yield a desired set of properties, such
as strength, heat resistance and electrical conductivity, has significantly
expanded the many roles plastics play in our modern industrial economy. Cyclic
polymers have dramatically different properties compared to their equivalent
linear counterparts. Catalyst technology developed at the University of Florida
enables the efficient production of cyclic polymers. Some plastics are able to
conduct electricity and are used in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). This
project aims to create the first electrically conducting cyclic polymers. The
project provides the students involved with hands-on training in modern
inorganic and organometallic chemistry. Demonstrations that illustrate the
principles of cyclic polymers are developed and presented to the general public
during an annual Chemistry Day at the Mall event. In this project, a key
catalyst which was discovered at the University of Florida will be employed for
the synthesis of macrocyclic polyene polymers. The main thrusts are: 1) to
maximize the conductivity of cyclic poly (acetylene-co-1-alkyne) polymers while
retaining their solubility; 2) to improve conjugation by forcing the alignment
of the polymer via side-chain ligation of substituted polyalkynes; and 3) to
synthesize cyclic poly[n]carbon, which represents a new carbon allotrope.
Conducting cyclic polymers are scarce, and the consequence of their cyclic
topology on conductivity have yet to be explored. The project employs a tungsten
catalyst that is capable of inserting acetylenes into a growing metallacycle.
Cyclic polyacetylenes are then obtained by termination of the polymerization
reaction via reductive elimination. Copolymerization of acetylene and
substituted acetylenes produce free standing lustrous films that are
interrogated for electrical conductivity upon doping. Substituted acetylenes are
essential for creating soluble polyacetylenes; however, their incorporation into
the polymer chain inherently reduces conjugation by twisting the polymer
backbone. This project aims to produce conducting cyclic polymers through
linking the substituents by post-polymerization functionalization to constrain
the geometry of the polymer backbone. Finally, the project also aims to
synthesize cyclic poly[n]carbon, which represents a new carbon allotrope. Linear
poly[n]carbon is unstable unless the chain ends are functionalized. By having no
chain ends it is expected that the cyclic polymer will be more stable and
therefore, potentially isolable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.