* 1808826
* Antiferromagnet-based Ultrafast Magnetic Memory Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Luqiao Liu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 368,000.00

Compared with existing computer memories, memories based on magnetic materials
have advantages of lower power consumption and better scalability. Moreover,
information is retained in magnetic memories in the absence of power supply,
providing possibilities of new computing schemes. However, existing magnetic
memory devices have relatively low operating speed, which greatly limits their
application. In this proposal, magnetic memory devices with ultrafast writing
speed (&lt;1 nanosecond) will be developed, which can potentially bring in
revolutionary changes in memory and data storage industry. The realization of
the ultrafast control of magnetic dynamics could also advance understanding on
the properties of magnetic materials. In addition to these broad scientific
impacts, this project also provides students with unique transdisciplinary
training opportunities. This research project is proposed to be integrated with
the educational missions, including inspiring career interest of K-12 students
in science and engineering; providing undergraduate students with cutting-edge
research opportunities; and preparing students for future careers through
curriculum development and interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize ultrafast magnetic memories, this
proposal tries to leverage the fast development of fabrication techniques on
spintronic devices with the recent advancement in new magnetic materials.
Particularly, antiferromagnet will be studied for realizing magnetic memories
with superior speed and high storage density. Compared with regular ferromagnet,
antiferromagnet has ultrafast dynamics due to the high magnetic resonance
frequency. However so far the lack of efficient control and detection mechanisms
in antiferromagnet has made it challenging for practical implementations of
antiferromagnet in magnetic memory devices. In this proposal, the PI focuses on
spintronic devices made from antiferromagnet with internally broken inversion
symmetry, where the inequality of the two sub-lattices allows the generation of
staggered spin orbit torque and provides the possibility for magnetic probing
and manipulation. The goals of the proposed experimental efforts include
quantitatively determining the writing efficiency as well as exploring and
optimizing the reading mechanisms of antiferromagnet. Specifically, a unique
scheme for measuring antiferromagnet spin orbit torque is proposed, through
which the underlying mechanisms for antiferromagnet switching will be revealed
and quantified. Moreover, the switching speed of antiferromagnet devices will
also be evaluated and the limiting factors on efficient magnetic switching will
be determined through the antiferromagnet domain movement experiment. Finally, a
high ON/OFF ratio will be pursued through the study of tunneling anisotropy
magnetoresistance, which can lead to an efficient reading mechanism for
antiferromagnet devices. In overall, the proposed research activities will not
only facilitate the realization of practical antiferromagnet magnetic memory
devices with fast accessing time and high density, but also enhance
understanding on the current induced dynamics in antiferromagnet and widen
awareness of the spin charge interaction in antiferromagnetically coupled
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.