* 1808558
* Bilingual infants' learning of Spanish and English from multiple speakers
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Casey Lew-Williams, Potter                  Christine      E
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 0.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Science of Learning program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Casey Lew-Williams at
Princeton University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating how bilingual children learn from the different
speakers around them. Not all children growing up in bilingual homes become
equally proficient in both their languages, and there is currently no consensus
about the most effective way to promote bilingualism. This project is designed
to address a common question raised by bilingual parents: is it easier for
children to learn two languages when different people speak each languages
Bilingual children, particularly Latinx children in the United States, face a
uniquely challenging linguistic environment, as they must learn two languages in
the same amount of time that monolingual children learn only one. Therefore,
this work will provide insights that are both crucial for the scientific
understanding of bilingualism and of great interest to parents, educators, and
clinicians seeking to improve language outcomes for bilingual
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been suggested that dual-language learning
may be easier when each language can be associated with a particular speaker
(e.g., one parent speaks one language; the other parent speaks the second).
However, despite its intuitive appeal, there have been no direct empirical tests
of this proposal. This research will assess whether reliable associations
between speaker and language facilitate learning for Spanish-English bilingual
infants and toddlers in both real and simulated bilingual environments. Study 1
will provide the first empirical test of whether bilingual and/or monolingual
infants keep track of the languages used by new speakers. Studies 2 and 3 will
then ask whether consistent speaker cues facilitate bilingual language learning.
Study 2 will use a lab-based manipulation to test whether or not bilingual
toddlers are better able to learn new labels produced by speakers who
consistently use one language. Study 3 will extend these questions to real home
environments and ask whether or not caregivers who consistently use one language
have toddlers who show enhanced vocabulary development. Results from these
studies will shed light on how bilinguals successfully navigate complex
linguistic environments and provide insight into mechanisms of early learning.
In doing so, this work could inform future practices and interventions designed
to promote dual-language learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.