* 1808625
* Plasmoresistor device for optoelectronic transduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Srikanth Singamaneni, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 329,999.00

Coronary heart disease, which leads to heart attack, is the most common type of
heart disease killing 380,000 people annually. It has been widely accepted that
a specific molecule, the cardiac troponin I, in blood serves as a highly
sensitive and specific indicator for the detection of heart attack. While there
are numerous commerically available bioassays available to detect this molecule
with requisite sensitivity and specificity, these tests are time consuming and
require specially trained personnel. This project seeks to create a novel class
of sensors which can detect cardiac troponin I with high sensitivity and extreme
selectivity in resource-limited settings. The long-term impact of the proposed
work is to shorten the time between the occurrence and the determination of a
heart attack such that appropriate treatment can be administered rapidly thus
saving lives and improving patient quality of life. The proposal will focus on
hiring women and minority graduate students for conducting the above research.
Opportunities for undergraduate students to conduct summer research will be
provided. The project will also provide opportunities for high-school students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, to participate in the micro- and
nano-fabrication summer camps in the university cleanroom. The experiential
learning-based science activities will directly help these high school students
to prepare for colleges and improve their chances of pursuing professional STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit the conversion of an
optical signal into an electrical output on a device platform to detect the
cardiac biomarker, the cardiac troponin I, with high sensitivity and
specificity. The device will consist of gold nanoparticles covered with a
semiconducting film and contacted by two electrodes. The conductance of the
illuminated device will be determined by plasmonically induced, energetic hot
electrons generated in gold nanoparticles and subsequently injected into the
semiconducting film. In turn, the gold nanoparticles will be functionalized to
specifically capture the target biomarker associated with heart attack. Upon
cardiac troponin I binding, changes to the immediate dielectric environment will
result in a shift in localized surface plasmon resonance wavelength of the gold
nanoparticles. This will result in the reduction of plasmonically generated hot
electron injection and hence lower the conductivity of the illuminated device.
Therefore, the quantifiable loss in photoconductivity will signal the presence
and concentration of the biomarker, the cardiac troponin I, for detecting heart
attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.