* 1808376
* Association Schemes and Configurations in Real and Complex Space
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* William Martin, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 163,776.00

This project investigates combinatorial objects fundamental to various areas of
communications, information theory, networks, and numerous topics in pure
mathematics. The team, consisting of the Principal Investigator (PI) and a PhD
student will study association schemes and configurations in real and complex
space. The project is motivated by applications in the theory of error-
correcting codes, cryptography, quantum information theory, knot theory,
extremal networks, finite geometry and spherical and projective codes.
Association schemes and related tools play a fundamental role in these and other
areas, for example guiding us to the best known efficiency bounds for binary
error-correcting block codes used in most digital communications devices. As
digital technologies grow in scale and complexity, we see increasing need for
algebraic tools of this sort that extract important structural information
efficiently from data. The project's broader impacts include training of highly
qualified personnel and outreach to students and teachers in local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress on association schemes over the past 50
years has been phenomenal, and the variety of new applications that the theory
handles has increased with each passing decade. Yet some fundamental problems,
regarding cometric association schemes for example, remain unresolved with few
new ideas emerging until recently. This project explores powerful mathematical
tools, ranging from algebraic geometry to algebraic topology, to forge a
stronger and more versatile theory of association schemes that will be equipped
to attack existing open questions - both theoretical and applied - as well as
future challenges that are likely to be framed in this general combinatorial
language. Specific problems to be attacked include: efficient description of the
ideal of polynomials vanishing on the set of columns of the first primitive
idempotent of a cometric scheme; constructions (via finite geometry and design
theory) and bounds for systems of lines with few angles; bounds on efficiency
parameters of association schemes and codes; determining the structure of
additive completely regular error-correcting codes. The mathematical tools to be
employed have mainly been developed by the algebraic combinatorics community,
including linear-algebraic and ring-theoretic techniques, as well as zero-
dimensional ideals in polynomial rings and discrete
homotopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.