* 1808859
* Low-Complexity Algorithms for Sparse Conic Optimization with Applications to Energy Systems and Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Somayeh Sojoudi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The development of fast numerical algorithms is crucial for large-scale
optimization problems arising in a wide range of areas, such as power systems,
machine learning, control theory, transportations and operations research. The
main challenge is the inability of the existing methods in handling the
nonlinearity (non-convexity) of many real-world problems. Conic optimization is
able to solve these nonconvex problems to global optimality in a rigorous and
principled manner through the notion of convexification. Despite a mature theory
on convexification, the practical use of conic optimization remains limited
since this technique greatly increases the dimension of a problem. It is common
amongst researchers to view conic optimization as a powerful theoretical tool
that is inaccessible for real-world applications, due to the lack of efficient
numerical algorithms for conic optimization. The objective of this proposal is
to design low-complexity algorithms for conic optimization that directly exploit
the structure of a give problem to reduce the complexity. The outcomes of this
project will lead to wide-ranging societal impact in all areas of design,
analysis, operation, and control in real-world systems. This project has several
outreach and educational activities, such as participation in multiple programs
for students from underrepresented groups, fostering undergraduate research, and
organizing tutorial sessions and workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops numerical algorithms for sparse conic optimization by exploiting
problem structure, with a particular emphasis on sparse semidefinite programs.
The proposed approach uses the notion of tree decomposition to solve sparse
problems in near-linear time and linear memory. The main objectives of this
proposal are as follows: 1) to identify graph-theoretic structures that control
the computational complexity of sparse conic optimization; 2) to design
numerical algorithms based on this graphical analysis to achieve best
complexities; 3) to develop parallel and distributed versions of these
algorithms for real-time computing. This is an interdisciplinary project
theoretically underpinned by graph theory, numerical algorithms, matrix
completion, conic optimization, low-rank matrix optimization, and algebraic
geometry, and finding applications in power systems and machine learning. The
proposed project will apply the designed numerical algorithms to nonlinear power
optimization problems with tens of thousands of parameters to demonstrate its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.