* 1808845
* The Behavioral Economics of Job Search During Unemployment: New Field Evidence on Search and Psychological Frictions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Lynn Conell-Price, Conell-Price            Lynn
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 08/31/2019
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is supported by
the Economics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Saurabh Bhargava at Carnegie
Mellon University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist studying job search behavior. Specifically, the present research
explores the psychological factors that influence job search during
unemployment. Many people find the experience of searching for work unpleasant
and discouraging. The proposed research aims to test these assumptions and to
provide new insights on the psychological mechanisms that might hinder the best
possible job-search behaviors. These insights can directly inform the types of
policies used to improve search behavior and speed up the pace at which job-
seekers find suitable employment.

This project aims to contribute to economists' understanding of job search
behavior by testing basic assumptions about the optimality of search effort and
strategy and the assumed irrelevance of psychological factors such as
discouragement. One reason that behavioral insights have been slow to affect
labor economics is the difficulty of capturing labor market dynamics
realistically in the laboratory. This research will address this gap by
leveraging access to real-world data on the online job search behavior of
several hundred thousand job seekers, and a field experiment with unemployed job
seekers. Collectively, this will provide new evidence on (i) how individuals
search, including effort and search wages, (ii) the optimality of such search
relative to a benchmark of the standard model, and (iii) the psychological
consequences of unemployment and their effect on search. Further, it will test
psychologically informed interventions intended to improve job outcomes.
Evidence on whether unemployed job seekers search suboptimally for work and, if
so, what specific interventions can improve search will have implications for
how economic theory should model job search decisions and unemployment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.