* 1808190
* Rare Earth Garnets for Spintronic Research
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 512,383.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;New devices that can carry out memory or logic
operations with low power consumption are under intense development.
"Spintronic" phenomena, in which the magnetic state of a material can be
controlled and detected by using an electrical signal, provide a path towards a
family of such devices. This program develops novel materials and investigates
their growth, structure and properties, and how their properties can be
controlled. The materials are based on garnet, which is a naturally occuring
oxide. The properties and behavior of the garnet can be manipulated over a wide
range, leading to new opportunities in spintronic research and applications. The
broader impacts of this work include the training of graduate and undergraduate
students, including those who have been traditionally underrepresented in
science and engineering, and the development of materials and knowledge that
will contribute to room temperature spintronic devices. Public outreach is
carried out via the NanoObservatory event at the Cambridge Science Festival,
where the public is introduced to nanofabrication and nanotechnology at MIT, and
by incorporation of modules on spintronics in free online courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses key issues in materials and spin physics which will point the way
towards room temperature spintronic devices. Spintronic phenomena are under
intense investigation due to their promise in enabling memory or logic devices
with low power consumption. Ferromagnetic insulators are particularly
interesting because they convey spin currents without charge currents, and
exhibit low damping and high temperature functionality. One of the most
prominent classes of such systems is that of iron garnets, of which the best
studied is yttrium iron garnet, but substitution of rare earth ions on the Y
sites enables exceptional control over the magnetic properties. The intellectual
merit of this work is to develop synthesis methods and examine spin orbit torque
- driven domain wall motion in iron garnet films with perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy. Materials properties are designed by substituting rare earths such
as thulium into the garnet structure to alter the magnetocrystalline anisotropy,
magnetoelastic coefficients and lattice strain, damping and compensation
temperature, and by diluting the Fe sublattices to change the net magnetization.
The behavior of domain walls in garnet is probed at various temperatures during
current or field pulsing, taking advantage of the high Faraday rotation and
magnetooptical Kerr effect measurements even for very thin (few-nm) films where
magnetometry is unsuitable, and complemented by measurements of spin Hall
magnetoresistance. The broader impacts of this work include the training of
graduate and undergraduate students and the development of a set of materials
and an increased understanding of heterostructures that will contribute to room
temperature spintronic devices. Public outreach is carried out via the
NanoObservatory event at the Cambridge Science Festival, where the public is
introduced to nanofabrication and nanotechnology at MIT, and by incorporation of
modules on spintronics in free online courses. Given the ever-increasing
diversity in the national workforce, the PI will be proactive in recruiting
students who have been traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.