* 1808964
* Synthetic Design of Kitaev Magnets and Spin Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* David Mandrus, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 431,779.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Quantum spin liquids are magnetic materials which do not
order even at temperatures approaching absolute zero. The theory of quantum spin
liquids is very rich, with predictions of exotic new states of matter displaying
unusual "fractionalized" excitations. Such fractionalized excitations behave as
if they were new types of particles. This project seeks to find materials that
show behavior characteristic of a particular kind of quantum spin liquid first
proposed by the theorist Alexei Kitaev in the context of research on quantum
computation. In this project new materials are designed in which Kitaev spin
liquid physics is significant or even dominant. Careful characterization of the
resultant properties is conducted, and the results will yield great insights
into the nature of fractional excitations in a wide class of realizable
materials, significantly advancing the state of forefront knowledge in modern
condensed matter physics. This project also lays some necessary groundwork
pointing the way to a possible solid-state technology for topologically
protected quantum computing. This project also supports curriculum development
of a new class, "Quantum Mechanics for Engineers", designed to help prepare
engineering students for future careers in the development of quantum
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The research objectives
of this project are to (1) design, discover, and characterize new materials in
which Kitaev physics plays a crucial role in determining their magnetic
properties; (2) study the spin excitations of the new materials with inelastic
neutron scattering; (3) understand the data in the context of model Hamiltonians
that go beyond the analytically soluble Kitaev model; and (4) use what has been
learned to tune the materials and improve materials design principles, with the
ultimate goal of finding a real material with a Kitaev quantum spin liquid
ground state. Several design pathways to new Kitaev materials will be
investigated: (1) intercalation of ruthenium trichloride into graphite; (2) use
of ion-exchange reactions to replace Ir and Rh in honeycomb structures, and the
investigation of these reactions in situ with powder neutron diffraction; (3)
synthesis and crystal growth of osmium trichloride; and (4) synthesis of
honeycomb and hyper-honeycomb hybrid inorganic-organic framework materials. The
new materials are characterized with basic tools such as x-ray diffraction,
magnetization, and specific heat. Attempts will be made to metallize some of the
materials through chemical doping and in some cases ionic liquid gating.
Promising materials will be studied with neutron diffraction and inelastic
neutron scattering to gain an in-depth understanding of the magnetic ground
state and quasiparticle excitations. The knowledge gained from characterization
will be used to help design the next generation of materials. Undergraduate
students involved in this project will be trained in materials synthesis;
graduate students will be trained in both materials synthesis and neutron
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.