* 1808051
* Combining Optimization, Machine Learning, and Model Structure to Improve the Robustness and Agility of Modern Bipedal Machines
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Bipedal robots are being built to aid in search and rescue, provide last mile
delivery of packages, and to assist people in their homes. Lower-limb
exoskeletons are being designed to help patients recover the ability to walk
after strokes or even severe injuries resulting in paralysis. While the feedback
control algorithms required to allow a bipedal robot to walk and a patient to
safely operate a lower-limb exoskeleton are not identical, they share enough
common elements that pursing their investigation in tandem is insightful and
important. This project combines recent advances in the ability to quickly
compute energy optimal solutions of bipedal dynamical systems with the
mathematics of machine learning and geometric control theory to achieve
unprecedented performance and safety in bipedal walking. The proposed research
will greatly expand the class of robots for which feedback controllers can be
designed with provable stability and it will significantly enhance the safety
than can be achieved with exoskeletons that allow a paraplegic to walk without
the use of crutches. One of the many technical challenges to be overcome in this
research is the complexity of the mathematical models that describe the movement
these legged machines. For example, printing out the symbolic model for the
exoskeleton studied here would take thousands of pages. If a human ever opened
the files to examine them, they would be incomprehensible. Yet, the PI and his
students provide concrete means for designing feedback controllers for these
machines and say deep things about how the closed-loop system will behave. This
is the beauty of feedback control theory when it is married with modern
computational tools. In addition, each year, the PI and his students share the
excitement of engineering by giving tours of his robotics lab to hundreds of
students, from grade school through high school, sharing the excitement and
personal fulfillment of careers in STEM fields. Presidents of major universities
and management teams of corporations visit his lab for the pure pleasure of
seeing a robot doing something amazing and yet at the same time, almost
ordinary: walking roughly like a human. The PI works with the media to share
with the general public the excitement of cutting-edge engineering research and
how it benefits society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks major advances
in the theoretical conception and practical synthesis of feedback controllers
for bipedal robots and lower-limb exoskeletons. The theory will be carefully
tested on a Cassie-series bipedal robot and an exoskeleton. The theoretical
thrust of the proposal aims to mitigate obstructions imposed by high-dimensional
bipedal models (dimension 30 or more), without resorting to simplified pendulum
models that are all too common in the robotics literature. The research seeks to
work directly with the full model of the robot, making it possible to generate
motions that exploit its full capabilities while respecting actuator
limitations, ground contact forces, and terrain variability. The process begins
with trajectory optimization to design an open-loop periodic walking motion of
the high-dimensional model, and then adding to this solution, a carefully
selected set of additional open-loop trajectories of the model that steer toward
the nominal motion. Supervised Machine Learning is used to extract from the
open-loop behavior (i.e., the collection of input and state trajectories) a low-
dimensional state-variable realization (i.e., a low-dimensional manifold and
associated vector field). The special structure of mechanical models of bipedal
robots is used to embed the low-dimensional model in the original model in such
a manner that it is both invariant and locally exponentially attractive, and
show that this locally exponentially stabilizes the desired walking motion in
the full state space of the robot. Transitions among periodic orbits will also
be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.