* 1808045
* Superchiral Light Generation on Achiral Substrates for High Sensitive Detection of Chiral Molecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Debashis Chanda, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,869.00

Chirality is a ubiquitous property of life, found at many levels of biological
systems from left-handed amino acids to right-handed glucose. It gives rise to
the inherent chirality to DNAs, proteins and more, which remained hitherto
unexplored due to the unavailability of precise characterization techniques.
These chiral biomolecules can be present in both handed symmetries with
undistinguishable physical properties, such as density, molecular weight or
electronic and vibrational transitions frequencies making them almost impossible
to differentiate with common spectroscopic techniques. Here a unique achiral
plasmonic surface is proposed, which outperforms previous approaches. In the
preliminary work chiral molecule detection sensitivity that is four orders of
magnitude higher compared to the conventional technique, but without the
extensive and tedious sample preparation and at much lower sample volume, is
demonstrated. Pharmacological and toxicological characterization of chiral
molecules plays a crucial role in the pharmaceutical drug industry and FDA
approval process. The proposed project will also serve to train graduate
students in nanolithography and device fabrication. Based on these attributes
the proposed novel molecular chirality detection scheme has high potential to
generate commercial interests and can become real world sensing technique in
near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The proposed unique cavity-coupled
achiral plasmonic surface outperforms previous approaches in the following
aspects: It does not have geometrical chirality, hence no chiral signal from the
substrate; It creates strong near-fields on the upper surface exposed to the
target analyte; The near-field is 100% single-handed chiral and flip handedness
depending only on the excitation handedness on the same substrate. Such a unique
mechanism of superchiral near-field generation is possible due to the coherent
interaction between degenerate plasmonic and photonic cavity modes. These
attributes are exclusive compared to any previous attempts where inhomogeneous
chiral near-field and structural CD diminishes chiral signal from molecules. In
the preliminary studies, chiral light-matter interaction through surface
enhanced vibrational circular dichroism with about four orders of magnitude
enhancement in detection sensitivity compared to conventional volumetric CD
(VCD) technique is demonstrated. The proposed system will permit efficient
chiral-light matter interactions for the detection of vibrational molecular
chirality in the MIR domain relevant for drug screening. Unlike previous
demonstrations where two independent chiral substrates with opposite handedness
were needed, the proposed work promises chiral near-field interaction on a
single achiral plasmonic substrate paving the path towards surface enhanced
chiroptical spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the project will be to
develop a sensitive chiral compound identification technique using our achiral
plasmonic substrates. The system will be benchmarked with pharmacologically
significant chiral drug compounds like Ibuprofen, Thalidomide, propranolol,
Albuterol, and Isoflurane. These chiral compounds will allow us to start the
characterization of the system and will further expand. The pharmacological and
toxicological characterization of enantiomers plays a crucial role in the
pharmaceutical drug industry and FDA approval process. Therefore, there is still
an active need for efficient enantiomer detection, precisely and cheaply. We
strongly believe that the proposed research will allow us to overcome some of
the previous challenges and enable us to develop a low cost, high throughput,
high sensitive chiral molecule detection technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.