* 1808824
* Fighting Fatigue and Fracture with Morphologically Tuned Energy Dissipation in Highly Swollen Elastomer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Travis Bailey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,564.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Swollen elastomer networks
are polymeric materials that have the potential to play key roles in advancing
of a number of health, energy, and environmental applications. These include
biological soft-tissue replacement materials such as those found in the meniscus
of the knee or the intervertebral disc of the spine, separation membranes for
selective removal of chemical or biological contaminants, durable and rapid ion-
transport membranes for battery technology, and materials designed to provide
long-term impact protection (military, athletics) while retaining high elastic
flexibility. Reduction to practice, however, has been plagued by materials with
limited ability to meet the mechanical demands required of such applications,
being subject to rapid decay in elasticity and susceptibility to failure by
fracture. This project is focused on using a new paradigm in swollen elastomer
network design to create mechanically robust polymers capable of sustaining
repetitive stress dissipation without fatigue while suppressing susceptibility
to fracture and failure needed to ensure long-term performance. The scientific
advancement efforts in the project will be integrated with interdisciplinary
education of students. It will also be accompanied by development of workshops
aimed at building collaborations among top soft-matter synthesis and mechanics
groups around the world, in an effort to push the frontiers of science, explore
new ideas, and accelerate the untapped potential of these unique polymeric
materials. The workshops importantly will provide a forum to encourage talented,
yet underrepresented young researchers, and provide them access to and
mentorship from leading materials researchers in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creative efforts in polymer network design over the
last decade have led to numerous impactful improvements in hydrogel mechanics.
Notable examples include both highly elastic hydrogel networks in which fatigue
is minimal but very little energy is dissipated, and highly dissipative hydrogel
networks in which toughness is maximized but fatigue is rapid and recovery is
subject to long recovery times (minutes to days). Effective integration of both
dissipative capabilities and efficient elastic recovery, however, appears
limited using current design strategies. The principal objective of this
proposal is to demonstrate the ability of junction point morphology
(nanostructure) and strand-level organizational control to maximize non-plastic
energy dissipation, recovery rate, and fatigue resistance simultaneously in
swollen polymer networks. The central hypothesis of the proposed research is
that synthetic integration of non-bond rupturing dissipative interactions into
every molecular strand of the network, combined with implicit coupling of the
dissipation mechanism to its own driving force for elastic recovery, will add
substantial dissipative capability without sacrificing the rapid elastic
recovery or the exceptional fatigue resistance. The project involves the
synthetic development of uniquely designed ABC and ABCBA block copolymers which
upon heating self-assemble into highly efficient network structures based on
core-shell sphere morphologies. The objectives are to explore the ability of the
B block domain size and degree of hydrophobicity to successfully tune the
magnitude of dissipated energy (e.g., through measurement of fracture toughness)
and understand its dependence on strain and strain rate. If successful, this
project will transform our access to hydrogel materials that exhibit both
fatigue resistance and toughness (bulk and fracture), at rates of recovery far
exceeding the most advanced hydrogel systems developed to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.