* 1808266
* Collaborative Research: Data driven control of switched systems with applications to human behavioral modification
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Constantino Lagoa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Dramatically increasing health care costs threaten the nation's economy. Over
80% of those costs are due to chronic illnesses which can be prevented or
mitigated through lifestyle change. Physical activity is also a key behavioral
component of ideal cardiovascular health. This suggests that promoting physical
activity through the personalized virtual health advisors can lead to
substantial health improvements across a broad spectrum of the population.
Motivated by these observations, this proposal seeks to develop a tractable,
practical framework for designing personalized behavior monitoring systems,
aimed at maintaining optimal levels of physical activity. This is accomplished
by embedding the problem into a more general, systems-theoretic one: design of
controllers with provable performance for systems characterized by a collection
of models where neither the number of models nor their parameters are a priori
known and must be obtained from experimental data, collected from multiple
sensors with large variations in quality. Education is proactively integrated
into this project, starting with STEM summer camps projects for urban middle
school students on data driven modeling and continuing at the college level with
a multi-disciplinary program that uses personalized medicine to link a full
range of distinct subjects ranging from machine learning to systems theory and
optimization. At the graduate level, these activities are complemented by
recruitment efforts that leverage the resources of Penn State's McNair Scholars
Program and Northeastern University's Program in Multicultural Engineering to
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the problem of designing effective behavioral
interventions, this proposal seeks to develop a comprehensive, computationally
tractable framework for synthesizing data driven control laws for a class of
systems described by switched difference inclusions. These models arise in a
broad class of domains, ranging from resilient infrastructures to health care,
characterized by large amounts of uncertainty and abruptly changing dynamics.
The research addresses both the identification and control design problems in a
unified framework based on polynomial optimization and its connections to the
problem of moments. Contributions to the field of identification include the
development of a tractable framework for robust identification of uncertain
switched systems that exploits the underlying structure of the problem to
substantially reduce the computational complexity and can handle both worst case
and risk-adjusted descriptions. Contributions to control include a new framework
for chance constrained control of uncertain switched systems that maximizes the
probability of achieving a desired final state, while, at the same time,
minimizing the probability of entering bad sets. As a proof-of-principle, the
resulting framework is applied to the problem of designing smartphone based
virtual health advisors capable of providing individualized optimal physical
activity strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.