* 1808463
* Raw Signal Processing and Peak Cluster Geometry to Discover and Quantify Co-Indicative Associations between Target and Non-Target Environmental Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ananya Sen Gupta, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Profs. Ananya Sen Gupta and Keri Hornbuckle and their groups at
the University of Iowa are devising data interpretation tools to facilitate
discovery and quantitation of associations between well-known and unknown toxic
pollutants. The key idea is to connect the "big picture" (what are the major
causes and transport pathways of environmental contamination?) with small-scale
details by mathematically resolving overlapped signals to discover hidden
contributors to data from instruments used for separation and chemical analysis
of contaminants. Studies of environmental pollution typically focus on known
pollutants ("targets") and ignore the potentially significant roles played by
unknown constituents. Non-target compounds can vastly outnumber known target
compounds, and may be closely associated with, and strongly indicative of, the
presence of target pollutants. Experimental data often contains rich information
about non-target compounds, but this information is rarely tracked in studies of
environmental pollution or considered in regulatory policies. The Sen Gupta and
Hornbuckle groups are addressing this gap by devising a novel suite of
computational techniques to enhance recovery of information from complex
experimental data. Their work is applicable to a wide range of chemical
pollutants, such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and other industrial
pollutants in city air; nitrates and arsenic in rural well-water; and
hydrocarbon pollution from marine oil spills. Beyond the scientific advances in
pollution studies, the work is actively engaging women and other
underrepresented groups through graduate and undergraduate research
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sen Gupta/Hornbuckle team is devising a
suite of computational techniques to examine raw instrument signal (primarily
from gas chromatography and mass spectrometry) and to autonomously detect
contributions from both target and non-target compounds, enabling quantitation
of their relative associations in environmental contamination. The approach
combines non-linear optimization, geometric clustering, and graph-based multi-
scale networks, where the target analytes form the local neighborhood hub and
non-targets cluster around the target hubs forming dense association sub-graphs.
Techniques are validated across multiple data repositories and multiple
applications, seeking unprecedented comprehensive interpretation of raw
chromatographic and mass spectrometric signals. Specific objectives include: (i)
discovery of "hidden peaks" that co-elute with target compounds; (ii)
identification of associations between target and non-target compounds to
enhance identification of contamination pathways; and (iii) provision of tools
enabling integration of diverse data repositories, potentially transforming
understanding of environmental contamination pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.