* 1808143
* Active Assembly of Conducting Peptide Gels
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Allon Hochbaum, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 488,319.00

In living organisms, some structural components are assembled only when they are
demanded for specific functions and then dissembled when they are no longer
needed. In this project, the research teams of Prof. Rein Ulijn at the City
University of New York, and Prof. Allon Hochbaum at the University of
California, Irvine, aim to understand how to control dynamic assembly processes
and explore the feasibility of incorporating design concepts from the biological
world into synthetic, non-living materials. An important goal of this project is
to develop new approaches to preparing electrically conducting assemblies that
can change shape and make new connections in response to the environment or
external stimuli, mimicking the dynamic behavior of biological materials. The
assemblies are potentially useful as materials for interfacing electronic
devices with biological systems in biomedical applications. This project
provides interdisciplinary research training to graduate and undergraduate
students. The team inspires high school students, including underrepresented
minority students, from the local area (Harlem, NY and Irvine, CA) with hands-on
education and discovery programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, the research team designs transient assemblies of peptide
nanostructures, based on biocatalytic reactions that utilize chemical fuels to
dynamically sustain the self-assembled state. Activated amino acid methyl
esters, with the energy stored in the ester bond, serve as fuels to provide the
chemical energy required to drive assembly processes. The amino acid part
encodes the self-assembly of nanofibers that entangle to form a gel-phase
material. Modification of the peptide sequence enables modulation of the
assembly dynamics and fiber stability. Electronic functionality is introduced by
incorporating semi-conducting organic molecules into the peptide building
blocks. Another aim of the project is to integrate the resulting materials with
neuronal cells to investigate whether the behavior of neuronal cell can be
influenced by electronic stimulation through these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.