* 1808331
* Instrument Development: 4-D Near-Infrared Chemical Imaging Using Snapshot Tomography
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yongjin Sung, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2022
* USD 356,242.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Sung at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) develops
new instruments for 4-dimensional (4D) chemical imaging in the near-infrared
(NIR) range. NIR hyperspectral imaging has been widely used for nondestructive
quality inspection; however, existing methods cannot examine a specimen with a
complicated internal structure or detect the chemical impurities buried deep
inside a 3-D volume because the depth information is lost in the recorded 2-D
projection images. Traditional approaches to 3-D tomographic imaging require a
scanning mechanism, which significantly increases the data acquisition time and
the complexity of an instrument. Professor Sung and his group is developing
instruments using a technique called snapshot tomography, which can acquire the
3-D tomogram in a single snapshot. By incorporating various wavelength-scan
strategies, the new instruments can acquire the 4-D hyperspectral data at a high
speed and good spatial resolution. The instruments, once developed, could
potentially impact many industries by allowing nondestructive quality inspection
of pharmaceutical, chemical, petrochemical, or agricultural products.
Applications such as improving human health by detecting counterfeit medicines
or being used in failure analysis of 3-D integrated-circuit chips in solar cells
or micro-electro-mechanical system (MEMS) devices are envisioned. Professor Sung
strives to provide training opportunities to undergraduate researchers and K-12
students, the future generation of scientists and engineers. He also works on
incorporating cutting-edge science into course materials and is actively engaged
in many on-campus programs to recruit more women and minority students into his
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Sung is developing a 4D NIR absorption and
refractive index imaging where a wavelength-scanning light source is combined
with a snapshot tomography technique that is enabled by a micro-lens array and
digital holography. A common-path design is incorporated to further increase the
robustness to environmental vibrations and a spatial light modulator to actively
compensate for the chromatic aberration. For 4-D NIR emission imaging, a tunable
bandpass filter or Fourier transform spectroscopy is combined with another
snapshot tomography technique for luminescence light. The theoretical frameworks
to be developed is believed to extend the application of diffraction tomography
to more general classes of absorbing specimens and increase the accuracy of
emission tomography by including the wave nature and the partial coherence of
light in the image formation and reconstruction
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.