* 1808241
* Plasmon Coupling Correlation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Bjoern Reinhard, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 04/30/2022
* USD 419,998.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research,
Professor Reinhard and his team at Boston University are developing optical
spectroscopic techniques to investigate the structure and movement of
biomolecules at the single molecule level. Single molecule measurements provide
information about each molecules that move at a fast rate or rare events that
would otherwise be buried by bulk measurements. To monitor the movement and
structural changes of biomolecules at such a small scale, Professor Reinhard
makes a molecular ruler based on optical interaction of gold nanoparticles
(NPs). Fast and subtle changes in biomolecular structure and movements lead to
changes in the spectral signature of these gold NPs, which can be captured at
fast speed and be used to understand the behavior of biomolecules. The developed
technique could elucidate the role of structural fluctuations of proteins and
other biomolecules in complex biological systems, which could lead to new
advances in biological, biomedical, and environmental research. Professor
Reinhard works with his graduate and undergraduate students on the project,
providing them an opportunity to work at the interface between biophysical
chemistry, bioplasmonics, and biomaterials. Professor Reinhard also organizes
workshops, offers research internships, and develops web-modules to share with
the general public of his research outcomes. A particular emphasis of his
outreach activities is to attract members of groups that are underrepresented in
science and engineering to the research of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Reinhard is developing a localized
surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) based correlation spectroscopy. He utilizes
distance-dependent near-field coupling between plasmonic NPs that cause spectral
fluctuations in the far-field to monitor interparticle separations which would
allow him to obtain long-time signal correlation studies of individual
biopolymer molecules entirely without blinking artefacts. In this project,
Professor Reinhard uses plasmon coupling correlation spectroscopy (PCCS) to
measure the effect of nanoconfinement on the mechanical properties of DNA and
experimentally test the validity of conventional polymer models under nano-
confinement. He also works on understanding the structural dynamics of
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) by providing an accurate
characterization of the structural fluctuations over a broad frequency range in
order to develop predictive function models based on structural dynamics. The
ability to elucidate the role of structural fluctuations for the function of
disordered proteins and other biopolymers is important and necessary to develop
a fundamental understanding of their working mechanism, which remains enigmatic.
The project involves testing how spatial nanoconfinement, which is ubiquitous in
biological systems, effects and potentially changes the structural dynamics of
biopolymers. Besides the research goals, Professor Reinhard is working on a
series of educational and outreach activities to actively mentoring students in
interdisciplinary research and encourage the participation of underrepresented
groups in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.