* 1808288
* Functional Hybrid Biotic/Abiotic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Brian Dyer, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 478,056.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
hybrid biotic/abiotic functional materials that achieve light driven, multi-
electron reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) to formate - an anion derived from
formic acid. CO2 is the inevitable oxidation product of the primary fossil fuel
energy vectors of modern society and reducing it back to useful hydrocarbon
products such as formate is desirable for both environmental and economic
reasons. It is difficult to activate CO2 towards reduction, however, because it
is a very stable molecule, both thermodynamically and kinetically. New catalysts
and a method for coupling them to a renewable energy source are required to
achieve this goal. Man-made materials such as metal oxide surfaces are
inefficient catalysts and suffer from lack of specificity for CO2 substrate over
H+ and the interfering hydrogen evolution reaction. In contrast, nature has
evolved highly efficient catalysts for selective CO2 reduction without
competitive H2 evolution. Formate dehydrogenases (FDH), are a class of enzymes
from prokaryotes that reversibly catalyze the reduction of CO2 to formate, a
precursor to methanol or methane production and a potential energy source
itself. In nature, however, FDH enzymes are not naturally activated by light,
but require some other input of energy. The Dyer group will develop hybrid
biotic/abiotic materials that integrate a nanocrystalline semiconductor (quantum
dot) with the FDH enzyme to achieve light driven CO2 reduction. Biotic/abiotic
interfaces have evolved in nature to achieve functional designs that range from
biofilms to photonic crystals and structural materials. Artificial hybrid
abiotic/biotic materials may be rationally designed to achieve novel and
emergent functions. Integrating biomolecular and abiotic structures is a
powerful approach to create functional materials. The major goal of this work is
to couple the biological enzyme FDH to an abiotic photosensitizer component
(quantum dot) that converts solar energy into reactive electrons, to produce
functional materials that can be optimized for highly efficient light driven
conversion of CO2 to fuel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this grant is to develop hybrid
biotic/abiotic functional materials based on a formate dehydrogenase (FDH)
enzyme coupled to a nanocrystalline semiconductor (NCS) photosensitizer for
light driven, multi-electron reduction of CO2 to formate. The first objective is
to design, synthesize and characterize hybrid NCS:FDH materials that convert
light to reactive electrons and then efficiently transfer them to the catalyst.
The interfacial electron transfer (ET) will be optimized by controlling the
NCS:FDH interaction using three different approaches: 1) direct attachment to
the NCS surface via an N-terminal His-tag; 2) optimization of ET efficiency
using a viologen derivative redox mediator and 3) a covalent "molecular wire" to
the distal FeS cluster. Interfacial ET will also be optimized by wave-function
engineering of the NCS structure (dot, core shell, rod, dot-in-rod structures)
and the nature of the capping ligands and interfacial charge. Finally, the
efficiency of light-driven CO2 reduction will be correlated to the interfacial
ET efficiency and to the underlying structure of the hybrid interface. The
second objective of the grant is to elucidate the mechanism of light driven CO2
reduction by hybrid NCS:FDH materials. The intrinsic photosensitivity of these
hybrid materials will be exploited to optically trigger the ET and enzyme
turnover and thereby study the dynamics of all of the relevant processes,
including multi-exciton generation and extraction, interfacial electron transfer
and enzyme turnover. These experiments will test the important hypothesis that a
quantum confined NCS may act as a multi-electron photosensitizer by multi-
exciton generation and extraction. This approach will also be used to elucidate
the CO2 reduction mechanism by the FDH enzymes. The Dyer lab has developed a
unique capability for this purpose, based on the laser induced potential jump
coupled with structure-specific, time-resolved methods including ultrafast
infrared and fluorescence spectroscopy. Finally, these materials will be
integrated into photo-electrodes to demonstrate sustained light-driven CO2
reduction without the limitations imposed by the use of a sacrificial electron
donor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.