* 1808166
* Space Weather Workshop 2018; Westminster, Colorado; April 16-20, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,999.00

This grant is to organize the 2018 Space Weather Workshop held April 16-20, 2018
at the Westin Westminster Hotel in Westminster, Colorado. This is a four-day
workshop that focuses on the impacts of space weather and explores recent
scientific advances in predicting and forecasting. Space weather originates at
the sun, which is constantly emitting material and electromagnetic waves.
Impacts in the near-Earth space environment stimulates a complex response
including geomagnetic storms, induction of the aurorae, ionospheric
disturbances, and a variety currents are induced on the ground. There are
resulting impacts to infrastructure such as satellite drag, disruptions to
electronic components in space assets, induced currents in the power grid, and
many others which will be discussed at the workshop. The participants are
expected to be (based on past workshops) a mixture of scientists, and
representatives from industries impacted by space weather, including those from
electric power, commercial airlines, satellite operations, and navigation/
communication. The workshop is intended to foster collaboration across academia,
industry and government on space weather issues, and promote an active forum
among science, technology, economic, policy and security communities.

The organizing committee is comprised of representatives from federal agencies,
knowledgeable experts from the academic community and from the private sector,
and includes student representatives. The organizing committee is responsible
for identifying and recruiting speakers for workshop sessions on the basis of
qualities of merit, educational career objectives, and potential contribution to
the overall conference experience. The workshop is structured around plenary
sessions, poster sessions, and a roundtable discussion. Undergraduate and
graduate students are encouraged to participate and present posters at the
workshop. A website for the workshop has been created at
https://www.cpaess.ucar.edu/events/space-weather-workshop for handling meeting
logistics, registration, and coordinating multimedia activities. Space Weather
Workshop 2018 is co-sponsored by interested units in several different agencies,
including the NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center, NASA Heliophysics Division,
and the NSF Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.