* 1808052
* Photochemical Fate of Dissolved Amino Acids in Natural Aquatic Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Doskey, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 347,808.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Profs. Daisuke Minakata and Paul Doskey from Michigan
Technological University. They study the reactions of free amino acids in
natural freshwater with light. Understanding and predicting these processes is
important because nitrogen-containing free amino acids and their degradation
products are involved in global nitrogen-cycling. They also affect biological
activity in natural aquatic environments. The effluent of wastewater contains
amino acids as one of the major components. The findings from this study address
the impact of nitrogen-containing contaminants to aquatic systems that receive
treated municipal wastewater. The project includes outreach activities to K-12
high school students in the Detroit region through a summer youth intern
program. This program promotes the participation and retention of
underrepresented groups in the environmental science field. A webinar is being
developed based on the findings of this study to raise public awareness of water
safety and security in freshwater systems and the importance of protecting
ecosystems from contaminants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational and experimental research and education to predict the photolytic
and elementary reaction pathways of free amino acid transformation. This
transformation is induced by direct photolysis and indirect oxidation by
photochemically produced reactive intermediates. The researchers use
computational chemistry tools to identify the fundamental elementary reaction
pathways of representative free amino acids transformation. The research team
then predicts the kinetics information of each identified elementary reaction
pathway. Finally, a kinetic model based on elementary reactions is developed to
predict the time-dependent concentration profiles of free amino acids and their
transformation products in environmentally relevant conditions. The predicted
concentration profiles are compared to laboratory-scale experimental
observations to validate the kinetic model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.