* 1808609
* Synthesis and study of glycoconjugates and carbohydrate based macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Guijun Wang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Carbohydrates are renewable and abundant natural resources. Using readily
available sugars such as glucose, fructose, or lactose as building blocks, the
research group of Professor Guijun Wang at Old Dominion University is developing
new strategies for assembling sugars into large molecules with defined shape and
functions. The resulting molecular systems are useful for understanding
carbohydrate interactions with other biomolecules. Applications include the
discovery of new catalysts and advanced biomaterials. The creation of novel,
functional and biocompatible materials from abundant carbohydrates is important
for the advancement of green chemistry, material sciences, and biomedical
sciences. The project provides educational opportunities for students at all
levels, especially undergraduate and graduate students. Students participate in
interdisciplinary research in organic synthesis and bioorganic, medicinal, and
materials chemistry. Graduate students have industrial internship opportunities
in pharmaceutical companies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Low molecular weight
gelators (LMWGs) can self-assemble and form reversible supramolecular gels, a
category of soft materials with many applications. Professor Wang's group is
developing synthetic methods to obtain several classes of glycomimetics that can
form reversible hydrogels and organogels and other functional molecular
assemblies. The main aims of the proposed research are: 1) The synthesis and
study of new series of heterocycle functionalized sugar derivatives that may
function as molecular gelators and ligands for catalysis. 2) The
functionalization of effective molecular gelators or catalysts to improve their
performance through formation of branched or linear oligomers. The
multifunctional self-assembling systems are designed to retain the structural
flexibility of LMWGs while also displaying mechanical strength and stability. 3)
The synthesis and characterization of heterocycle-linked, carbohydrate-based
macrocycles. These glycomacrocycles have important potential applications as
novel catalysts or enzyme inhibitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.