* 1808606
* Constraining the Degradation Pathways of Siloxanes in the Atmosphere
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Eleanor Browne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 341,312.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program in the Division of Atmospheric
and Geospace Sciences supports Professor Eleanor Browne and her graduate and
undergraduate students. They study the atmospheric degradation processes of the
organosilicon compounds known as siloxanes. Siloxanes are high-production
compounds manufactured for a variety of uses, including as components of
adhesives, coatings, and personal care products. The siloxanes can be detected
in environmental samples worldwide including in remote Arctic regions. Due to
the environmental persistence of these compounds and concerns over their
toxicity to aquatic organisms, the environmental chemistry of siloxanes is an
emerging area of interest. In the environment, siloxanes preferentially
partition to the atmosphere where they undergo chemical reactions to form new
products. These products may have a different fate than the original compound.
This project improves the understanding of the timescale and products of the
atmospheric degradation of siloxanes and provides the data necessary to evaluate
their environmental fate. Through this project, graduate, undergraduate, and
high-school students receive training in atmospheric chemistry techniques and
analytical instrumentation. Students also develop scientific communication
skills by creating videos describing the work. Results are incorporated into
undergraduate educational materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses
laboratory experiments to investigate the multigenerational atmospheric
chemistry of siloxanes. The reaction rates of common linear and cyclic siloxanes
with the hydroxyl radical and chlorine atom are measured to understand the
lifetime of the compounds. The work investigates the mechanism and products of
the gas-phase oxidation of siloxanes under conditions approximating urban,
rural, and remote atmospheres. Experiments probing the uptake of oxidation
products into particles explore the interactions between gas-phase siloxanes and
submicron particles. Both reactants and products are measured in real time with
chemical ionization mass spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.