* 1808151
* Understanding epitaxial nanocrystal attachment processes across length scales with the aim of designing defect-free interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2022
* A Alivisatos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 367,861.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The continued development of semiconductor
materials with ever increasing quality has allowed for a steady improvement of
modern electronic devices over the past half century. Structural defects in
semiconductor materials, imperfections where atoms are misplaced in the
crystalline material, often limit their performance, and it is desirable to
remove such defects. Many of the improvements previously seen relied on a
fundamental understanding of the behavior, formation, and removal pathways of
different types of imperfections. In this project, we aim to understand defects
in nanocrystals, which are tiny pieces of crystalline solids and are known to
behave differently than their bulk counterparts. Nanocrystals can be thought of
as small analogues of individual LEGO bricks, and similarly they can be attached
into larger structures that may have properties that are more interesting or
useful than the individual building blocks. Unfortunately, when nanocrystals are
attached, they can attach imperfectly which can give rise to the same
crystalline defects that limit traditional semiconductors. This project aims to
look at these defects with atomic detail using advanced electron microscopy
techniques to understand the defects that form when nanocrystals attach, how
those defects can be removed, and how to prevent them from forming in the first
place. By developing a fundamental understanding of defects in nanocrystals, it
may be possible to make nanocrystal assemblies with sufficient material quality
(lack of defects) to have properties not observed in any natural material.
Furthermore, this project exposes a diverse body of undergraduates to high-level
scientific research thought a unique undergraduate research program where ~20
first-year undergraduate students work collaboratively to analyze atomically
resolved electron microscopy data under the guidance of graduate student
mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The assembly of
epitaxially connected nanocrystals with atomically coherent interfaces and
mesoscale order provides a route to materials with interesting emergent
properties. However, the irreversible nature of the attachment process often
leads to nonequilibrium defect formation at the interfaces, which can limit
ultimate materials performance. A suite of in-situ transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) experiments are used to understand the process of oriented
attachment in colloidal nanocrystals. Specifically, in-situ high resolution TEM
experiments probe the fundamentals of dislocation dynamics in imperfectly
attached particles. In addition, an automated HRTEM image analysis tool is used
to determine faceting, number of step edges, and size of ensembles of single
particles with atomic layer precision. This tool is used to develop nanocrystal
synthesis protocols for preparing atomically defined nanocrystals which should
minimize defect formation during attachment. Finally, alignment and attachment
of nanocrystals are imaged in-situ at a liquid-liquid interface in a specially
designed liquid phase TEM cell design based on bifunctionalized silicon nitride
membranes. In-situ techniques to study dynamics at liquid-liquid interfaces
provide insight to many self-assembly processes at these dynamic interfaces.
Individually these experiments provide insights into each step of the oriented
attachment process, and together they provide a unified picture of assembly
processes from the atomic to mesoscale. This project trains graduate students in
advanced in-situ materials characterization tools and prepares them to be future
scientific mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.