* 1808054
* The Role of Photo-Generated Hydrated Electrons in Determining the Environmental Fate of Short-Chain Chlorinated Paraffins in Surface Waters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Christoph Aeppli, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2022
* USD 399,554.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Dr. Christoph Aeppli at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
Sciences. The goal of this project is to study how sunlight determines the fate
of short-chain chlorinated paraffins (SCCPs) in surface water of lakes and
oceans. These compounds have been classified as persistent organic pollutants,
but there are insufficient scientific data to assess their fate in the aqueous
phase. Specifically, there are knowledge gaps about a process called indirect
photolysis of SCCPs. In this project, this process is studied in the laboratory
under environmentally relevant conditions. The degradation of SCCPs is mediated
by two primary species responsible for indirect photolysis: the so-called
hydrated electron and the hydroxyl radical. The mechanisms and rates of these
reactions are being determined. There are indications that the pathway mediated
by hydrated electrons is highly effective for degrading hydrophobic pollutants,
especially in surface water. In such systems, the presence of dissolved organic
matter is expected to facilitate the transformation reaction. The anticipated
outcome of this research is a better understanding of the loss and persistence
of an important class of pollutants in lakes and oceans. Undergraduate students
from Colby college participate in this research both in the summer and during
the academic year. They gain intense hands-on research experience in laboratory
environmental chemistry. A postdoctoral researcher learns about the intersection
of photochemistry, high-end analytical techniques, and computational chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates whether hydrated electrons are
the active species for the photolysis of SCCPs in surface water. It is
hypothesized that this photochemical degradation with hydrated electrons occurs
in dissolved organic matter (DOM) aggregates. Irradiation experiments are
conducted using DOM-containing systems as well as clean systems that allow a
separate investigation of the SCCP photolysis by hydrated electrons as well as
by hydroxyl radicals. Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography is used
to quantify degradation of the highly complex mixture of SCCP congeners. To
interpret results from the DOM-containing photolysis experiments, the affinity
of individual SCCP congeners into the DOM phase is being estimated using quantum
chemical-based computational chemistry tools. Overall, this project advances the
understanding of the photochemical fate of hydrophobic pollutants in surface
waters. The project also improves the fundamental knowledge of a so-far
understudied photoreactive species, the hydrated electron. Furthermore, this
project trains the next generation of researchers and includes a significant
undergraduate education component. Additionally, there is an active outreach
program to educate the broader community on the relevance of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.