* 1808433
* Mechanisms of Energy Conservation in Bifurcating Electron Transfer Flavoproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Anne-Frances Miller, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 471,000.00

Just as electrical wires carry power to every room in our houses, cells have
dedicated proteins carrying a current of electrons from reactions that generate
electrons to vital reactions that require them. This project addresses a newly-
recognized class of 'electron transferring flavoproteins' (Etfs) that act as
energy brokers, trading quantity for quality by accepting pairs of modest-energy
electrons and concentrating their energy onto just one of the pair to produce
one high-energy electron. Crucially, this biochemical 'step-up station' makes it
possible for cells to fix nitrogen gas from air to generate their own
fertilizer, making food production possible where it otherwise would not be. The
project seeks to understand HOW these Etfs accomplish this complex process. The
research seeks to learn what is special about the site at which energy is
reallocated among the two electrons by studying the molecule on which this
happens (this flavin is a derivative of the riboflavin vitamin B2). The research
also seeks to identify safety mechanisms built into the protein scaffold that
allow such demanding transformations to occur within a benign, non-toxic
protein. Thus the work aims to articulate the underlying principles of the
process, so that they can be designed into human-made devices and materials, to
increase our ability to use solar power and boost the efficiency and versatility
with which we use electrical energy in general. Flavins are just one example of
many plant pigments that present powerful chemical properties along with
glorious colors. The project scientists share their enthusiasm for pigments via
a series of workshops and a course on plant pigments, fibers and fragrances in
which participants create a fiber art project using natural materials while
learning about the chemical principles underlying plant colors. This creative
chemistry course gives all participants a chance to design experiments and
integrate science and art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-familiar family of
proteins has recently been found to have a surprising capacity to re-allocate
energy among pairs of electrons acquired from NADH, yielding one with more
reducing power than the NADH source (electron transfer bifurcation, or
'bifurcation'). This research establishes which of the two flavins plays which
of the contrasting roles identified in the newly-purified bifurcating electron
transferring flavoprotein (Etf), and then seeks to understand what aspects of
the protein environment are responsible for each of the different activities
(conventional electron transfer vs. bifurcation). Spectroelectrochemical
titrations measure the extent to which individual amino acids change the flavin
reduction potentials (Eo) in proteins bearing amino acid substitutions, and
spectroscopic studies elucidate changes in flavin covalent bonding, hydrogen
bonding and protonation states, mapping out the active site's role in producing
bifurcating activity. Residues to be targeted include a cysteine common to all
the Etfs associated with nitrogen fixation but not conserved in others. Thus the
research may reveal the protein context needed in order to exploit flavins'
capacity for this reactivity while suppressing side-effects. The objective is to
elucidate principles underlying the versatility and efficiency of bifurcation,
for implementation beyond biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.