* 1808055
* Exploring Metal-Free Living Cationic Polymerizations via Reversible Addition-Fragmentation Chain Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 408,662.00

Synthetic polymers (commonly known as plastics) are a mixture of different
molecular "strings" having different lengths. While for many applications, such
a mixture does not impact the physical properties of the polymer, some
applications require polymers to have strings of the same length to attain
specifically-desired polymer properties. The research group of Professor Wei You
at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill has discovered a new
polymerization methodology for preparing polymers that have a narrow
distribution of lengths. To further develop the methodology, this research seeks
a better understanding of the polymerization process in order to achieve greater
control of the lengths of such molecular strings. The research also seeks to
broaden the applicability of the synthesis methods to a wide range of different
polymers. Education, collaboration, and outreach are integral aspects of this
project. Professor You actively recruits students of underrepresented groups
into his research group. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
receive training in cutting-edge small molecule and polymer synthetic methods,
along with complex analytical techniques through engaging in this
interdisciplinary research project. Professor You is actively involved in a
number of outreach activities, including the UNC Science Expo (part of the North
Carolina Science Festival). This event is UNC?s single largest science outreach
event, attracting approximately 10,000 participants annually. In addition,
Professor You has also designed short lectures on polymer solar cells for high
school students and teachers brought as part of the Climate LEAP
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classical living cationic polymerization
achieves "living" characteristics via the equilibrium between the ionic (i.e.,
propagating chain end) and the covalent (i.e., resting chain end) species. In
contrast, the controlled cationic polymerization recently discovered in
Professor You's laboratory proceeds through an entirely new mechanism - a
cationic chain transfer mechanism, analogous to that of the conventional
Reversible Addition-Fragmentation Chain Transfer (RAFT) radical polymerization.
This research explores and elucidates the mechanism of this new cationic
polymerization process. The project investigates the mechanistic details of a
new metal-free, protonic acid initiated and alcohol-mediated controlled cationic
polymerization. The researchers expand this unique living cationic
polymerization into polymerizing various electron-rich monomers, and unveiling
the roles of the applied photocatalysts in the controlled cationic RAFT
polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.