* 1808956
* Collaborative Research: Stability of Nonlinear Wave Structures in Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anna Vainchtein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 198,624.00

The principal investigators of this collaborative research project study the
stability of nonlinear waves in lattices. The interplay of spatially discrete
structure and nonlinearity in many physical and biological systems, from
mechanical metamaterials and nanoelectromechanical devices to biopolymers, often
results in formation of nonlinear waveforms that either coherently transport or
release energy as they propagate through the system. In particular, recent
experimental and theoretical work on granular materials has advanced the
understanding of the conditions for existence and properties of a variety of
such structures, including traveling pulses and shock waves. However, much less
is known about the conditions under which these structures are stable. The goal
of this project is to obtain such criteria in a framework that extends earlier
work to more general classes of waves and to broader settings that account for
the effects of higher dimensions, lattice structure, external driving, and
damping. Fundamental understanding of stability criteria for nonlinear waves is
important in a number of different fields, including materials science,
condensed matter physics, mechanical engineering, and biophysics. The insights
provided by this work can be helpful in designing new devices for energy
channeling, shock absorption, and vibration mitigation. An integral component of
this collaborative project is teaching and training graduate students in the
interdisciplinary research area of nonlinear wave phenomena in lattices. To this
end, graduate students participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on the ongoing joint work of the principal investigators on
stability of solitary traveling waves in one-dimensional lattices and its
intimate connection to the stability of discrete breathers. This involves
developing novel analytical stability criteria, as well as state-of-the-art
numerical approaches necessary to extend this framework to broader settings,
including two-dimensional and heterogeneous lattices, while considering more
general classes of traveling waves. In particular, stability of waveforms with
oscillatory tails, such as nanoptera in resonant granular chains and generalized
kinks in dislocation models, is investigated. The project involves studying
dynamic implications of instability and examining the effects of dissipation,
long-range interactions, and external driving. The project's goals also include
clarifying the relation of the linear spectra associated with a solitary
traveling wave (and their variations at instability critical points) to the
corresponding discrete breather Floquet spectra, as well as connecting the
stability criteria for such waves to the established functional analytic
framework for continuum systems. Graduate students participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.