* 1808710
* Elucidating the Reactive Species Responsible for the Antifungal Activity of a Metallopeptide
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Katherine Franz, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 471,000.00

This award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division will support work by Professor Katherine J. Franz at Duke University to
elucidate the basis for the antifungal activity of histatins, a family of
naturally occurring peptides found in saliva. As part of the immune system,
histatins are known to provide a layer of protection against infection, although
the chemical details of how they do this is not well understood. The
experimental work of this award will test the hypothesis that histatin peptides
generate reactive complexes with copper that are capable of damaging fungal
targets. Graduate and undergraduate students will acquire training in methods of
bioinorganic chemistry in an interdisciplinary and supportive research
environment that promotes diversity and inclusion as a vehicle for creativity
and excellence. The outcomes will provide detailed understanding of metal-
dependent processes responsible for fungal cell killing, thereby filling a
knowledge gap that currently limits a comprehensive understanding of the diverse
mechanisms used by the innate immune system to ward off
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Histatins are peptides of the innate immune
system that range in length from 7 to 38 residues, including multiple metal-
ligating amino acid side chains arranged in motifs characteristic of
metalloproteins and metallopeptides. While it has long been speculated that
histatins' capacity to bind metal ions is important for its biological activity,
the molecular details linking metallopeptide formation and antifungal activity
have been lacking. This work will test the hypothesis that histatin peptides
generate reactive copper-oxygen species that are capable of damaging specific
fungal targets as part of their antifungal mechanism. This hypothesis derives
from recently published work from the Franz Lab that established a dependence
for copper on histatins' fungicidal activity and identified previously
unrecognized Cu(I) binding sites that are required for cell killing. The
experiments supported by this award will identify spectroscopic features and
reactivity profiles of the molecular species formed by reaction of Cu(I) and
Cu(II) peptide complexes with oxygen species and identify likely substrates that
such intermediates may alter. Outcomes of these studies will provide new
insights into the activity of peptides that represent primitive elements of the
innate immune system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.