* 1808912
* Robust 3D Beamforming using Electronically Steerable Metamaterial Antennas for Millmeter wave Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Mai Vu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,001.00

Robust 3D Beamforming using Electronically Steerable Metamaterial Antennas for
Millmeter wave Communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D beamforming is a promising
technology for millimeter wave (mmWave) communications, due to the demand for
higher capacity and the need to overcome strong atmospheric absorption at high
mmWave frequencies. By forming narrow beams in both the azimuth and elevation
directions, 3D beamforming allows efficient spatial division and leads to higher
user capacity, better coverage, less interference, and better energy efficiency.
The true promise of this technology, however, has not yet been realized due to
immense challenges in both hardware and algorithms. Existing beamforming
approaches rely on phased array antennas with bulky, power-hungry phase shifters
and related amplifiers and size not suitable for practical handsets. True mmWave
beamforming requires thin, lightweight antennas with the ability to produce
sharp beams that are electronically steerable over a wide range of angles in
three dimensions. For effective beamforming, there is an added difficulty in
estimating the channel accurately at both the receiver and transmitter because
of strong directionality of mmWave propagation, its high path loss and
vulnerability to shadowing and blockage. Such channel conditions call for robust
3D beamforming algorithms that are tightly coupled to novel antenna designs in
order to integrate them into efficient communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal puts forth several key innovations
spanning across signal processing, antenna design and integrated system levels.
(1) The signal processing innovation lies in robust 3D beamforming algorithms
for a planar antenna array, taking into account errors in channel estimation,
particularly in angles of departure and arrival specific to mmWave propagation,
and also variation in antenna beam formation caused by inherent non-idealities
in hardware and process mismatch specific for the proposed metamaterial antenna.
Both of these sources of error have not previously been considered. (2) The
hardware innovation lies in the use of metamaterial-based resonant cavity
transmit/receive antennas that are ultra-thin for electronic beam steering,
achieved by embedding active components such as varactors in the metamaterial
that are biased intelligently in software. The proposed antenna is a fundamental
shift from the existing phase-array antennas with bulky mechanical moving parts
or phase shifters and related amplifiers, thereby also saving significant power,
while providing flexible narrow beam-width of wide steering angles. (3) These
two innovative aspects are then integrated in a multi-level evaluation plan,
including detailed testing and evaluation at component (antenna), system
(transceiver pair), and network (cellular) levels. Characterized antenna beam
profile is integrated in a network simulation that implements the proposed
robust 3D beamforming with detailed mmWave channel model. Project results are
expected to have direct impact on mmWave communications in meeting the demand
for high data rate connectivity in cellular, vehicular, and IoT
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.