* 1808489
* High-Voltage High-Power-Density Power Electronics for Emerging Medical, Environmental, and Aerospace Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Juan Manuel Rivas-Davila, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-voltage low-current power-electronic
converters that can deliver voltages between 10s to 100s of kV and currents in
the 1-100 mA range play a critical role in many medical, environmental, and
aerospace applications, established or emerging. In many of those applications,
a compact and lightweight high-voltage power supply is desirable if not
essential. Unfortunately, conventional technologies are inefficient, heavy, and
bulky. This project seeks to develop a new generation of lightweight and
efficient high voltage power converters that will enable many promising
applications. The fundamental idea is to leverage radio frequency circuit
techniques and the recent introduction of high-performance wide-bandgap
semiconductor power transistors. This project will make possible many high-
voltage applications that have previously been considered impractical, thereby
creating new research and business opportunities. A miniaturized power supply
that can reach 10s of kV in a fraction of a millisecond will enhance the
portability and safety of X-ray systems. These power supplies can also enable
smaller and cheaper particle-beam accelerators to make ion and neutron sources
more readily available. These systems can be used to detect harmful substances,
explosives and map the distribution of petroleum in an oil well. Other
applications can become possible with a dramatic reduction in the size and
weight of a high voltage converter, like a new kind of electrohydrodynamic
aerial vehicle that uses no moving parts and with very low noise and heat
profile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will develop a small and lightweight
dc-dc power converter capable of generating an output voltage close to 100 kV.
One of the most promising candidates for such goal is high-frequency multi-stage
class-DE rectifiers with inductive isolation. In the principal investigator's
previous works on multi-stage class-DE rectifiers, the dc output voltage is
limited to the breakdown voltage of capacitors with high-quality factors. With
the insertion of an air-core transformer, the output voltage upper limit is
enhanced up to the breakdown potential between transformer primary and secondary
windings. Parallel-input series-output connection of rectifiers in conjunction
with high-frequency operation leads to fast rise and fall times, making the
circuit particularly suitable for systems that require pulsed dc voltage.
Regarding power density (output power per unit volume) and specific power
(output power per unit mass), the developed power converter is expected to be
superior to state-of-the-art existing converters by at least an order of
magnitude and hence will enable or improve many technologies that require high
voltage source. In a later stage of the project, efforts will be made to prove
the practicality of the developed high-voltage power supplies by building
prototypes of target applications including an electrohydrodynamic aerial
vehicle, an X-ray tube, and a neutron source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.