* 1808117
* Field and microstructural investigation of strain localization processes, texture development, and the rheology of naturally deformed lower crust
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Seth Kruckenberg, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 312,566.00

The rheology (i.e. the deformational behavior) of Earth's crust and upper mantle
exerts a fundamental control on a range of planetary processes, from accurately
modeling plate tectonics, to estimating patterns of post-glacial rebound and the
propagation of seismic deformation. Models of sea level rise are similarly
influenced by our understanding of the viscosity structure of the crust and
upper mantle, having direct consequences for humans in coastal communities that
base their future planning and development on model predictions. Thus, our
ability to accurately predict the societal effects of global and local sea level
change is, in part, dependent upon a nuanced understanding of the conditions and
processes that control the deformational behavior of Earth materials. This study
will produce empirical estimates of rheology from some of the least accessible,
and least understood, deep crustal materials, thus informing on various model
inputs and global processes. Teaching and training of graduate and undergraduate
students are cornerstones of the integrated research efforts outlined in this
study, with a particular focus on the participation of women in international
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) research experiences.
This study further aims to leverage the development of new digital databases and
scientific tools (e.g., the StraboSpot database for structural analysis) to
facilitate the free dissemination of primary data and scientific findings, and
it seeks to develop new tools used for the characterization of crystalline
solids, offering potential for technology transfer and breakthroughs in other
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The viscous rheologies of many minerals
(e.g., olivine, quartz) and mineral aggregates (e.g., olivine and orthopyroxene)
in the lithosphere have been studied for some time, yet rheologies for polyphase
aggregates (e.g., gabbro -- the dominant lithology comprising the lower crust)
remain poorly constrained. Because plagioclase and pyroxene are among the most
common minerals in the lower crust, investigating the micromechanical processes
that govern their deformation is fundamental to advancing the understanding of a
range of geodynamic processes, particularly in active orogenic settings where
the ability to make tectonic inferences from indirect methods of observation
rests upon knowledge as to the origin of structural fabrics and crystallographic
textures developed during high-temperature viscous flow. Rheological information
obtained from field-based and microstructural investigations of exhumed deep
crustal lithospheric sections thus remain critical as these exposures record
within them the rock microstructures, deformation mechanisms, and
crystallographic textures formed in the deep crust during deformation under
natural conditions. This research focuses on naturally deformed, compositionally
heterogeneous deep crustal granulite exposures in the Mount Hay block of central
Australia and is rooted in field-based investigation, and integrated with
microstructural studies, strain analysis, and textural analysis using electron
backscatter diffraction. Using these methods, this research will provide
quantitative constraints on: (i) deformation heterogeneity and strain
localization processes in the deep crust; (ii) the compositional and tectonic
controls the micromechanics of deformation in polyphase aggregates; and (iii)
the rheology of heterogeneous lower crustal lithologies. Further, this study
aims to explore the role of strain geometry on the development of
crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) in plagioclase-dominated rocks
(e.g., gabbro), offering immense potential for improving the interpretation of
lithospheric processes that depend on fabric anisotropy (e.g., seismic
anisotropy, viscous anisotropy, melt percolation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.