* 1808715
* The influence of doping and annealing onto the lattice dynamics, band structure and free charge carrier properties in monoclinic gallium aluminum oxide semiconductor alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Mathias Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 485,052.00

Non-technical Description: This project provides a scientific basis for
development of novel semiconductor material for electronic devices that could
enable real-time low-loss electric power distribution capability within the
electric grid. Such distribution can be controlled by high-power electronic
devices capable of switching and distributing high voltages and loads. As a new
class of semiconductor materials, gallium aluminum oxide emerges as a promising
candidate for fabrication of such devices. This project investigates the
influence of doping and composition onto the resulting electronic properties of
the material by employing a variety of theoretical and experimental
characterization techniques. This project offers various training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, along with various outreach activities
targeting K-12 students, teachers, minorities and underrepresented groups. The
project includes Nebraska high-school and middle-school student summer research
programs and after-school science education activities, and annual public Social
and academic outreach programs are expanded to include demonstrations and Sunday
presentations at the University of Nebraska State Museum on power electronics
and the electric grid of the future for elementary to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project focuses on a
fundamental material investigation of novel wide-bandgap material with potential
in high power electronic applications. The research investigates the effect of
doping and annealing on the electronic properties of semiconductor aluminum
gallium oxide alloys with monoclinic symmetry. The main objectives are to
determine the phonon, band structure and free charge carrier effective mass and
mobility parameters, including their anisotropy, as a function of: (i) aluminum
composition variation, (ii) tin, germanium and silicon doping concentrations and
(iii) annealing under different gaseous environments in wide temperature ranges.
The project combines computational theory and experimental characterization.
Density functional theory calculations are performed to predict the effects of
doping (defects) and alloying and to guide the applications of the experimental
techniques - generalized spectroscopic ellipsometry and the optical Hall effect
- to determine the electronic, phonon and transport properties in single
crystals and heterostructures of low-symmetry semiconductors. Additional
techniques include Raman spectroscopy and in-situ high-temperature studies. This
research contributes to the technological development of high power electronic
devices based on novel monoclinic semiconductor materials and provides education
and research training possibilities for graduate students and young researchers
in advanced semiconductor technology in culturally diverse
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.