* 1808426
* Collaborative Research: How magnetic nanoparticles organize in extreme force gradients
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Thomas Crawford, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 319,832.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic nanoparticles in fluids can click-
together to make miniature stir sticks, scaffolds for building artificial bones,
and even barriers to trap cancer cells and prevent their traveling through
blood. To realize such structures, one must understand the forces that control
how these particles come together. The research team is studying a novel method
for connecting nanoparticles together under extreme magnetic forces that are
many orders of magnitude larger than naturally occurring ones. Systematic real-
time experiments and theoretical simulations are compared to understand the new
physics of these systems and their potential applications in nanotechnology.
Women and minority PhD and undergraduate students will be recruited for this
work that takes place within two Physics departments. In the US, Physics has the
lowest female and minority percentage of graduating PhDs of any discipline so
this is of critical importance. Through their close interaction, the two groups
will design a 30 minute long Magnetic Nanoparticle Show with videos and simple
demonstrations, and then perform the show to school groups. This topic is very
visual so students will be able to understand the results and the implications
for exciting applications such as drug delivery, heating to kill cancer tumors,
and lab-on-a-chip. Finally, the two PIs will give talks on nanotechnology at
local "Science Cafes," where members of the public can come to discuss
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Massive magnetic
force gradients can be created at the nanoscale and used to make virtually any
self-assembled shape from magnetic nanoparticles in fluids. However, assembly in
these extreme gradients shows novel behaviors that remain unexplained, including
vastly different results when a minute amount of salt is added to the suspending
fluid. This project seeks to understand how the immediate environment
surrounding a nanoparticle (ionic, magnetic, ligand chemistry) affects its
ability to assemble into geometric arrangements in extreme force gradients, an
understanding that could transform how and where nanoparticles can be used in
real-world applications. The specific aims of this project focus on three
parameters that affect nanoparticle assembly: (i) external field gradient, (ii)
ionic strength of colloidal suspensions, and (iii) interparticle magnetic
interactions. The research team is applying controllable forces - that vary by
orders of magnitude over just nanometers - to nanoparticles as their colloidal
environment is modified, with a transformative approach involving magnetic
recording media submerged in liquid. These parameters are studied by observing
nanoparticles self-assemble into a diffraction grating, as well as by performing
torque-mixing magnetic resonance spectroscopy measurements to study few-
nanoparticle assemblies. These experiments are closely tied with theoretical
calculations and Langevin dynamics simulations that explain how changes in
nanoscale interactions modify the emergent self-assembled structures they
produce. Multi-timescale, finite-temperature simulations allow predicted large
assemblies to be compared to experiments within reasonable computation
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.