* 1808391
* Extracting the RING from the B-box: Characterizing MID1 B-box1 E3 ligase activity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Michael Massiah, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Michael Massiah from the George Washington University to
investigate factors that contribute to the function of a key class of enzymes
involved in cellular protein recycling. All living organisms employ a common
mechanism to maintain protein concentration and function to ensure a normal cell
life cycle. A protein marked for recycling is covalently modified with a protein
called ubiquitin (Ub). Proteins with multiple Ubs are cleaved into small
fragments. The class of proteins that facilitates protein Ub modification are
called RING E3 enzymes, and they are overall similar in structure. However, each
RING E3 marks a specific set of proteins for modification. Despite structural
similarity, the basis for substrate specificity and varying levels of activities
by E3s are unknown. With this project, graduate, undergraduate and high school
students re-engineer a new class of E3 enzyme and determine how specific amino
acid changes affect the enzyme function. Students gain important biotechnology
skills and the use of numerous chemical tools to characterize protein structure
and protein-protein interactions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project
focuses on the B-box1 domain from the MID1 protein. This new class of Ub E3
enzymes has the same overall structure as RING E3 but exhibits a much lower
level of activity. Through the use of PCR-based mutagenesis, specific amino
acids of the B-box1 domain are changed. Multi-dimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy is utilized to determine the structures of the various
mutants of the B-box1 domain, and used to characterize their interactions with
an E2 enzyme that is part of the ubiquitination cascade. Isothermal titration
calorimetry, fluorescence spectroscopy, and FTIR are among the tools employed to
characterize binding interactions. Completion of this project leads to
identification of amino acids and structural features important for E3 ligase
activity and substrate binding. These findings can be applied to other B-box
domains and RING E3s to predict activity and mechanism of
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.