* 1808342
* CDS&amp;E: Fast, Scalable GPU-Enabled Software for Predictive Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Sharon Glotzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2023
* USD 628,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award. It supports theoretical and
computational research, computational tool development, and education in support
of the prediction of new materials and their properties by computer simulation.
Materials scientists can model the "building blocks" of new materials, from
atoms to molecules to nanoparticles, and solve those models on fast computers.
Although much work is still needed to improve the fidelity of models with
additional physics, inform the models with measurements from experiments, and
develop faster algorithms on modern architectures to solve these models, the
paradigm of predictive materials simulation is well in hand. Predictive
materials simulation can be thought of as a "forward-type" simulation, where one
essentially runs computer experiments from initial conditions for a given system
and observes the result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials scientists are now at
the threshold of a paradigm shift in materials simulation, where it is becoming
feasible to design for materials structure and properties, rather than simply
predicting them based on physical models. This use of molecular simulation for
the "inverse problem" approach to design materials - that is, the determination
of attributes of building blocks such that those building blocks will self-
assemble into materials with specific structural, optical, mechanical,
thermodynamic or other properties - would represent a major leap
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moving into an era of inverse materials design
requires new computational tools capable of performing simulations that flip the
usual forward-type simulations on their head. These tools must be scientifically
valid, robust, accessible and easy to use, and should exploit the fastest
available hardware. This project will develop computational tools, share them
broadly with an existing and rapidly growing user base, and apply them to the
important problems of nanoparticle self-assembly and colloidal crystallization.
The new tools will run efficiently on laptops, desktops, and even massive GPU
(graphics processing units) supercomputers, thereby serving multiple user types.
The approaches and tools developed under this award are transferable and will be
of immediate and even broader interest to the materials, engineering, and
chemistry communities interested in inverse
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award. It
supports theoretical and computational research, computational tool development,
and education in support of the prediction of new materials and their properties
by computer simulation. Missing in today's computational materials research
ecosystem is inverse-type predictive software; that is, software that enables
materials design starting from desired properties. In "inverse problem"
simulations for design, a target materials property, behavior, and/or structure,
is specified and the building blocks and thermodynamic conditions that will
achieve that target are predicted. Inverse design methods may still require
molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, or other workhorse algorithms, but the entire
conceptual approach is flipped on its head. &lt;br/&gt;The PI and her group
recently developed an inverse design algorithm called "digital alchemy." The
algorithm is grounded rigorously in statistical thermodynamics, and is based on
the idea of generalized thermodynamic ensembles. They have developed a way to
simulate materials in an "alchemical ensemble," where particle attributes like
shape or interparticle interactions are treated as thermodynamic variables, and
change during the course of the simulation, sampling many millions of
possibilities in minutes. In these simulations, a target structure is defined,
and the simulation finds the optimal set of building block attributes that will
self-assemble the target structure. They have applied digital alchemy to the
design of nanoparticle and colloidal particle shapes for target, one-component
colloidal crystal structures, including some very complex ones.&lt;br/&gt;Under
this project, the PI will fully develop digital alchemy into a method that can
treat other, experimentally relevant particle attributes and implement the
method into the publicly available, open source, particle simulation toolkit,
HOOMD-blue. HOOMD-blue will be able to "discover" building block attributes and
thermodynamic conditions optimized for a target structure, target properties,
and/or target behavior. The research team will demonstrate the use of this new
inverse design capability of HOOMD-blue to design multicomponent colloidal
crystals, colloidal crystals of patchy particles, and reconfigurable colloidal
crystals. &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this project are to provide open-
source software capable of inverse materials design to the materials community,
and demonstrate the power and possibilities of GPU-enabled inverse design
simulations via several scientific use cases relevant to nanoparticle self-
assembly and colloidal crystallization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.