* 1808401
* Structure-property relationships in novel conjugated mixed conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2022
* USD 416,309.00

Nontechnical description: Soft materials that have the ability to transport both
ions and electrons are of great interest for use at the interface between
electronics and biology. Indeed, biology works by shuttling ions while
electronic systems work by moving electrons. Mixed conductors, that transport
both ions and electrons, can act as translators between biological signals and
electronic devices. Potential applications of these materials include
biosensors, neural probes, and drug delivery systems. In this project, new
plastic materials exhibiting mixed conduction are studied. In particular, the
structure of these materials is correlated with their ability to transport ions
and electrons. Advanced materials characterization techniques using X-rays and
electron beams are used to analyze the structure of these plastics down to the
molecular level, in order to determine what limits their performance.
Ultimately, these insights allow to design and synthesize higher performance
materials. Scientific advances resulting from the project are incorporated in
undergraduate and graduate classes. The educational outreach is completed by
enrolling undergraduate students to join the project during the Summer Quarter,
with a focus on recruiting through the Engineering Diversity Program. An
additional program, the Art + Science program at Stanford is leveraged to
broaden the undergraduate experience through interactions with the Cantor Museum
aimed at studying the materiality of art objects. Finally, the interdisciplinary
nature of the research project provides a broad educational training to the
graduate student involved in it, which greatly facilitates the student's
insertion in the biotech industry workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Polymers that exhibit mixed ionic and electronic conduction have
the ability to transduce ionic fluxes, the language of biology, into electrical
currents, which can be manipulated by conventional electronics. The goal of the
project is to understand how ion penetration and electronic carrier transport
are affected by the microstructure of a new family of polymeric mixed
conductors. In particular, the effect of crystalline texture, degree of
crystallinity and mesoscopic organization of the crystallites is studied.
Advanced X-ray diffraction techniques and a new scanning nanobeam microscopy
technique are used to analyze the microstructure. The microstructure is
correlated to performance, as characterized using electrochemical methods. The
ultimate goal is to determine materials design rules, which will be confirm by
studying potentially high-performing materials. Healthcare is being
revolutionized by the confluence of engineering and medical sciences. Soft
materials that exhibit mixed conduction have a role to play because of their
outstanding electrical properties combined with a low modulus. New high-
performance materials are ideally placed to play an important role in this
space. Finally, the project trains a student with an interdisciplinary outlook,
ready to enter this nascent industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.