* 1808138
* Atomically Monodisperse Palladium Nanoparticles: Size, Composition and Atomic Structure Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Amala Dass, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2024
* USD 289,051.00

Significant progress has been made in the atomic level manipulation of matter in
the case of gold (Au) and silver (Ag) nanoparticles, assemblies of tens to
hundreds of atoms. Ultra-small small Au and Ag nanoparticles are those with
diameters less than 3 nm and are composed of less than 500 atoms. These
nanoparticles display well-defined structures and can be synthesized when
specific organic molecules (known as ligands) are tethered to their surfaces.
However, nanoparticles of other metals have not been well studied by this
strategy and without ligands, their structures can be poorly defined. Palladium
(Pd) nanoparticles are under consideration for a variety of practical
applications, such as hydrogen sensors and to catalyze important chemical
reactions including several of interest for applications in renewable energy. In
this project, Dr. Amal Dass of the University of Mississippi is synthesizing
atomically precise Pd nanoparticles with specific numbers of metal atoms and
protecting ligands. Dr. Dass is integrating his research with outreach
activities including a high school student summer research program, an
undergraduate research program and science demonstrations to local and
Mississippi Delta schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr.
Dass is synthesizing atomically monodisperse palladium ultra-small
nanoparticles. Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) and
electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry are used to determine the
numbers of metal atoms, the thiolate ligands, and overall chemical composition.
Atomic structures of these nanoparticles are examined using X-ray
crystallography. Further characterization is conducted using electrochemistry,
optical spectroscopy, and electron microscopy. The effect of ligands on the
composition and structure of Pd nanoparticles is investigated and Pd alloy
nanoparticles are prepared to tune chemical and physical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.