* 1808474
* Nonequilibrium Dynamics and Thermodynamics of the Cell Cycle
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,964.00

Jin Wang of Stony Brook University is supported by the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to develop integrated theoretical
and computational methods for exploring the cell cycle of eukaryotic organisms,
using budding yeast as a model system. The Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Division of Physics, the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences also
contribute to this award. The cell cycle is critical to the replication and
division of a cell. It governs cellular proliferation and development---the
basis of life. This project is utilizing a unique combination of approaches to
understand the origin and driving forces of the cell cycle. Key genes and
regulators of the cell cycle process, critical to guaranteeing normal cellular
function, are identified through computational analysis, for comparison with
experimental data. Professor Wang's work may lead to a new understanding of the
biological functions of the cell, with implications for the maintenance of
normal cell function, critical to human health and prevention of disease. A new
teaching module, based on research from the project, is integrated into the
departmental systems biology course. The interdisciplinary nature of the
research is providing opportunities for training students from different
backgrounds in a mutual learning, collaborative environment, preparing them to
tackle problems at the nexus of these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
the cell cycle is essential to understanding the life of a single cell, the
basic unit of living systems. The global dynamical theory that Professor Wang
and his group are developing models the underlying gene regulatory network of
the cell as a chemical reaction network, with gene expression levels playing the
role of chemical state concentrations. The driving forces for transitions
between gene expression states originate in a combination of a nonequilibrium
effective potential determined by the steady state probability and the
rotational steady state flux between states of the system. The steady state
probability flux quantifies the extent of nonequilibriumness and irreversible
behavior, and provides the bridge for describing the thermodynamics of the
system in terms of its dynamics. The project is investigating the development of
a dynamical systems model of the cell cycle in terms of the gene regulatory
network. Researchers are also developing a nonequilibrium thermodynamic theory
of the cell cycle in terms of energy input, energy cost, and entropy production.
The team also couples the dynamical systems and nonequilibrium dynamics models
to enable predictions of biological observables such as cell cycle speed,
coherence, with utilization of sensitivity analysis to identify key genes and
regulators. Model predictions are being compared against time-dependent in vivo
fluorescence measurements of gene expression dynamics and correlations from
experimental collaborator Jie Xiao. The nonequilibrium dynamics and
thermodynamic theory is general and can be applied to cell cycle processes in
different organisms and associated underlying regulatory networks. This project
is enabling a deeper, quantitative understanding of the cell cycle, with
applications to normal function maintenance and disease prevention. Educational
activities include organization of a workshop, month-long program of visiting
scholars, and seminars on the interdisciplinary topics of the project. Students
are trained in theory and modeling techniques from chemistry, dynamical systems
theory, and physics, with applications to cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.