* 1808059
* Understanding the Impact of Confinement on the Dynamics of Entangled Chains
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Gerald Schneider, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The variety and flexible properties
of plastic materials (polymers) has changed our lives. The emergence of
particles with a size as tiny as a billionth of a meter (nanoparticles) can
provide even more flexible and stronger materials with superior properties as
billions of these particles can be incorporated into polymers to yield
nanocomposite materials. Modern chemistry can modify these nanoparticles at the
molecular level, which leads to a substantial impact on their material behavior,
often with unknown and novel properties. The challenge is to develop a
relationship between molecular manipulations and macroscopic properties. This
project approaches this task by controlling and varying the spatial distribution
of the nanoparticles and by modifying the polymer molecules attached to the
surfaces of these particles. The effects of nanoparticle confinement under these
conditions will then be studied using advanced experimental techniques. The
project includes the understanding of the relationship between mechanical
properties of the nanocomposite materials and the spatial distribution of the
nanoparticles, as well as the theoretical description at the molecular length-
scale. This research is also integrated with education of students and exposing
them to a variety of advanced experimental
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects imposed by nanoconfinement on polymer
melts will be studied in this research. Emphasis will be on the manipulation of
the chain dynamics by nanoparticle dispersion, surfaces, and the influence of
chains grafted to surfaces. The current understanding is limited by knowledge
gaps, which include a missing theoretical understanding of chain dynamics and
how to distinguish effects of the particle dispersion and polymer chains. A
holistic approach involving small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), dielectric
spectroscopy (DS), and rheology, will be used to develop a theory based on
recent progress to simultaneously describe the dielectric properties and
rheology of polymer melts. Composites of NTPs (tethered chains on nanoparticles)
dispersed in polymer matrices will be studied. The dispersion of the NTPs can be
controlled by the grafting density, the molecular weight of free chains, and the
corresponding characteristics of the NTPs. The static structure factor by SAXS
can be used to obtain a phase map of systems with agglomerated and non-
agglomerated particles, and to provide information on the length-scale of the
confinement. The influence of the additional confinement imposed by
nanoparticles on the chain dynamics will be explored, together with a change of
the tube diameter of the polymer caused by surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.