* 1808945
* Collaborative Research: Student Thinking About Measurements Across the Physics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Natasha Holmes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,000.00

Student understanding of the nature of science and scientific measurement are
critical for any science curriculum. In physics, students experience the ideas
of measurement in two very different contexts: classical measurement and quantum
mechanical measurement. This project will develop a better understanding of the
ways students think about measurement in each context. It will also help us
understand relations between the two. Do students carry lines of thinking about
classical measurement into their quantum mechanics courses? When students learn
about quantum mechanical measurements, do their lines of thinking about
classical measurement change in response? This project will test how well we can
generalize existing research on student understanding of measurement. This will
be done by extending the research to new institutions, at different
instructional levels, and in quantum mechanical contexts. This study will lay
the groundwork for improving instruction related to measurement at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address two research questions. First,
it will ask how students reason about measurement across the university physics
curriculum, classically and quantum mechanically. Secondly it will ask what the
interplay is between how students reason about measurement in classical and
quantum contexts. Student understanding of classical measurement has been
characterized by a point reasoning and set reasoning paradigms. In point
reasoning, each measurement could be the true value. In set reasoning, each
measurement is an estimate of the true value. Situational interviews will cue
either classical or quantum reasoning about measurement. Some cues will come
from referring to activities in introductory labs or quantum mechanics courses.
Other cues will come from the physical environment of the interviews. Interview
results will then be analyzed to identify the relationships between reasoning
about measurement in either context. Results from the interviews will inform the
development of surveys that can be distributed more broadly to evaluate
reasoning of a wider range of students at the two institutions and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.