* 1808108
* Discovering the Facet-Selective Chemistry that Drives  Anisotropic Growth of Metal Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Wiley, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 397,253.00

Nanostructures are materials whose shape is controlled on the nanoscale, length
scales 1000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair. By controlling the
shape of nanostructures, scientists can optimize their properties for a very
wide range of applications. This can enable the production of cheaper solar
cells, higher capacity batteries, and better catalysts that lower the energy
required to produce fuels and chemicals. Many nanostructures can be grown from
atoms, resulting in nanoscale crystals suspended in liquid solutions. However,
nanostructure chemists do not completely understand the surface chemistry that
results in growing nanostructures with a certain shape. In this project, Prof.
Wiley of Duke University is developing new analytical tools and methods to test
ideas for how and why nanostructures grow to form different shapes. Such
understanding is necessary to produce large quantities of nanostructures with
precisely controlled sizes and shapes in a way that minimizes the environmental
impact of nanostructure manufacturing. Prof. Wiley works with Dr. Moffat at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology to develop these analytical
methods. They also organize symposia that bring together researchers focused on
nanostructure synthesis and surface chemistry to cross-fertilize these
disciplines with new perspectives. Prof. Wiley disseminates his work through
hands-on activities at public events. He also hosts promising high school
students in his lab for summer internships to encourage their pursuit of a
career in scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of
nanostructures relies on some form of anisotropic growth, but how and why
anisotropic growth occurs in many solution-phase metal nanostructure syntheses
remains a matter of debate. With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Wiley at
Duke University is providing new insights into the facet-selective surface
chemistry that is driving anisotropic atomic addition through the use of
electrochemical measurements on single crystal surfaces, as well as by using
nanostructures themselves as substrates for in situ electrochemical quartz
crystal microbalance, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and surface-enhanced
infrared absorption spectroscopy measurements. These measurement techniques are
being used to test the hypothesis that, in syntheses of Cu, Ag, and Au
nanowires, preferential adsorption of halides onto (100) facets promotes
adsorption of organic capping agents onto (100) facets. This in turn leads to
preferential atomic addition to (111) facets. In addition, Prof. Wiley is
determining the role of capping agents and halides in modulating the rate of
nanowire growth through a combination of in situ visualization of nanowire
growth rates, and single-crystal electrochemical measurements in the reaction
solution. This work is forging a stronger link between the fields of metal
nanostructure synthesis and electrochemistry, in part through a new
electrochemical society symposium that brings together researchers from both of
these fields. The analytical methods and deeper mechanistic understanding
developed during this project could enable the rapid development of syntheses
with higher productivities and less waste based on fast electrochemical
measurements of the conditions that promote anisotropic atomic addition. Prof.
Wiley is engaged in educational outreach through the Duke Chemistry Outreach
Program, the Durham Museum of Life and Science, and hosting high school students
in his lab for summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.