* 1808696
* Expressive Writing as an Emotion Regulation Intervention for Improving Cancer Caregiver and Patient Health
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* James Gross, Eldesouky               Lameese
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Social Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. James Gross at Stanford
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the role of emotion regulation in caregiving for cancer
patients. Caregivers play a critical role in cancer care and treatment by
providing emotional, financial, and medical support on a daily basis. With the
growing rise in cancer cases and movement towards cancer care in outpatient and
home settings, cancer caregivers' demands only continue to increase. Substantial
research suggests that the ways in which caregivers manage the demands of
caregiving can profoundly impact their health and patient's health. This project
seeks to improve cancer caregiver and patient health by enhancing healthier
emotion regulation in caregivers. In doing so, it will use a nationally
representative sample, which will increase the generalizability of its findings
to a wide range of caregivers and patients. It will also use a well-established
and low-cost emotion regulation intervention, Expressive Writing (EW), which
will ultimately pave the way for more accessible cancer caregiver interventions.

Despite the important implications of emotion regulation for the health of
cancer caregivers and patients, its role in cancer caregiving remains largely
unstudied. This project seeks to elucidate the role of emotion regulation in
cancer caregiving and to enhance healthy emotion regulation in caregivers to
improve caregiver and patient health. It will test three aims: Aim 1 will assess
the association between caregiver emotion regulation and caregiver patient
health; Aim 2 will assess the impact of an emotion regulation intervention
(Expressive Writing; EW) on caregiver and patient health; and Aim 3 determine
whether changes in caregiver emotion regulation explain EW's health impacts
post-intervention, and 3 months later. These aims will be tested in a nationally
representative sample of 500 male and female breast cancer caregivers and their
(non-metastatic) patients from three large online panels. The methods used will
include online survey measures of emotion regulation, health, and health-
relevant covariates, as well as an online 2-group randomized controlled trial
(EW vs. matched controlled condition). Findings will inform our understanding of
(1) the potentially critical role of emotion regulation in cancer caregiving,
whether EW with cancer caregivers improves the health of (2) caregivers and (3)
patients, and whether (4) emotion regulation explains why EW may improve health.
This research also holds broader insights for social psychology and affective
science by informing our understanding of how emotion regulation operates within
caregiving contexts and what the most effective ways for changing emotion
regulation are.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.