* 1808382
* Instrument Development: 4-D Super Time Resolved Microscopy (4-D STReM) for Understanding Dynamics in Porous Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Christy Landes, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 866,300.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Landes at Rice University is working to understand and
optimize processes that occur within porous materials. The goal of the project
is to develop a new type of microscope with unprecedented space and time
resolution. The Landes group's new microscope allows the study of how rare
events impact the efficiency of porous materials that are important for
catalysis, separations science, corrosion, and biology. It has been established
that it is possible to manipulate light as it interacts with molecules and
proteins. For example, Professor Landes has already shown that by shaping
light's phase, events faster than the camera frame rate can be imaged. By
incorporating new mathematical and physical tools, the current project will
result in a new instrument to image and track fast dynamics in porous materials
with optimized 3-D space and time resolution. The interdisciplinary nature of
this research effort provides participating students with a unique experience at
the interface of spectroscopy and materials science, as well as image processing
and modern information theory, and continues the strong history of cross-
disciplinary activities in science and technology at Rice University. This grant
supports Professor Landes to provide training opportunities to high school
teachers to incorporate cutting edge science into their course materials, as
well as her new effort to create a summer scientific programming course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a new microscopy technique called super
temporal-resolved microscopy (STREM) was developed. Proof-of-concept
measurements showed that STREM can improve the time resolution of traditional
wide-field cameras by at least twenty times. This development, if combined with
recent advances in 3-D imaging methods and signal processing, represents an
opportunity to resolve the multiscale, nonlinear dynamics that drive a range of
interfacial materials properties. Thus, the current project's objective is to
develop and optimize 4-D STREM, a chemical imaging method for quantifying the
nonlinear dynamics and structures in porous materials. It is hypothesized that
better 3-D sub-diffraction spatial information, coupled with improved time
resolution and signal processing algorithms, reveals heterogeneous mass
transport, chemical, and biological mechanisms occurring at porous interfaces.
The project will involve innovations in both hardware and software to improve
the temporal and 2-D spatial resolution. Additionally, a new algorithm is to be
developed to track in 3-D. Finally, the new microscope is to be used to acquire
and curate a machine learning library capable of differentiating among common
analyte, sample, and instrument conditions. A new instrument optimized for
characterizing the multiscalar physics and chemistry that underlie separations
in porous media, by improving both spatial and temporal resolution is obtained
in this project. Further, the project will result in new algorithms to extract
information from large 3-D data sets. In terms of applications, a more detailed
description of mass transport in pores and channels is a step towards predictive
separations, which are currently optimized empirically, amounting to billions of
dollars each year for industry, government, and academic
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.