* 1808344
* Gauging and Optimizing Solid-State Nanopore Sensing Performance for Polysaccharide Sensing and Glycomics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jason Dwyer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,075.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program (Division of
Chemistry), and the Nanobiosensing Program (Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems), Professor Jason Dwyer and
his group at the University of Rhode Island are developing new nanofabricated
sensors to enable better characterization of an important class of biomolecules
known as polysaccharides, or glycans. Glycans play important roles as a source
of energy, as markers in important biological processes, and can also serve
therapeutic functions - for example, the anticoagulant heparin is the most
prominent medically useful polysaccharide. Identification and characterization
of glycans can be incredibly challenging, in part because they are made from
more than 100 different sugar building blocks connected in a variety of
different ways. Drug safety can require detection of subtle and often low-
abundance variants; in 2008, failure to detect a toxic contaminant in heparin
resulted in ~100 deaths in the U.S. The Dwyer group is developing a rapid and
inexpensive tool for selective analysis/screening of glycan samples. Students
involved in this multidisciplinary work learn about nanofabrication of chemical
measurement devices that have the potential to be used easily where they are
needed, not just in a specialized chemistry laboratory staffed by highly trained
scientists. Thus, broader impacts derive not only from potential nanopore-based
assays for targets like heparin, but also from student classroom and laboratory
exposure to the principles and practice of microfluidics, 3D printing, and
computer-aided design, as well as the nature of innovation and technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken by the Dwyer group utilizes
nanopores for single molecule sensors and manipulators. Specifically,
representative polysaccharides are being targeted using thin-film silicon
nitride nanopores of varying sizes and surface chemistries (e.g. charge-
polarity). Covalent and noncovalent labelling of the glycans is used to tune
sensitivity and selectivity. Interactions among polysaccharides are also being
studied. More broadly, the work addresses the design and reproducibility of
chemically functionalized nanopores for glycomics, genomics, and proteomics,
ideally with the potential for low barriers to widespread
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.