* 1808869
* The Role of Grassroots Movements in Urban Sustainability
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Laura Pulido, Goodling                Erin
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laura Pulido
at the University of Oregon, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the role of grassroots movements in urban
sustainability transitions. Over the last two decades, the United State's
homeless population has grown substantially. At the same time, environmental
concerns have become more mainstream. As a result, public agencies are
increasingly tasked with managing conflicts that result in and from homeless
people living in urban green spaces. In response, grassroots groups are
establishing homeless rest areas. Also called tent cities or encampments (and
distinct from publicly funded highway rest areas), rest areas now exist in over
100 US cities. Rest areas typically involve a collection of tents and temporary
shelters on public and private land. They are usually managed by and for
homeless people, providing a safe place for daily life off the streets. Yet,
little research has focused on these spaces and communities in the context of
the green urbanism movement. This project addresses three questions: 1) What is
the current geography of rest areas in US cities?, 2) What is the relationship
between rest area communities and conservation organizations and public
agencies?, and 3) What role do rest area communities play in grassroots
movements for urban sustainability? This research contributes insights for
policymakers and community organizations seeking to manage urban green spaces
and address the needs of a growing homeless population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines urban socio-ecological change in an
era defined by growing mainstream environmental consciousness, green urban
development, and housing precariousness. Integrating relational/comparative
urbanism theory into an extended case method framework, this project entails an
in-depth investigation of one particular grassroots organization based in
Portland, Oregon that is known for its role in promulgating the homeless rest
area model throughout the US. The project then extends from this central case to
involve a broad survey of US rest areas (n~140) and a deeper investigation of
rest areas in four municipalities selected for their status as green cities and
their relationships to the central case, as well as for their variations in
region, broader social/EJ movement foci, and rest area developmental stages. A
national phone survey, in-person interviews, observation, and content analysis
of municipal documents and media coverage will result in a new mapping of the
role of rest area communities in urban sustainability
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.