* 1808803
* Eulemur as a Primate Model for Oxytocin System Evolution and Function
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Christine Drea, Grebe                   Nicholas
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Christine
Drea at Duke University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the role of oxytocin (OT) in primate behavior.
This project uses an animal model, a genus of Malagasy lemurs housed at the Duke
Lemur Center. Species within this genus (Eulemur) vary considerably in their
social systems, including the degree of female dominance and existence of
monogamous mating bonds. Thus, Eulemur is a natural experiment that permits an
investigation of how OT is involved in the complex nature of pair bonds.
Insights from this project will inform the literature across several scientific
fields, including zoology, evolutionary biology, and neuroscience. More broadly,
findings from this project have the potential to inform efforts to harness OT
for therapeutic purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional significance of the
neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) has become a topic of debate within social
endocrinology. Evolutionary biologists have argued that ancestral functions for
OT were co-opted in some species to mediate formation and maintenance of other
social bonds. A large literature supports and espouses OT's potential as a
biological foundation for the interdependent relationships, including monogamous
pair-bonds, characteristic of highly social species. Psychological studies
report a number of both prosocial and anti-social effects or correlates of OT.
Functional interpretations are often derived from model systems of a single
species. Evolutionary biologists argue that model systems do not sufficiently
represent the diversity of mammalian socio-ecologies. This project expands the
current state of knowledge in behavioral OT research by collecting behavioral,
hormonal, and anatomical data on the OT system in a unique animal model -
Eulemur, a genus of group-living primates. The combination of close genetic
relatedness and divergent social behavior within the Eulemur genus acts as a
natural experiment. Seminal studies revealed that inter-species differences in
structure and function of the OT system are essential to understanding the
biological bases of mating system variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.