* 1808286
* Small-Scale, Loop-Based Chemical Separations and In-line Sampling Employing Magnetoelectrochemical Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Ingrid Fritsch, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2023
* USD 451,244.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division. Professor Ingrid Fritsch of the University of Arkansas is
developing a fast and versatile approach for screening components of crude
synthetic mixtures of biologically-relevant chemicals in ultrasmall volumes.
This new approach to chemical separations does not require high pressures nor
high voltages. It also minimizes expense and improves portability. To meet these
separation challenges, magnets and electricity are used to propel the fluid
mixtures in the separation system. The system is essentially an indefinitely
extended loop where analytes are separated. Each component is removed in a
programmable fashion as it pulls away from the others so that separation
conditions can be optimized for the rest. This approach advances opportunities
for and has economic bearing on drug design, such as in peptide therapeutics,
and other chemical products of interest for medical, pharmaceutical, and
environmental uses. In an outreach partnership with High School teachers, a
self-sustaining summer science workshop, developed by students, for students,
focuses on concepts in the research project while highlighting the
personalization and humanization of the science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, high-efficiency chemical separations at the small scale with the
ability to program column length "on-the-fly" are being developed.
Magnetoelectrochemical pumping in loop-based microfluidic channels, combined
with ultrasensitive in situ detection of separations, determine conditions for
the best separation efficiencies of mixtures focused on therapeutic peptides.
Complementary fluorescence techniques are used, including total internal
reflection, wide field imaging, and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. An
in-line sampling approach enables near real-time monitoring and tuning of
separations. In addition, numerical simulations in three dimensions provide a
better understanding of experimental results and suggest designs for improved
efficiencies. Personnel at the University of Arkansas partner with a public high
school, Haas Hall Academy to initiate and foster a self-sustaining week long
summer science workshop. In an outreach partnership with High School teachers, a
self-sustaining summer science workshop is under development. Broader impacts to
society include facilitation of therapeutic peptide drug design and development
through the screening of small quantities of synthetic mixtures with minimal
expense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.