* 1808900
* Graphene Encapsulated Growth of 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 430,000.00

Nontechnical description: The project explores the use of graphene encapsulated
growth for the formation of single layer (also known as two dimensional) of
traditionally three dimensional materials with a specific focus on materials
that emit light in the ultraviolet range. The graphene encapsulated growth
process, which was initially demonstrated for the synthesis of two dimensional
gallium nitride, involves the diffusion and reaction of growth species within
the ultrathin space that is present beneath graphene formed on silicon carbide.
The research, which combines both experimental studies and molecular
simulations, is aimed at developing a fundamental understanding of the synthesis
process, aiming to achieve improved control and scalability, as well as to
expand the technique to the synthesis of other two dimensional nitrides and
oxides. The realization of large area, uniform and reproducible two dimensional
nitride and oxide films impacts a range of technologies including quantum
communication and computing, ultraviolet emitters and detectors and high
frequency/high power electronics. The activities provide collaborative research
opportunities for a graduate student, a postdoctoral scholar and several
undergraduate students and also engages high school students from
underrepresented groups and economically disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The research focuses on
fundamental studies of defects and growth chemistry relevant to the synthesis of
two dimensional nitride and oxide films via graphene encapsulated growth within
a metalorganic chemical vapor deposition environment. Experimental studies focus
on controlling the type and density of defects in the graphene layer in order to
understand their impact on the adsorption and reaction of gallium and nitrogen
precursors as assessed by surface chemical analysis. Collaborative research
employs atomic resolution characterization techniques including scanning
tunneling microscopy and aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron
microscopy with chemical analysis to provide detailed insights on defects and
the structure and chemistry of synthesized materials. The experiments are
supported by atomistic-scale simulations, which are used to study precursor
thermal decomposition and adsorption on the graphene surface, species transport
on and through the graphene layer and sub-surface reactions that lead to gallium
nitride formation. To enable these simulations, the research team extends
existing ReaxFF parameter sets to gallium/graphene systems and uses these, in
conjunction with molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo techniques, to study
chemical and diffusion events. The studies also extend the technique to
investigate the synthesis of other two dimensional nitrides and oxides. The
overall goal of the project is the development of graphene encapsulated growth
as a general platform for the synthesis of novel two dimensional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.