* 1808048
* In-Situ Studies of the Electrochemical Deposition of Functionalized Poly(thiophene) Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* David Martin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 441,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certain organic "plastic"
materials known as conjugated polymers are able to conduct electrical charge in
a manner similar to traditional metals and semiconductors. These substances are
of considerable scientific and commercial interest for a wide variety of
applications including energy storage, chemical sensors, and biomedical devices.
However, the fundamental mechanisms by which these materials transition from
small-molecule liquids to polymer solids are not well understood. This lack of
scientific understanding limits the ability to precisely tailor these materials
for specific purposes. Specialized electron-microscopic sample stages are now
available that allow for detailed local studies of the formation of these
materials, revealing previously unknown aspects of this complex process. This
project will monitor the local shape and chemistry of the reaction products
formed as the material proceeds from precursor liquids, through sticky
intermediates, to the final solid conjugated polymer products using a high-
resolution electron microscope and related analysis techniques. The work will
also enable graduate students in materials science and engineering to obtain
specialized advanced education and establish new insights about the formation of
polymers from small molecules using an electrochemical reaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been previously established that in-situ,
environmentally-controlled electron-microscopic sample stages can be used to
directly monitor the electrochemical transition from a solution of liquid
organic monomer 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) to the final
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) conjugated polymer product using low-
dose transmission electron microscopy (TEM). However many fundamental questions
remain unknown about the process, including the influence of comonomers and
introduction of solid nanoparticles in the reaction medium. This research
project will quantify the influence of these variations in chemistry and
composition on the deposition process, particularly the nucleation, growth, and
redissolving of oligomer droplets back into solution when using a more
hydrophilic co-monomer (EDOTacid). The TEM experiments will be complemented with
methods able to provide additional information about the chemical changes
associated with the reaction, including optical microscopy, nanoscale FTIR/AFM,
and microfocused Raman spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.