* 1808307
* Collaborative Research: Precise and Dexterous Single-Particle Manipulation Using Non-uniform AC Magnetic Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Rui Qiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 214,390.00

High-precision manipulation of single micro-particles such as biological cells
and colloids in the liquid environment is a critical process in applications
such as single-cell analysis. A myriad of methods has been developed to achieve
such manipulation. However, few of them can simultaneously meet all the
requirements in practical applications, e.g., high precision, robustness,
ability to move particles along arbitrary paths, low cost, and good
biocompatibility. Recently the principal investigators discovered a new kind of
particle manipulation method, i.e., using non-uniform alternating magnetic
fields to actuate an anisotropic magnetic cluster and further applying the
actuated cluster to manipulate nonmagnetic particles. Unlike other magnetic
manipulation methods, this method requires only low-frequency, weak magnetic
fields, and two orders of magnitude less power to achieve the same transitional
speed, and the entire setup is extremely cost-effective. However, the
fundamental mechanisms underlying this method are not clear and the parameters
to precisely control the cluster motion are unknown. This project seeks to
resolve this challenge and thus to create a precise, dexterous, low-cost, and
biocompatible method for manipulating single particles. The project can
potentially enable better single-cell analysis and make such analysis more
accessible to research and educational communities, thereby creating great
scientific and societal impact. The project includes education programs
involving undergraduate students with diverse ethnical backgrounds and regional
K-12 students. Discoveries from the project will be disseminated to technical as
well as general audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is
to understand, prefect, and apply the newly discovered magnetic particle
actuation method through two specific aims: (1) to understand the actuation of
single magnetic particles using non-uniform alternating magnetic fields; (2) to
investigate nonmagnetic particle manipulation through the actuation of single
magnetic particles. These aims will be achieved by integrating magnetic particle
fabrication, experimental characterization of particulate dynamics in liquids,
and multiphysics simulations. These interdisciplinary activities will benefit
from the synergistic collaboration of the two research teams at University of
Georgia and Virginia Tech, which have a fruitful history of collaboration and
demonstrated expertise in material synthesis, instrumentation, and experimental
and computational studies of particle transport in low-Reynolds number flows.
The results from this project will provide both the theoretical basis and
practical guidelines for the effective design of systems to manipulate single
particles and cells. This project will also create new knowledge on the dynamics
of magnetic particles in liquid environments and hydrodynamic actuation of
particles in low-Reynolds number flows, thereby simultaneously contributing to
the fields of magnetic actuation, fluid dynamics, particle assembly, and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.