* 1808289
* RUI: Thermoreversable hydrogen bonding in mesogenic assembly: enhancing mesogen structure, stability and formation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kurt Wiegel, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 291,328.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals (LCs) are in
everything that has a digital display: phones, laptops and tablets. They are
amongst the most important optically active molecules in the world. Liquid
crystalline phases are formed when shaped molecules, called mesogens, align as a
liquid. Common wisdom has been that LC phases have a very delicate structure and
miniscule amounts of structural or physical defects can destroy it. The ability
of a liquid crystalline phase to self-repair or heal would be very significant
to understanding how these molecules align under adverse conditions. This
project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, investigates new concepts of liquid
crystalline networks that are capable of healing and repairing any structural
damage that may occur. By changing the type of molecular bonding in the liquid
crystal structures, the principle investigator and his group develop a new
approach that allows liquid crystal networks to re-form/self-repair, if chemical
bonds are broken. Beyond its scientific impact this project enhances the
research infrastructure and support human resource development at the University
of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. The University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire is a low-cost
public institution that has a long-established tradition of strong
undergraduate/faculty research collaboration. Almost half of the student body
are low-income, first generation students, and about 60% are female, both of
which are underrepresented in the scientific communities. This research project
greatly enhances student training and intellectual development through hands-on
experience with sophisticated equipment and offers the students opportunities to
present their findings at national meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
assembly of liquid crystalline materials using non-covalent interactions offers
many interesting features involving living polymeric systems and the ability of
the mesogens to self-heal and repair macroscale structural defects. Liquid
crystalline networks are an area that has received considerable attention due to
the ability of the materials to couple the order of the mesogenic directors to
the elasticity of the materials. The application of thermoreversible assemblies
to liquid crystalline networks is a relatively unexamined area. The ability to
combine the healing and reversibility of the hydrogen bond with the
characteristics of a crosslinked mesogenic system could produce materials with
very intriguing characteristics and properties. This project, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, enables the synthesis of a series of liquid crystal precursor
networking agents in which the hydrogen bond acceptor is distanced from the
central carbon. By varying the functionality of the molecule, the distance from
the assembly point to the central carbon (increasing chain length) and the size
and rigidity of the hydrogen bond acceptor, the effect of this distal
crosslinking on the ability of a hydrogen-bonded liquid crystalline polymer and
network to form is investigated. A corollary study determines the effects of
using the double hydrogen bond assemblies of the 2-pyridone functionality to
create liquid crystalline polymers. In these a series of 2-pyridone aromatic
ester tectons are created with variable structure and spacer lengths to
determine the effect on mesophase stability and structure, which are studied
using spectroscopic, X-ray and thermal analytical techniques. The creation of
these new liquid crystalline systems provides valuable insight into the ability
of a mesophase to stabilize in unfavorable, constrained (networked) conditions,
as well as an understanding of systems assembled through multiple hydrogen bond
assemblies. Imparting new characteristics to liquid crystalline systems provides
new materials, combining the stabilities of covalent species with the lability
and healing capabilities of hydrogen bonded associative chain
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.