* 1808635
* Exploring Luttinger Liquid Physics in Carbon Nanotubes with Combined Electrical and Optical Probes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Feng Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 389,999.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand a new
state of electrons known as a Luttinger Liquid where electrons can behave like a
liquid, in one-dimensional carbon nanotubes. This research will not only answer
basic questions on the nature of unique electron states, but also be of great
technological importance. For example, the unique properties of a Luttinger
Liquid of electrons in carbon nanotubes can lead to new and robust sub-
wavelength circuits and single-directional propagation of signals that are
tunable with a simple electric field that cannot be achieved with current
technology. In addition, the project offers an excellent opportunity to expose
graduate and undergraduate students to a variety of advanced experimental skills
and interdisciplinary research. The principle investigator will also reach out
to a broader outside community on K-12 education through established
collaboration with Cal-Teach program at Berkeley. The project will also broaden
participation of underrepresented researchers by engaging female graduate
students and underrepresented undergraduate in the research
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;One-dimensional
Luttinger liquid establishes a new paradigm of strongly correlated electron
system qualitatively different from Fermi liquid. The principle investigator
will study novel Luttinger liquid phenomena in carbon nanotubes building upon
his pioneering work on single-tube spectroscopy and near-field infrared
nanoscopy of carbon nanotubes. Specifically, the principle investigator will
explore three exciting directions: (1) Parameter-free test of Luttinger liquid
phenomena in metallic carbon nanotubes, where combined electrical tunneling and
optical nanoscopy allows for independent determination of electron correlation
power law index and Luttinger liquid interaction parameter. (2) Exploration of
excited state dynamics of tunable nonlinear Luttinger liquid in semiconducting
nanotubes. It can unravel unusual plasmon dissipation beyond the Landau damping
mechanism in strongly correlated one dimensional electrons. (3) Non-equilibrium
Luttinger liquid phenomena in strongly biased metallic and semiconducting
nanotubes. It will enable the observation of novel Luttinger liquid behavior far
from equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.