* 1808332
* Biophysical Regulation of Chemical Communication in Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Douglas Tobias, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division of NSF is funding Prof. Allon Hochbaum and Prof. Douglas Tobias at the
University of California, Irvine to study the role of detergent-like moecules
called biosurfactants in bacterial communication. Bacteria communicate using
chemical signals to coordinate behavior throughout dense communities, called
biofilms. These coordinated behaviors result in the colonization of surfaces by
biofilms, which is problematic in various industrial settings, but biofilms of
beneficial microbes also demonstrate great potential in areas of energy,
environmental remediation, and waste and chemical processing applications. To
control the cultivation or eradication of biofilms in these different scenarios
requires an understanding of the compounds and mechanisms responsible for their
formation and disassembly. Recent work has established a new role for
biosurfactants in mediating bacterial communication. Funding for this project
supports microbiological, analytical chemistry, and chemical modeling approaches
to advance our understanding of the mechanisms by which bacterial biosurfactants
affect chemical communication pathways in biofilms. Research funded by this
program supports graduate and undergraduate student training in diverse and
interdisciplinary methods related to studies in chemical biology of
microorganisms. In the course of this project, these students also develop
tools, such as modeling scripts, experimental methods, and bacterial strains,
that will be used as part of the labs' educational outreach programs for primary
and secondary school programs at UC Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
supported by this award will use techniques from microbiology, analytical
chemistry, and molecular dynamics (MD) modeling to advance our understanding of
the mechanisms by which bacterial biosurfactants affect chemical signaling
pathways via cell membrane modulation. A biofilm dispersal assay is used to
determine the critical chemical substituents responsible for the biophysical
mechanism of activity of a class of glycolipid surfactants, called rhamnolipids.
Mutant strains with truncated surfactant biosynthesis and the purification of
specific rhamnolipid congeners are used to generate a suite of chemically varied
rhamnolipid structures. Mass spectrometry characterizes the effects of specific
rhamnolipid exposure, in combination with an acyl-homoserine lactone signaling
compound, on intracellular levels of secondary metabolites regulating biofilm
and free-swimming phenotypes. Specific mechanistic insight is provided by
coupled mass spectrometry, NMR, and MD simulations of bacterial membranes to
determine the localization, chemical and biophysical effects of different
rhamnolipids on the membrane permeability of specific signaling compounds. These
techniques are further applied to known biosurfactants and other amphiphilic
signaling compounds produced by a variety of bacteria to advance our
understanding of the roles of specific and non-specific chemical and biophysical
interactions in determining bacterial community
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.