* 1808133
* Electrochemical Imaging with Ion Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 03/31/2022
* USD 729,700.00

This research project is funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program
of the Division of Chemistry. Professor Lane Baker of Indiana University is
developing new tools to measure very small concentrations of ions, molecules,
and proteins at scales that are smaller than an individual cell. To meet this
challenge, new instruments are being constructed that make use of advanced
signal processing and new chemical and biochemical sensors. Chemically selective
imaging provides new nanoscale information related to nerve communication and
wound healing. This research advances the understanding of molecular biology,
and in turn informs efforts to improve human health and the treatment of
disease. Students trained in this project learn state-of-the-art fabrication,
measurement and characterization protocols, which add to their high-level
technical skills. This education enhances their contributions to the STEM
workforce upon their graduation. In addition, efforts to improve education at
the undergraduate and graduate level, and to engage the local community in
science outreach are underway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
sensing and imaging with chemical selectivity at the nanoscale, a significant
goal for modern bioanalytical chemistry. This objective is accomplished by
integrating ion channels at the probe tip in scanning ion conductance microscopy
(SICM). An SICM with ion channels sequestered at the tip is developed as an
imaging platform designed around a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
processor. This is a new tool to investigate local, temporal release of high-
value, but difficult to study biological analytes. The developed instrumentation
is used to probe local distribution and release of neurotransmitters in
differentiated PC12 cells as well as the transient ion concentration in
epithelial wound models. Broader impacts focus on two specific aims. The first
aim is the development of new ways to teach analytical chemistry at the graduate
and undergraduate level. This includes the inclusion of instrument building (3D
printer construction) and development of a regional graduate analytical
chemistry course between Indiana University, Purdue University and the
University of Notre Dame. The second aim is to make full use of outreach
activities with the student Electrochemical Society (ECS) chapter at Indiana
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.