* 1808672
* Novel DNA cross-links
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Kent Gates, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2022
* USD 455,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology are funding Dr. Kent S. Gates from the University of Missouri
to investigate the chemistry of unavoidable DNA damage that takes place within
living systems. Damage to DNA in cells is important because it can influence
aging or it may cause cancer, for example. Cross-links that permanently join the
two single strands of the DNA double helix may prevent the strand separation
required for the read-out of the genetic information stored in the sequence of
bases in the double helix. The molecular nature of the cross-links formed in
cellular DNA is unknown. The Gates group is investigating errors in crosslinking
DNA strands that may represent biologically-important DNA damage. Professor
Gates studies the chemical details of the formation of these crosslinks and the
impact they have on the DNA structure. The project provides excellent training
in the use of chemical and biochemical techniques for a diverse group of
graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Missouri. The work
develops methods and materials that can be used by other researchers who study
DNA damage in living systems. Additionally, Professor Gates develops a new
Chemistry Engagement Program to foster interest in the chemical sciences of 8th
and 9th grade students. This program helps students prepare for chemistry and
other science majors in college and makes them aware of diverse STEM career
options. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation that elaborate interstrand cross-
link repair pathways are retained across all walks of life suggests that the
formation of endogenous cross-links in cellular DNA is unavoidable. The
molecular nature of endogenous cross-links generated in cellular DNA remains
unknown. Professor Gates' research builds on the recent finding that the
alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehyde sugar remnant (3'-dRP) arising from cleavage of
true abasic sites in duplex DNA can react with an adenine residue on the
opposing strand to forge an interstrand cross-link adjacent to a strand break.
It is striking that this common type of DNA damage in the genome has the
potential to generate interstrand cross-links, which are among the most
deleterious of all lesions. Therefore, 3'-dRP-derived cross-links are potential
candidates for unavoidable endogenous cross-links in cellular DNA. These cross-
links could be relevant to mutagenesis, evolution, aging, neurodegeneration, and
cancer. The importance of the proposed work on 3'-dRP-derived cross-links is
anchored in the unprecedented structure and mechanistic origin of the lesions
along with their potential biological significance as unavoidable endogenous DNA
damage. The research is focused on the characterization of the formation and
properties of 3'-dRP-derived cross-links with canonical nucleobases in various
sequences of duplex DNA, the study of how glutathione modulates the cross-
linking, and the elucidation of the chemical structure and cellular occurrence
3'-dRP-derived cross-links using rigorously-characterized synthetic standards
combined with LC-MS/MS analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.