* 1808258
* Designing light-matter hybrid states for high-performance organic (opto)electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Oksana Ostroverkhova, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,985.00

Non-technical Description: Interactions between organic molecules and light may
enable formation of a hybrid light-matter state (polariton). Such state has
fascinating optical and electronic properties which are of interest both from
the fundamental physics and from the applications perspective. The applications
of polaritons include lasers, sensors, devices enabling optical communications
and information processing, and many others. In this project, properties of
polaritons are explored using a combination of experimental and computational
approaches with the goal of designing next-generation organic optoelectronic
materials and device architectures that utilize enhanced light emission and/or
conductivity enabled by polaritons. The project integrates fundamental physics
with materials design and device technologies, thus providing unique educational
resources and infrastructure for graduate and undergraduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, involved in this project. The investigators
develop educational materials based on the results of the project and related
concepts and participate in a broad variety of outreach activities ranging
between lab-based demonstrations for various audiences and participation in
university-wide and department-wide outreach
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Organic
(opto)electronic materials are of interest due to their low cost and tunable
properties appropriate a broad range of applications has been demonstrated. One
of the areas that has seen a dramatic progress is the applications relying on
strong exciton-photon coupling in organic microcavities. In spite of
considerable amount of theoretical and experimental work on strong exciton-
photon coupling in organic materials, there is still a number of unresolved
fundamental issues pertaining to the nature and properties of hybrid light-
matter (polariton) states. Resolving some of these issues and providing
experimental validation for some of the recent theoretical predictions,
exemplified by that of a dark polariton (a hybrid state with unique
photophysical characteristics), is the goal of the present research. In
particular, a systematic investigation of photophysics of hybrid light-matter
states and their ability to enhance charge transport in model organic
semiconductors, chosen to be solution-processable functionalized acene and
anthradithiophene derivatives, is carried out. For this, various modalities of
optical and photoluminescence spectroscopy are combined with measurements of
charge carrier dynamics and with numerical simulations. The ultimate goal of the
research is to establish the nature and properties of hybrid light-matter states
in microcavities and on plasmonic nanostructured substrates and to quantify the
potential of such states to enhance coherent charge transport in organic
crystalline materials. More specifically, the research team seeks to establish
how the properties of polaritons evolve depending on the nature of excitonic
states in the organic semiconductor, molecular packing and disorder, and to lay
foundations for enhancing charge carrier mobility and photocurrent in high-
performance organic semiconductors via coherent hybrid
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.