* 1808771
* Optimizing frameshift suppressor tRNAs for the recoding of the genetic code
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christine Dunham, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Christine Dunham from Emory University to investigate
mechanisms to control protein expression with the goal of engineering proteins
with diverse, non-natural chemical moieties. The translational machinery of
cells is responsible for the incorporation in proteins of twenty-two amino
acids. For research and application purposes, the incorporation of non-naturally
occurring amino acids is very important and has long been recognized as an
important goal of synthetic biology. This represents a current technological
challenge. The research in Dr. Dunham's lab develops a solution to this
challenge that is based on the use of engineered molecules called transfer RNA
(tRNAs). The research in her lab is a training ground for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, who acquire interdisciplinary scientific skills at the
interface between biology and chemistry. This project is also integrated into an
outreach program whose mission is to raise the interest of high school students
in STEM, to train these students to become independent thinkers, and to help
create a diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of how to
manipulate the ribosome to express proteins containing one or more novel
chemical moieties is an important synthetic biology puzzle. The realization that
the genetic code is not immutable and that recoding events could occur has
attracted the interest of many chemical biologists. The major limitations of
previous approaches to solve this puzzle include cross-reactivity with host
translation machinery and low incorporation of engineered molecules on the
ribosome due to competition with endogenous tRNAs. This proposal centers on
expanding the coding capacity of tRNAs using the novel and innovative strategy
of rational, structure-based redesign of frameshift suppressor tRNAs and
biochemical and structural biology approaches. Information from this study
provides new insights into the regulation of protein synthesis, a topic
critically important to a broad biomolecular and synthetic biology research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.