* 1808623
* RUI: Selenium-modified Electrodes: From Surface Reactivity to Biosensing Developments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Marisa Buzzeo, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 301,381.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Marisa Buzzeo of Barnard College and her team of
undergraduate research students study how biological molecules communicate via
the transfer of electrons. The tunable chemical reactivity that is accessible by
the transfer of electrons is harnessed by Nature in a wide range of important
biochemical processes. Photosynthesis and cellular respiration, for example,
rely on the exquisite sensitivity and selectivity with which electrons are
transferred between molecules. The Buzzeo group is focusing on the chemical
properties of the essential trace element selenium, a natural antioxidant, to
gain a deeper understanding of its unique role in biological electron transfer
events. Their studies provide fundamental information regarding the reactivity
distinctly afforded by the presence of this element. Findings from their work
also have the potential to result in selective sensing of selenium- and sulfur-
containing molecules, including in clinical settings. This project provides
multiple interdisciplinary research opportunities for students at Barnard
College, a liberal arts undergraduate institution for women, and bolsters the
participation of underrepresented groups in the physical sciences via community-
based outreach activities involving high school students from disadvantaged
backgrounds and individuals with disabilities. The aim is to expose both groups
to chemical concepts, applications, and careers that would otherwise appear
unattainable or inaccessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate measurement of
redox potentials is imperative for detailed understanding of how species
participate in electron-transfer reactions. Electrochemical studies of
chalcogen-containing molecules are hindered by unwanted oxidation and adsorption
on electrode surfaces. New electrode materials have been identified that
demonstrate great promise for the aqueous measurement of chalcogen-containing
redox-active molecules. It has been shown that the intrinsic reactivity between
selenium and gold yields a stable and reproducible electrode surface
modification that makes accessible diffusional electron transfer of solution-
based chalcogen analytes. The Buzzeo group is working to characterize selenium-
modified electrodes by a combination of spectroscopic and electrochemical
techniques. Specifically, they are measuring the electrochemical behavior of
biological selenium and sulfur species on selenium-modified gold substrates to
obtain fundamental thermodynamic parameters, and using the optimized selenium-
modified surfaces to develop a portable electrochemical biosensor for cystine, a
known culprit in kidney stone formation. Aided by collaborations across several
departments and institutions, the work entails characterization of both surface
and solution speciation to build a molecular-level description of the selenium-
gold adsorbate layer. Sensing capabilities are assessed through comprehensive
electroanalytical study of selenium- and sulfur-containing amino acids,
peptides, and ligands. Together these pursuits will yield fundamental knowledge
about selenium-gold surface reactivity and will enable measurement of
physiologically relevant redox-active species. The work offers Barnard
undergraduates research training at the interface of physical, inorganic,
analytical, and biological chemistry. Additionally, the work includes
educational activities involving high school students from disadvantaged
backgrounds and individuals with disabilities to promote a more diversified STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.