* 1808026
* Collaborative Research: Decoding and encoding mechanistic relations between structure and function in crack resistance of articular cartilage and cartilage inspired biomaterials.
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Moumita Das, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,999.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage is a soft tissue
which provides a smooth cushion and distributes mechanical load in joints. As a
material, articular cartilage is remarkable. It is only a few millimeters thick,
can routinely bear up to ten times one's body weight over 100-200 million
loading cycles, and still avoids fracturing. The simultaneous strength, fracture
resistance (toughness), and longevity of native articular cartilage remains
unmatched in synthetic materials. Such properties are desperately needed for
tissue engineering, tissue repair, and even soft robotics applications. The
molecular mechanism underlying this exceptional toughness, however, is not well
understood. This project will obtain an understanding of the underlying
principles and mechanisms that lead to the toughness of articular cartilage, and
provide criteria, as we do for cracks in airplane wings, for predicting the
probability that initially untreated tears in cartilage will fracture further.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will test the hypothesis that cartilage has such
terrific properties due to the fact that it is comprised of two interweaving
polymer networks, one which provides mechanical rigidity and one that provides
dissipation. Moreover, this double network changes in composition with location
in the tissue. These ideas will be tested using numerical simulation and
comparison with experimental measurements of the tissue mechanical properties.
Using this integrated approach, the PIs will elucidate mechanical structure-
function relations underlying fracture toughness of articular cartilage (AC)
which will lead to better predictions of cartilage mechanics and failure, and
guide the design of new bioinspired materials. The project will provide insights
into tissue failure, tissue repair therapies, and design principles for soft
robotics. PIs will educate and train a new generation of scientists who
understand physics, engineering, and biology, organize workshops aimed at
teaching communication skills to graduate students, and promote diversity in
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular Cartilage (AC) is a soft tissue that
covers the ends of bones to distribute mechanical load in joints. AC contains
relatively few cells and its network-like extracellular matrix primarily
determines its mechanical response. Its strength, toughness, and crack
resistance are extremely high compared to synthetic materials, but the molecular
mechanism underlying this exceptional toughness is not well understood. Given
the heterogeneous, depth dependent, and multi-component structure and
composition of AC, existing continuum descriptions are too coarse-grained to
fully describe its fracture mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
address this challenge by approaching cartilage fracture with a new structure
function framework that combines rigidity percolation theory and microscale
double-network hydrogel models, together with new confocal elastography
experiments that can inform and interface with the model development. Using this
integrated approach consisting of multi-scale mathematical modeling and state-
of-the art experiments, they will test the hypothesis that the toughness of AC
arises because (i) the reinforcing network state is in proximity to a mechanical
phase transition allowing tunable mechanical response, and (ii) the tissue is a
multi-component heterogeneous composite enabling novel response to stress and
blunting of cracks. The project will obtain an understanding of the dependence
of cracks on structure and composition of cartilage and similar soft tissues, as
well as on loading conditions, and provide insights into tissue failure, and
tissue repair therapies. More broadly, this new framework will enable novel and
concrete predictions on how these structure, composition, and constitutive
mechanical properties can be tuned to resist, and blunt cracks in biomimetic and
engineered materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs will educate and train a new
generation of scientists who understand physics, engineering, and biology, and
promote diversity in STEM workforce. Cohen and Bonassar will develop soft-skills
curriculum units for graduate students and postdocs based on a recent science
communication workshop held at Cornell by the Alan Alda Center for Communicating
Science. Das will mentor minority and 1st generation students via RIT's McNair
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.