* 1808199
* Multi mode Mass Spectrometric Imaging of Nanomaterials and their Biochemical Effects
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Vincent Rotello, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Vachet and Rotello and their groups at University of
Massachusetts, Amherst are developing new approaches to tracking nanomaterials
in biological samples. Nanomaterials are increasingly present in commercial
products, and have potential to improve the efficacy of therapeutics through
their use as drug delivery agents. To properly understand the potential
biological consequences of such materials, new measurement methods are needed
that can report on the distributions and biochemical effects of nanomaterials.
Professors Rotello and Vachet are developing new imaging tools that can
simultaneously monitor the distribution of nanomaterials in tissues while also
providing site-specific information about their biochemical effects. The
proposed imaging methods rely on sophisticated laser-based mass spectrometry
which can also provide fundamental information about the interactions of light
with nanomaterials. The new methods developed in this proposal can also provide
information about how nanomaterial properties, such as size and composition,
affect biochemistry and their distributions in vivo. A diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project obtain training in
cutting-edge mass spectrometry and nanotechnology, two areas of broad
importance.

The Vachet/Rotello group is developing new imaging approaches that use matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI MS) to
simultaneously track nanomaterials, their associated molecules, and biomolecules
(e.g. lipids, metabolites) in tissues. They are exploring how the MALDI matrix
and the nanomaterial core material can work synergistically to enhance
detection. They are also developing new computational approaches to fuse images
obtained by laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma MS (LA-ICP MS) and MALDI
MS. Target test applications focus on the effects of nanoparticle-stabilized
capsules on tissue biochemistry. The PIs provide regular updates of their
research and other related research on the National Nanomanufacturing Network
(NNN) website, www.internano.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.