* 1808414
* Collaborative Research: Tuneable cross-conjugated organic semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Aimee Tomlinson, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 105,000.00

Professors Malika Jeffries-EL of Boston University and Aimee Tomlinson of
University of North Georgia are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop new
carbon-based materials - organic semiconductors - that combine the properties of
organic materials with the optical and electronic properties of conventional
inorganic semiconductors. These complex materials are of technological
importance as they can be fabricated into devices for use in a variety of
different areas including energy (solar cells), displays, (light emitting
diodes), and electronics (field effect transistors). During the course of this
project, conjugated materials based on the cross-like motif are designed by
Tomlinson's team using computational methods in order to identify the most
promising candidates for synthesis and characterization by the Jeffries-EL
group. This research enhances our understanding of how structure impacts its
material properties, and how these properties then impact its performance in
various applications. In addition to supporting basic research, this grant
provides interdisciplinary research experiences for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The broader impacts of this grant include the development of
highly qualified scientists with extensive experience working on complex
interdisciplinary projects in a diverse environment. Since the University of
North Georgia is located in the foothills of the Blue Ridge mountain range a
number of first generation and underrepresented undergraduates are given the
opportunity to be involved in this project. Additionally, Dr. Jeffries-EL
fosters interest in materials chemistry in underrepresented high school students
through the Achievement, Self-Awareness, Communication, Engagement, Networking
and Developmental Skills (ASCEND) outreach program targeting low-income and
underrepresented minority students in grades 9-12. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project further advances the field of organic semiconductors through an
investigation of structure-property-morphology relationships in cross-conjugated
benzobisoxazoles (BBOs). Cross-conjugated molecules, which are systems with two
orthogonal conjugation paths that intersect through a central aromatic ring, are
especially advantageous for organic semiconducting applications as this
arrangement leads to spatial segregation of the frontier molecular orbitals
(FMOs). Consequently, it is possible to selectively tune the FMOs and band gaps
through aryl group substitution along the various axes as a result of extension
of the pi system and inductive effects. The benefits of the approach are that
the cross-conjugated platform allows for the opportunity to optimize the
material's optical and electronic properties for specific applications. Based on
the insights from the previous grant period, there are several opportunities for
the rational design of new materials, specifically architectures for narrow
band-gap materials for photovoltaic cells and wide band gap materials which can
be used as either blue emitters or hosts in organic light emitting diodes. A
combination of theory, synthesis, device fabrication and characterization are
utilized to identify and generate new materials as well as provide insights on
how to design future materials. The simple iterative approach allows for easy
synthesis of the target materials and structure-property studies advance the
rational design of new materials with characteristics that are tunable and
predictable. As such this work is expected to impact the field of organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.