* 1808492
* The Role of Salt Bridges on Gas Phase Protein Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joseph Loo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry,
supports Professors Rachele Loo and Joseph Loo at the University of California-
Los Angeles (UCLA). With growing interest in biotech and pharmaceutical fields
to develop therapeutic protein-based drugs, the need to understand the exact
structures of large biomolecules is expanding. Despite the growing interest in
this field, there remains a large gap in the fundamental understanding of how
the structure of a protein and/or protein complex dictates the measurements.
This research seeks to fill this knowledge gap by detailing how making the
measurement itself can change the protein or protein complex. Mass spectrometry
(MS) techniques are used to analyze biological samples that are important to the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. The broader impacts of this work
include providing fundamental knowledge of protein structure that are important
to disease research in medicine. The research team designs chemical analysis
laboratories for advanced high school students in South Los Angeles? Biotech
Career Pathways Program. This program exposes students to life science careers
and provides technical skills in viable STEM related fields used in
biotechnology, medicine, and government regulatory
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent of stabilization that ion pairs (salt
bridges) provide to gas phase proteins and protein complexes delivered by
electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS is addressed by monitoring the charge state-
dependent activation and dissociation behaviors of gas-phase complexes.
Considerable evidence exists that not all opposing charges are neutralized in
ESI; therefore, limited activation can reorient negatively charged side chains
into positions well-placed to interact with cationic sites, replacing solvent
molecule "glue" formerly stabilizing subunit interfaces with salt bridges. The
goals of this research include demonstrating the means by which the opposite
charge contributions to ESI-generated ions can be manipulated. The project also
tests trends predicted by models; e.g., effects on gas phase cross-sections, on
the products and charge-state distributions arising from collision induced
dissociation of gas phase assemblies, and on the relationship between gas and
solution phase structures of intrinsically-disordered proteins. The
investigations test whether the charge state-dependent activation and
dissociation behaviors observed in ESI-MS reflect how Coulomb repulsion
destabilizes high charge state species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.