* 1808162
* Rational development of next-generation shape memory alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2021
* Joost Vlassak, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 433,495.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are materials that
undergo large shape changes when their temperatures are changed. This unique
property makes SMAs ideal for the fabrication of powerful yet lightweight
actuators for a variety of applications. While SMAs have already been adopted in
a number of commercial technologies - from image stabilizers in smart phones to
tools for minimally invasive endovascular surgery - the relatively low operating
temperatures of commercially available SMAs (typically between room temperature
and 100 degrees C) make them unsuitable for many applications. New alloys are
needed that operate at either much higher or much lower temperatures to prevent
inadvertent actuation by ambient temperature fluctuations or to allow operation
under adverse conditions. In this project, a framework for the rational design
of novel SMAs will be developed. The framework will couple high-throughput
computational and experimental techniques using a physical model that
quantitatively relates material properties to physical parameters. This
framework will be used to screen a range of alloys with the goal of identifying
new families of SMAs with tailored shape memory properties in terms of operating
temperature and functional stability. The computational strategy will start with
a rapid screening for alloy endpoints that exhibit relevant characteristics of
shape memory alloys. Physical models will then be trained to rapidly interpolate
the thermomechanical properties of complex alloy compositions in the region
spanning the endpoints. Materials systems of interest identified in the
computational phase will then be investigated using state-of-the art
experimental techniques. The methodology developed in this project and the
ensuing fundamental understanding of the phase transformation responsible for
the shape memory effect will provide a pathway to the targeted design of novel
SMAs that may be used in a broad range of applications. The methodology is also
easily transferred to the design and understanding of other classes of active
materials that may be used in sensors or actuators. The computational methods
that will be developed in this project fit very well within a graduate
curriculum for computational materials science and will be incorporated in a
graduate course on computational materials design. This project will also
provide the context for a summer internship program for undergraduate students
and for high-school students from local public schools that will provide a
learning environment for students to experiment with materials, processing,
modeling, and data science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) undergo large recoverable shape
changes as a result of thermoelastic martensitic transformations. These alloys
have actuation energy densities that are an order of magnitude higher than any
other solid-state actuator and are therefore of interest for lightweight and
robust actuation systems. Nitinol, the most commonly used SMA, has actuation
temperatures slightly above ambient temperature. To fully realize the potential
of SMAs, new alloys are needed that can operate at either much higher or lower
temperatures. In this project, a framework for the rational design of novel SMAs
will be developed. The framework will couple high-throughput computational and
experimental techniques using a physical model that quantitatively relates
material properties to structural parameters. This framework will be used to
screen a range of alloys with a goal of identifying new families of SMAs with
tailored shape memory properties in terms of transformation temperature,
hysteresis and stability. The effort will initially focus on known cubic binary
and ternary phases with Fe, Cu, or Ni as the main component, and will expand as
necessary. The computational screening strategy will start with a rapid
screening for alloy endpoints that exhibit relevant characteristics of
thermoelastic martensitic transformations and stability. Promising structures
will be investigated in more detail, focusing on the temperature dependence of
their properties. Physical models will then be trained to rapidly interpolate
thermomechanical properties of complex alloy compositions in the region spanning
the endpoints. Materials systems of interest identified in the computational
phase will be investigated experimentally using sputter-deposited composition
spreads combined with combinatorial nanocalorimetry and resistivity measurement
techniques. The methodology developed in this project and the ensuing
fundamental understanding will provide a pathway to the targeted design of novel
SMAs that serve a broad range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.