* 1808704
* Collaborative Research: High-Q Magnon Crystals and Emergent Topological Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Ezekiel Johnston-Halperin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2023
* USD 389,936.00

Non-Technical Description: Magnetic materials have a long history of successful
integration with high frequency electronics dating back to the invention of the
radio and continuing through the present day in cell phones and other wireless
communication technologies. Given this central role, it is unfortunate that our
choice of materials is significantly limited by the fact that magnetic materials
in nature are exceedingly rare and our ability to predict which new materials
will have targeted magnetic properties is limited. This project fills that gap
by employing the strategy of "materials by design" to predict and produce high
quality magnetic materials that enable next-generation microwave technologies.
The envisioned materials form high quality "magnetic spray paints" that can be
patterned onto nearly any surface, enabling accurate micro-scale patterning for
materials engineering. Down-stream technological benefits range from more power
efficient microwave electronics to the potential to contribute to the
development of quantum computing and quantum communication. This work helps grow
our economy in the fast-moving technology sector by establishing a leadership
role for the US in these emerging fields and by training students in the new
techniques and new knowledge necessary to succeed in the competitive
international landscape of science and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project exploits
the ability to engineer highly coherent magnon (spin-wave) excitations in the
organic-based ferrimagnet vanadium tetracyanoethylene to explore magnonic phases
ranging from dilute gasses of magnon atoms (isolated magnetic
micro/nanostructures) and magnon molecules (coherently coupled magnon atoms), to
magnon crystals (coherently coupled arrays of atomic/molecular magnon building
blocks). For example, the PIs are investigating exotic phases such as
topologically protected modes in magnon crystals whose symmetry and structure
are based on deterministic materials design and microscale
fabrication/synthesis. This work is a joint theory/experiment collaboration, and
employs both cavity and broad-band ferromagnetic resonance and magnetothermal
transport measurements as well as numerical modeling and prediction of the
relevant magnonic states. Both PIs have a strong track record of mentoring at
all levels, and are leveraging that commitment and expertise during this program
to provide an interdisciplinary and collaborative environment for the training
of 3 PhD students. This research advances the field of coherent magnonics and
provides a deeper understanding of the role of topology in creating and
preserving coherent excitations with implications for applications ranging from
next generation microwave electronics to quantum information
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.