* 1808233
* RAPID:  Collaborative Research:  Sponge resilience in the face of multiple stressors
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2020
* Julie Olson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2020
* USD 63,446.00

Over the past several decades, coral reefs worldwide have undergone a transition
from being dominated by the corals themselves to being dominated by sponges or
algae. The causes of these changes are complex, but they include both natural
stressors, such as diseases and hurricanes, and impacts from human activities,
such as coastal development and climate change. There are over 600 species of
sponges on Caribbean coral reefs, and they serve many important ecological
roles, including nutrient cycling, providing food and shelter for other reef
animals, and producing a tremendous diversity of chemical compounds that are
important for controlling species interactions on the reef, and may serve as
potential new drugs. In spite of their importance on coral reefs, there are many
aspects of sponge biology that remain unknown, including how they respond to
different types of stressors. Coral reefs in St. Thomas, in the U.S. Virgin
Islands, are exposed to different levels of man-made stressors, depending upon
their proximity to coastal development, and the sponge assemblages on these
reefs also vary with levels of human impacts. In September 2017, St. Thomas was
devastated by two Category 5 hurricanes in a row. Since, unlike corals,
virtually nothing is known about what happens to sponge communities in the
aftermath of hurricanes, the research team will use a combination of field
ecology and population genetics approaches to determine how sponge communities
respond and recover from these devastating storms and whether prior exposure to
land-based stressors affects their recovery. Researchers at the Universities of
Mississippi, Alabama and the Virgin Islands will participate in this RAPID
project, and will provide training opportunities for students and postdoctoral
researchers, especially from underrepresented groups. Information will be
provided to resource managers in the Virgin Islands, along with outreach
programs to community groups in St. Thomas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to assess the impacts of single (e.g., hurricanes) versus
multiple (e.g., hurricanes and land-based sources of pollution) stressors on the
resilience, recovery, and recruitment of sponge communities in St. Thomas,
U.S.V.I. Given the growing dominance of sponges on coral reefs worldwide,
understanding the responses of sponges to natural and anthropogenic stressors is
increasingly important. The investigators will leverage multiple years of data
on sponge assemblages from several sites around the island of St. Thomas that
varied in their levels of exposure to local land-based stressors prior to
Hurricanes Irma and Maria, and evaluate changes to these diverse assemblages
over time, beginning within 3 months of these devastating storms. Using a
combination of natural and experimentally cleared plots, the investigators will
assess the progress of sponge succession and whether the presence of algae
interferes with sponge recruitment and recovery. Subsamples of recruits and
nearby conspecifics will be collected to evaluate population genetic diversity
and potential sources of new individuals. The data resulting from this project
will provide critical insights into sponge resilience in response to hurricanes
at sites previously exposed to land-based stressors, the initiation of
succession within sponge communities, potential predictors of successional
trajectory, and genetic diversity within sponge populations following a storm
event. This information will help identify factors that inhibit coral recovery
and potential approaches to enhance resilience of coral reefs.