* 1808671
* Substrate-Enhanced reactivity of pristine graphene in cycloaddition reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mingdi Yan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,694.00

Professors Mingdi Yan and Lawrence Wolf of the University of Massachusetts
Lowell are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
(MSN) Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop experimental and
computationally guided approaches to enhance the reactivity of pristine graphene
(a defect-free single layer, two-dimensional carbon material). The integration
of theory with experiment provides a comprehensive, fundamental understanding of
the reactions leading to the acceleration of discovery. The results have a
direct impact on the practical utilization of this material, which exhibit
extraordinary mechanical, electrical and thermal properties. Pristine graphene
has the potential to impact many technologically important applications, such as
in display screens, nanoelectronics, solar cells, and various others. Pristine
graphene offers advantages over other forms of graphene, which are either
oxidized or contain many defects. The computational modeling techniques used are
incorporated in the curriculum of new computational chemistry courses offered to
both undergraduate and graduate students. The students involved in the project
receive training in research planning and evaluation through individualized
development plans. Under-represented and female undergraduate students are
recruited to participate in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to expand the chemical space of pristine graphene. Specifically, the impacts of
substrate and interface on the reactivity of pristine graphene in cycloaddition
reactions is investigated both experimentally and computationally. Pristine
graphene is fabricated on different surfaces by chemical vapor deposition or by
transfer. Cycloaddition reactions, with initial focus on the (2+1) cycloaddition
with perfluoroaryl azides, are carried out and the products are characterized.
The study aims to shed light on the relationship between the reactivity of
graphene and its supporting substrate interface. The reactivity of pristine
graphene in other cycloaddition reactions is also a subject of this
investigation. The theoretical underpinnings of the cycloaddition
substrate/reactivity relationships with pristine graphene is established using
density functional theory through the development and application of modern
reactivity models. Pristine graphene is fairly inert chemically due to the large
resonance stabilization resulting from the delocalization of its conjugated pi
electrons over the entire two-dimensional network. Overcoming these inherent
reactivity challenges offers the ability to introduce into pristine graphene
well-defined functionalities. Other benefits include modulating graphene
solubility and bandgap, and enabling its integration into high performance
composite materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.