* 1808692
* Model Reduction of High Dimensional Hidden Markov Models and Markov Decision Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yury Polyanskiy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Intellectual Merit: We currently live in an era where data is a major currency
promising a transformative change to our society. Consequently, there has been a
surge in the use of machine learning (ML) algorithms on high dimensional data
producing unstructured stochastic models. Such models tend to be of very high
dimensions limiting their utility in various applications involving optimization
or decision systems. This proposal focuses on developing a foundational theory
for model reduction applied to classes of stochastic models, in particular,
Hidden Markov Models (HMMs); these are stochastic models that are described by
underlying finite dimensional state space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Ultimately, a model reduction theory will impact many fundamental aspects
related to complex stochastic models including simulation, prediction, coding,
robust learning, decision design and reinforcement learning. This research will
develop new insights to address similar questions for other stochastic models
including jump linear systems, and graphical models with latent variables and
will have a direct impact on problems related to artificial intelligence and
reinforcement learning. The latter is emerging as a popular approach for many
decision-systems applications involving social behavior-- where simple
mechanistic models do not exist. Examples of such problems are critical
infrastructures and smart services where high dimensional unstructured data is
available in real time. Models emerging in such approaches tend to have very
high dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A foundational theory for model reduction
will affect the way we learn and utilize complex stochastic models. As a result,
this development will enter our courses at MIT in a fashion similar to how model
reduction theory impacted courses in linear system theory. The development
should affect classes in stochastic models, machine learning, and statistical
learning theory, reinforcement learning, and AI. We also intend to incorporate
the connection between model reduction and statistical learning in our new MIT
micromasters in statistics and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.