* 1808576
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Strategies for Managing Data in Uncertainty Quantification at Extreme Scales
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tan Bui-Thanh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2023
* USD 409,829.00

The exponential increase in the quantity of measurements and data holds
tremendous promise for data-driven scientific discovery and decision making. In
many cases, data-driven scientific discovery is mathematically formulated as an
inverse problem. For inverse problems that serve as a basis for discovery and
decision-making for complex problems, the uncertainty in its solutions must be
quantified. Though the past decades have seen tremendous advances in both
theories and computational algorithms for inverse problems, quantifying the
uncertainty (UQ) in their solutions taking big-data issues into account remains
challenging. This is largely due to computationally demanding nature of existing
mathematical techniques that are unable to scale up to the amount of data being
generated. Consequently, much of the available data remains unused. This project
develops UQ algorithms that are both computationally scalable as well as
datascalable for making scientific progresses in geosciences and medical
imaging. In particular, the proposed methods are evaluated in the context of two
challenging data-driven applications: (1) from large amount of seismograms
(records of the ground motion) perform geophysical imaging to infer earth's
interior structure to better understand earthquakes, and (2) from magnetic
resonance (MR) cine images of patients estimate the heart's function (e.g.
motion, contraction) to detect early onset of heart disease
(cardiomyopathy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative
research project is to develop an integrated research program that addresses the
data management and data analytics arising from both observations and scientific
simulations, with applications from diverse domains at extreme scales. The
project develops innovative statistical, mathematical, and parallel
computational methods to manage the large amounts of simulation data as well as
the ever increasing amounts of observation data required for extreme-scale UQ
problems in general and Bayesian inverse problems in particular. These methods
will be of immediate practical utility to scientists and engineers dealing with
big data and large-scale UQ problems in sensing-based disciplines, geosciences,
climatology, medical imaging, etc. The successful completion of the project
would provide a first step towards the development of mathematical and
computational methods for a wide range of data-driven large-scale inverse and UQ
challenges that can lead to original scientific discoveries and promote the
progress of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.