* 1808027
* Dynamics of Nanoparticle-Assisted Melting and Recrystallization of Water Ice
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xingchen Ye, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,391.00

Ice melts when you raise the temperature to 0C, or 32F. Melting seems like a
simple process, but at the molecular level it is much more complicated. The
melting process starts at the surface. The reason is that a water molecule
sitting at the surface, or at the interface with another material, is surrounded
by fewer neighboring water molecules than one located deeper into the solid.
Half as many, in fact. With fewer neighbors, water molecules move more freely.
The result is the formation of a pre-melted liquid layer at the interface, even
at temperatures colder than the melting temperature. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Dragnea and Ye at Indiana University are using
sophisticated microscopy methods to study the formation of the pre-melted liquid
layer around individual gold nanoparticles embedded by ice. Their work could
have broad implications for understanding ice melting and recrystallization in
environmental and geophysical contexts, such as the melting of snow fields and
the thawing of frozen soils, and insights gained could help advance the
development of new adhesives and lubricants. The project provides training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in the development of
complex experimental methods. In addition, an entrepreneurial collaboration with
the Indiana University School of Business is introducing future scientists and
future business professionals to the process of translating inventions into
commercialized products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working alongside their students,
Professors Dragnea and Ye use laser light to excite individual gold
nanoparticles. The nanoparticles are grown by the Ye group with precise sizes
and surrounded by an organic layer and then encapsulated in ice. The formation
of pre-melted liquid layer is observed by the Dragnea group using optical and
electron microscopies. Photothermal microscopy provides insight into melting and
recrystallization of the ice near the nanoparticle surface, while interfacial
morphology is observed by graphene liquid cell transmission electron microscopy.
The temperature at which the pre-melted layer forms depends on the chemical
interaction between water molecules and the nanoparticle surface, as well as the
particle size and curvature. By studying single nanoparticles, the research team
can circumvent problems arising from the study of large collections of
particles, where particles of different sizes exhibit different pre-melting
behaviors. Experimental results are complemented by numerical simulations to
determine kinetic parameters and physical properties of the interfacial
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.