* 1808251
* Biomimetic Dendrimer-Exosome Hybrid Nanoparticles for Efficient Cancer Targeting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Seungpyo Hong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 356,226.00

Non-Technical Part: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present program is unique in that
it will mimic a naturally occurring targeting mechanism of exosomes (are cell-
derived vesicles) and take advantage of efficient targeting and tumor
penetration behaviors of dendrimers. This approach will have implications, and
potentially high reward in the emerging area of Biomimetic Nanotechnology.
Successful achievement of the proposed study will: i) significantly advance the
understanding on cancer targeting using multiple targeting mechanisms; ii)
establish a database describing biotic/abiotic combinations that control the
biological responses; and ultimately iii) present a novel, transformative
platform technology for targeted cancer therapy in a truly personalized
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the proposed biomimetic hybrid
nanoparticles will lead to a new paradigm for designing a personalized medicine
with maximum targeting efficacy, without immunogenicity issues, which will
ultimately offer an effective therapeutic delivery platform for patients
suffering from cancers and other debilitating disease. The PI will create and
expand the education and outreach activities. First, this proposed study will
provide excellent opportunities in interdisciplinary training and career
development of graduate students. Second, this project intimately incorporates
research training for undergraduate students from University of Wisconsin-
Madison as well as other local community colleges that have limited resources.
Third, this research program will be integrated with an outreach plan that aims
to provide hands-on science experiences to K-12 students and teachers to spark
their interests in STEM. For broader dissemination, we will produce a couple of
YouTube videos highlighting basic polymer chemistry and our nanocarrrier
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although recent advances in nanotechnology have
culminated in a myriad of promising delivery platforms for tumor targeting,
successful clinical implementation of such technologies has been hindered
largely due to a lack of understanding on nano-bio interactions, resulting in
unmet targeting efficacy, immunogenicity, and toxicity of nanocarriers. Here a
novel delivery system is proposed that integrates engineered poly(amidoamine)
(PAMAM) dendrimers and biologically extracted exosomes derived from human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). It is hypothesized that overall tumor targeting
of the novel biomimetic hybrid nanoparticles, or BioHNPs, will be significantly
enhanced, with minimized potential immunogenicity or toxicity concerns.
Specifically, BioHNPs will take advantage of three unique mechanisms: i) hMSC
homing to inflamed tissue, involving rolling, firm adhesion, and extravasation,
which is frequently observed in activated, angiogenic cancerous regions; ii)
dendrimer-mediated multivalent targeting; and iii) efficient penetration of
dendrimers across tumor tissue. In addition, using such exosomes derived from
individual patients as outer layers of the nanocarriers, this approach will
ultimately achieve truly personalized medicine, which will be potentially
transformative in designing and engineering not only BioHNPs proposed here but
also other novel nanocarriers. The new design of the nanocarriers will be
validated via a series of physicochemical and biological assays through
achieving three objectives: i) Functionalization and hybridization of hMSC-
derived exosomes and PAMAM dendrimers; ii) In vitro selectivity tests of BioHNPs
against endothelial and cancer cells; and iii) Tumor spheroid model study for
tissue penetration and diffusion of BioHNPs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.