* 1808394
* Chemistry of Useful Destruction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Benjamin Bythell, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2019
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Benjamin Bythell and his group at the University of
Missouri-St. Louis is developing new tools for determining the structure of
complex sugars known as "glycans." The complexity of glycans makes their
analysis challenging, but their pervasiveness in biology makes their
characterization important. The primary difficulty comes from the fact that
subtle differences in the assembly of similar components can make large
structural and - importantly - functional differences. The Bythell group is
using tandem mass spectrometry (a powerful technology for determining molecular
structure and sample composition) combined with computational modeling to enable
screening and identification of unknown glycans without the need for synthetic
standards. Resulting savings of time and money can advance the pace of
discoveries impacting areas such as medical and pharmaceutical interventions.
The work provides interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate, and high-school students, including members of underrepresented
groups.

A key aim of this research is to understand how sequence information can be
recovered following mass spectrometric fragmentation of glycans. The PI seeks to
predict ratios of fragment ions based on the energetics of the transition and
the structures of the products. Combining these two capabilities will enable
prompt generation of predicted spectra for comparison with experiments. The
approach uses computational methods combined with tandem mass spectrometry of
regioselectively labeled and sodiated glycan model compounds. Improved
understanding of fragmentation chemistry will provide greater confidence in
assignment of glycan ion structures and prediction of relative abundance,
leading to faster and more accurate identification of glycan sequences and
glycosidic bonding arrangements without the need for synthetic standards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.