* 1808509
* Mesoscale Structural Control in 2D Peptide Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Vincent Conticello, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2021
* USD 475,000.00

The meso-scale (circa 100-1000 nm) is above the nano-scale, in which molecules
and macromolecules (polymers) fit, but below of the macroscale of everyday
objects. The construction of defined structures within the meso-scale range is a
problem of significant scientific and technological interest because it is key
to the ultimate realization of "bottom-up" fabrication. This process employs
structurally- and functionally-defined nano-scale building blocks for the
creation of meso-scale objects of defined size, composition, pattern, and
morphology, which in turn represent ideal platforms for the creation of
functional devices including sensors, actuators, and tranducers. However, the
physical principles for construction of synthetic materials on the meso-scale
are not well developed in practice. In contrast, biological systems, e.g.,
cells, assemble multiple nano-scale components into exquisitely-defined,
functionally-complex meso-scale machines. Researchers in the laboratory of Prof.
Vincent Conticello at Emory University are developing principles derived from
the study of biological systems to create structurally-homogeneous, meso-scale
2D assemblies from synthetic peptides. These principles are generalizable to the
field of soft materials. The structurally-defined 2D assemblies represent
prototypes for the creation of functional devices. Concepts and principles from
this project are being utilized in the development of a new course as part of
the undergraduate curriculum reform in the Department of Chemistry at Emory
University. The reform emphasizes the integration of traditional disciplines
into themes using a blended pedagogical approach. The new introductory course
focuses on macromolecular structure and function, which is a topic rarely
covered at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
crystalline or quasi-crystalline protein assemblies present in living systems
display a range of essential biochemical functions including as molecular sieves
and barrier materials, photochemical energy transducers, selective transporters,
and signal transduction and amplification agents. The native protein assemblies
provide inspiration for the types of critical functions that could potentially
be encoded within synthetic 2D protein arrays, if their structure could be
controlled across length-scales. This proposal investigates methods to create
structurally-defined and programmable meso-scale 2D assemblies from synthetic
peptides. Peptides offer a number of advantages for the controlled fabrication
of 2D assemblies; most importantly, the sequence-specificity of peptides makes
possible molecular-level programming of hierarchical order and enhances the
capacity for rational control of the assembly . However, thus far meso-scale
structural control has been fortuitous and, this far extensive structural
polymorphism was observed for assemblies of synthetic peptide. Researchers in
the Conticello laboratory are defining methods to control the mechanism of
assembly and identify conditions that promote meso-scale structural order. Three
complementary approaches are being investigated: (1) controlled nucleation of
"living" supramolecular assemblies, (2) selective formation of heteromeric
assemblies, and (3) implementation of principles based on geometrical
frustration. Each of these practices has the potential to generate structurally-
homogeneous meso-scale 2D peptide assemblies, which in turn serve as structural
prototypes for the types of functional 2D materials employed in devices. Hence
this work addresses the opportunity implicit in the "meso-scale
challenge".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.