* 1808868
* Reinforcement Learning Theory in the Digital Age
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2020
* William Brady, Brady                   William
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Science of Learning Program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Molly J. Crockett at Yale
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating how social media environments may amplify our expression
and experience of moral outrage. More specifically, this project asks whether
the positive social feedback received on social media can make outrage
expression more rewarding and in turn, lead to the expression of outrage. This
project will contribute to an understanding of the documented growth in
polarization and decline of civil discourse by identifying specific
characteristics of the social media environment and psychological processes that
may contribute. Results can inform the development of interventions targeting
the feedback delivery system of social media and people's tendency to infer
social approval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop and test a
foundational theory of moral outrage in the digital age, specifically proposing
that social media environments amplify moral outrage because the positive social
feedback received on social media is conducive to habit-forming outrage
expression and internalization of perceived outrage expression norms. To test
this theory, this project will use a multi-method approach that combines the
ecological validity of studying naturally-formed social networks in social media
with the precise control of experimental manipulations and reinforcement
learning paradigms. This project seeks to expand psychological theory in several
important ways. First, it expands upon functional theories of moral emotions in
the affective sciences by articulating how the pervasive social media
environment shapes the way emotions are experienced, expressed, and how their
function may change. Second, this research expands theories of prosocial
behavior and cooperation by highlighting how the function of moral outrage
expression in the digital age may be better understood as ingroup signaling
rather than norm enforcement. Third, this research expands theories of
intergroup conflict by suggesting a new set of processes that may be antecedents
of negative emotions felt toward certain groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.