* 1808541
* Next-Generation Collision Induced Unfolding Analysis of Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Brandon Ruotolo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2024
* USD 595,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and with partial co-funding from the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, Professor Brandon Ruotolo and his group at the University
of Michigan are developing powerful new tools for characterizing the
3-dimensional structure of proteins - key molecules in life processes.
Specifically, the Ruotolo group is expanding the capabilities of "collision
induced unfolding" (CIU), an approach which studies protein structures by
quickly removing the water which surrounds protein molecules in their normal
environment, then induces their unfolding while monitoring their size and shape
using a state-of-the-art tool known as ion mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS).
The approach has the potential to revolutionize the detail and acquisition speed
with which protein stability can be evaluated. Potential applications include
the rapid analysis of biotherapeutic proteins and their mode of operation. The
work provides excellent training for students interested in research at the
interface between chemical measurements and the pharmaceutical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses three main goals: (1)
creating a complete physical description of factors impacting the peak width for
traveling-wave-type ion mobility separators, and validating the resulting
predictions against standards; (2) developing next-generation software that
incorporates the interpretation of IM peak width into CIU analysis workflows in
the form of highly-parameterized multi-modal Gaussian fitting in both two and
three dimensions; and (3) creating parallelized, multi-dimensional CIU methods
capable of rapidly tracking the unfolding patterns of protein mixtures across
many charge states simultaneously, even in the presence of significant chemical
noise. The new CIU tools are being tested using therapeutic proteins of
significance to the biotechnology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.