* 1808436
* Implantable Ultra-low Power VO2 MEMS Scanner based Surface-enhanced Raman Spectroscope for Wide-field Tumor Imaging in Free Moving Small Animals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nelson Sepulveda, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Every year, over 200,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer which causes
more than 40,000 deaths per year in the US. Tumor-targeting surface enhanced
Raman scattering nanoparticles based multiplexed Raman spectroscopy has recently
demonstrated great potentials to promote early and accurate cancer detection,
which significantly impact patient's survival rates. Spectral fingerprints of
Raman nanoparticles make it possible to study multiple cell surface biomarkers
and analyze targeted drug delivery in breast cancer rat models. With long
scanning time in slow speed, conventional Raman spectroscopy can only image ex-
vivo tissue specimens or monitor small animals under anesthesia, which behave
differently from free moving ones. There is an unmet need for an implantable
Raman system, which performs in-vivo multiplexed wide-field imaging and
longitudinal study on tumor, monitoring the dynamic response after drug
delivery, and quantitatively study targeted nanoparticles for multiple
biomarkers. This project will be focused on implantable thermal micro-scanner
based Raman spectroscope for wide-field tumor-imaging in free moving breast
cancer rat model. Societal impact will be significant, not only on scientific
communities (cancer biology), but also on broader communities of energy science
(solar cell inspection), pharmaceutical industry (drug screening). The
scientific impact is to generate knowledge that will be significance to
researchers in the field of implantable micro-system. The outcomes will yield
next generation transformative devices to enable a comprehensive understanding
of tumor development and targeted drug delivery. This project will provide
educational opportunities for students to learn different disciplines and
develop multiple skill sets. Outreach events will transform state-of-the-art
technologies to educational resources that are more accessible to local K-12
schools and broader communities in greater Lansing area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to overcome the fundamental
limitations in miniaturized ultra-low power surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
aimed for in-vivo wide-field tumor imaging in free moving rat. The research plan
will be focused on developing an implantable microelectromechanical system based
Raman spectroscopy for in-vivo monitoring and longitudinal study of tumor growth
and nanoparticles based targeted drug delivery. To achieve this goal, an ultra-
low power vanadium dioxide based self-sensing thermal monolithic micro-scanner
will be developed for fast beam steering with large mirror deflection in two-
dimensional raster scan manner, which enables wide-field spectroscopic imaging
with large field-of-view. Novel micro-scale electroplating and molding
techniques based mass-producible integration process will be developed for
ultra-thin opto-mechanical devices, including the implantable Raman scan-head.
In addition, an ultra-compact ultra-low power micro-scanner based Raman
spectrometer will be developed based on single element near infra-red
photomultiplier tube and a vanadium dioxide micro-scanner with on-chip grating.
For interconnecting the scan-head with spectrometer and providing physiological
recording, a compact small animal backpack with integrated physiology sensors on
conformal surface, will be developed using stereolithography three-dimensional
printing process. Finally, the platform will be characterized on free moving
breast cancer rat model for acquiring Raman spectra from nanoparticles
conjugated with anti-bodies specifically targeting over-expressed biomarkers.
Although significant progress has been made in the Raman spectroscopy on
biological tissue samples, molecularly targeted wide-field in-vivo multiplexed
Raman imaging of tumor in free moving rat has not been demonstrated yet.
Miniaturization of the scan-head and spectrometer with ultra-low power
consumption is critical to implantable Raman system. The proposed implantable
ultra-low power thermal micro-scanner enabled Raman imaging strategy will
overcome the fundamental limitation in current Raman imaging modality that has
urgent and unmet needs, such as higher sensitivity, scalable resolution, deeper
penetration, shorter integration time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.