* 1808962
* Examining Priming in State Legislative Elections
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Joshua Meyer-Gutbrod, Meyer-Gutbrod           Joshua         L
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Political Science program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Bruce Bimber at the University
of California, Santa Barbara this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the role of implicit and explicit racial
priming within American state legislative campaigns. Both conservative and
liberal social movements have increasingly integrated race-based identity claims
into their agendas. While existing literature has examined the impact of racial
rhetoric within national politics, little work has been done to assess the
impact on state politics. This project will explore how this growing racial
divide has impacted policy conversation within the American States by developing
an expansive data set that catalogues state legislative campaign content by
issue arena and rhetorical frame. In doing so, this project aims to inform
efforts to counteract racial rhetorical frames and improve democratic engagement
for all citizens. This dataset will also provide a critical data source for
developing projects for future research on state politics, public policy,
political campaigns, and race. Finally, by processing campaign statements into
issue coverage summaries for state legislative matchups, this project aims to
provide accessible information to better inform voters in lower information
elections of a candidate's willingness to engage with salient issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fully investigate racial rhetoric, this
project will employ web-scraping techniques to preserve state legislative
candidate campaign websites from 2014-2018. Websites provide a holistic approach
to the analysis of campaign rhetoric as candidates possess extensive control
over the content of a website while space and costs issues are at a minimum. A
random sample of candidate issue statements and self-reported legislative
records will be catalogued and coded by trained coders according to issue arena
and content. This will provide a critical training dataset that will be used to
classify the remaining statements according to issue arena using machine
learning classification algorithms. The final dataset will provide an
unprecedented account of state legislative campaign rhetoric by providing: 1)
Character-counts that measure dedicated issue space by topic and provide a
critical metric for issue salience and priming; 2) A comprehensive list of issue
statements relevant to a particular policy arena that will be used to examine
statements for implicit and explicit racially driven framing; 3) A complete
collection of website images that provide evidence for visual priming. This data
will provide evidence for variation in issue selection as a product of candidate
qualities and constituent demographics, specifically racial heterogeneity of
district constituents and neighboring districts. In addition, specific policy
arenas, including welfare/public assistance, criminal justice, and immigration,
can be examined for variation in implicit and explicit racial rhetoric across
states and districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.