* 1808202
* Designing new quantum topological nanomaterials via controlled ion-exchange reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 01/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Electronic materials form the core of critical technologies that drive
continuing advances in computing, information technology, diagnostics and other
applications. It is becoming increasing clear that conventional computers which
use silicon crystals to perform most of the computing tasks will not be able to
keep up with the demands for massive computing and information processing
systems. It is believed that quantum computers, which work on the principles of
quantum mechanics, can provide new technologies for large scale computation.
Synthesizing new quantum materials is an important challenge for the development
of quantum computers. Professors Ritesh Agarwal and Andrew Rappe of the
University of Pennsylvania utilize the unique chemistries and reactivities of
nanoscale materials to synthesize new quantum nanomaterials. They then test
these materials for unique quantum electronic properties and evaluate their
performance. The researchers augment the teaching curricula at the University of
Pennsylvania at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Research and
educational activities are integrated by the involvement of undergraduates in
research, by incorporating the latest research results into the curricula, and
by training high school and college teachers from Philadelphia where there is a
large percentage of underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the NSF Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry Program, Professors Agarwal and Rappe develop a tightly
integrated experimental and theoretical program to synthesize new topological
quantum materials by chemically transforming semiconductor nanostructures, while
preserving structural attributes of the parent compound (e.g. crystal lattice,
nanoscale morphology). Topological materials represent the next generation of
quantum materials, yet the classes of topological materials realized via
experiments is very small. Theoretical predictions have suffered from the lack
of appropriate materials for testing. The ion exchange synthesis method, in
conjunction with recent advances in connecting quantum chemistry and topology,
offers a route towards successfully addressing these synthetic challenges.
Attaining a high level of independent control over chemical composition and
crystal structure is highly desirable and motivates this research. This research
advances the development of materials for applications in quantum computing,
cryptography and sensing that may lead to increased security and economic
competitiveness for the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.