* 1808946
* Cultivating Conjugated Polymers as Novel Light Responsive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Stimuli-responsive materials alter their structure or properties according to
changes in their environment. This research program will develop novel stimuli-
responsive polymers whose function and properties can be controlled by light
exposure. This is exciting as light is a "clean" stimulus in that it can be
applied remotely without physical contact, is readily patternable, and its
intensity can be tuned with great fidelity. Unfortunately, there are few
compounds that are light-responsive. The planned research program will provide
pathways to direct these structural changes to improve their performance in
functional devices and to amplify these structural changes. The results of this
research program will therefore expand the applications that can be rationally
controlled and patterned by light exposure, which will significantly extend the
practicality of light-responsive materials. Workforce development and training
of the next generation of scientists and engineers who are prepared to tackle
the grand challenges in stimuli-responsive materials will be realized through
this research program and also by engaging public high school students in hands-
on research experiences, thus providing exceptional preparation for college.
Further impact will result from the completion of experiments at the national
neutron facilities at ORNL and NIST where the students participating in this
project will acquire hands-on experience in a multi-user facility and contribute
to the continued health of these national resources. This project will also
further develop the sustainable research infrastructure in Tennessee and will be
implemented to promote the participation of underrepresented groups in research.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The overarching goal of this research program is to provide pathways to
rationally control the optoelectronic performance of conjugated polymers by
altering their molecular, nanoscale, and mesoscale structure with exposure to
light, as well as to provide robust routes to amplify their light-induced
structural changes so as to realize novel light-responsive materials. Current
results clearly show that the absorption of a photon by conjugated polymers
reversibly alters their structure, assembly, and functionality. Therefore, this
research program will elucidate the relationship between light-induced
structural order in conjugated polymeric active layers and their photo-physical
properties. In parallel, targeted conjugated polymer constructs that are
designed to augment their alteration in structure and assembly when exposed to
light in solutions and thin films will be developed and harnessed to provide
routes to new stimuli-responsive materials with desired properties. This
research program will develop methods to amplify the structural changes of
conjugated polymers with exposure to light and correlate light-induced
alteration of the hierarchical structure of conjugated-polymer mixtures to
optimal functional response. This critical information will then be used to
elucidate guidelines to enable the systematic modification, rational design and
control of novel light-responsive materials with targeted properties. This
research will also attempt to directly correlate the impact of photon absorption
on conjugated polymer configuration, assembly, and vertical morphology to the
optoelectronic performance of conjugated polymer active layers. This in turn may
further provide crucial links toward the rational design of conjugated polymer
solutions or blends and associated thermal, light, and deposition processing
protocols so as to realize devices with optimal functional performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.