* 1808064
* Deep Learning-based Detection of Stealth False Data Injection Attacks in Large-Scale Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Katherine Davis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The proposed research aims to strengthen national security by improving the
resilience of power grid critical infrastructure with respect to data
manipulation attacks. A comprehensive methodology referred to as DEFENDA -
DEtection of FalsE and uNexpected Data Attacks - is proposed to quantify the
integrity of data and to characterize the impact of false data on power systems.
These attacks are referred to as unobservable or stealth false data injection
(FDI) attacks, and they are crafted to bypass traditional bad data detection.
DEFENDA's vision is to quickly detect sensor manipulation attacks and correct
the false data. The project aims to contribute enhanced state-of-the-art cyber-
physical security strategies for transmission system operation, where results
will inform solution of similar problems including cyber-physical attack
detection at generation, transmission, and distribution levels as well as in
communication networks, banking systems, cloud computing and storage, and other
critical infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DEFENDA will contribute attack
detection strategies for real-world power grids via deep neural network (DNN)
architectures known to offer superior representational power and improved
detection performance. Specifically, DEFENDA aims to develop an efficient and
robust FDI attack detection mechanism based on a deep long-short-term-memory
(LSTM) recurrent neural network (RNN) that captures the time series nature of
the status and measurement data and learns their respective normal and malicious
patterns. To ensure detection efficiency, DEFENDA investigates optimal selection
of the deep architecture and underlying hyper-parameters. Furthermore, DEFENDA
ensures detection robustness through three measures. First, DEFENDA enables
replacement of any missing status and measurement data via a deep LSTM auto-
encoder (LSTM-AE) to enhance detection performance even in presence of jamming
attacks. Second, using a deep variational LSTM auto-encoder (V-LSTM-AE) DEFENDA
is capable to detect attacks that have not been characterized via an anomaly
detector. Finally, DEFENDA carries out detection decision fusion based on
centralized, semi-centralized, and decentralized detection architectures.
DEFENDA will also create and make available synthetic cases with scenarios
designed to promote research in cyber-physical analysis and attack detection. By
demonstrating the importance of cyber security and data integrity though the
scenarios developed, the project will prepare a generation to solve the problems
facing society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.