* 1808779
* Chemical, Electrochemical and Physical Properties of Metallosupramolecular Architectures with Neutral and Radical Bridging Ligands and the Influence of Non-Covalent Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kim Dunbar, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 640,000.00

From common refrigerator magnets to tiny magnetic particles on which data are
recorded in hard drives, magnets are pervasive in everyday life. The reduction
in size of magnetic particles over the past several decades has led to
significant increase in the storage capacity but the limit is being reached.
Professor Dunbar's group at Texas A&amp;M University Main Campus explores new
types of chemical structures that display magnetic behavior at the nanoscale
level. Through systematic investigation of the structure-property relationships
of these magnetic compounds, the team aims to gain a better fundamental
understanding of the factors that contribute to superior magnetic properties and
provide insight to inform design of the next generation magnets for computing or
electronic storage devices. The versatility of skills required to work on this
project is an excellent opportunity for students, including members of
underrepresented groups, to learn chemical synthesis as well as numerous methods
of characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division supports Prof. Dunbar's
group to synthesize and study the properties of multinuclear transition and
lanthanide metal supramolecular architectures with neutral and radical bridging
ligands. Whereas more commonly used closed-shell (diamagnetic) bridging ligands
engage in superexchange (indirect) interactions between the metal spins, radical
bridging ligands facilitate direct exchange interactions which results in much
stronger magnetic coupling. For transition metal complexes, this situation
results in modest coupling and in lanthanide complexes these interactions are
very weak. Magnetic coupling in both transition metal complexes and lanthanide
rare earth complexes is greatly improved by using a radical bridging ligand that
can engage in direct exchange with the metal ions. In order to further improve
upon these systems, the Dunbar group seeks to generate new classes of radical-
bridged magnetic complexes using supramolecular strategies. This project focuses
on using N-heterocyclic neutral ligands that feature interactions between anions
and electron deficient aromatic rings, namely the anion-pi interaction. The
neutral ligand can undergo a reversible one-electron reduction at accessible
potentials to form a stable radical. Computatonal studies are performed to
identify the most synthetically feasible targets and guide the direction of
research as it progresses. Spontaneous self-assembly of paramagnetic metal ions
with the ligands gives multinuclear supramolecular complexes in high yields due
to anion and solvent templates. A plethora of techniques (including single-
crystal X-ray crystallography, SQUID magnetometry, electrochemistry, and
electron paramagnetic resonance) is used to study the rich electronic, redox,
and magnetic properties of these supramolecular architectures. By comparing the
properties of the complexes with a variety of ligands with different electron
donating ability and coordinating geometry, this research aims to unveil the
structural and electronic factors that contribute to superior magnetic
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.