* 1808582
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Theoretical Foundations and Algorithms for L1-Norm-Based Reliable Multi-Modal Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andreas Savakis, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2022
* USD 323,973.00

In modern applications of science and engineering, large volumes of data are
collected from diverse sensor modalities, commonly stored in the form of high-
order arrays (tensors), and jointly analyzed in order to extract information
about underlying phenomena. This joint tensor analysis can exploit inherent
dependencies across data modalities and allow for markedly enhanced inference.
Standard methods for tensor analysis rely on formulations that are sensitive to
heavily corrupted points among the processed data (outliers). To counteract the
destructive impact of outliers in modern data analysis (and thereto relying
applications), this project will investigate new theory and robust algorithmic
methods. The performance benefits of the developed tools will be evaluated in
applications from the fields of data analytics, machine learning and computer
vision. Thus, this research aspires to increase significantly the reliability of
data-enabled research across science and engineering. Combining theoretical
explorations, with practical algorithmic solutions for data analysis and
experimental evaluations, this project has the potential to build significant
future capacity not only for U.S. academic institutions but also for the U.S.
government and industry. Thus, apart from promoting the progress of science,
this project could contribute to advances in the national prosperity and
welfare. In addition, research activities under this project will be integrated
with education. Participating students, at both graduate and undergraduate
levels, will gain important experience in optimization theory, machine learning,
computer vision, and data mining, among other areas. Moreover, the project plan
includes multiple STEM outreach activities and supports diversity in STEM by
involving students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the theoretical underpinnings of L1-norm tensor analysis will be
investigated, with a focus on its computational hardness and exact solution.
Then, based on these new foundations, efficient/practical algorithms for L1-norm
tensor analysis will be explored, together with scalable and distributed
software implementations. These theoretical and algorithmic investigations are
expected to advance significantly the knowledge in the currently under-explored
area of L1-norm tensor analysis and deliver highly impactful methodologies for
outlier-resistant multimodal data processing. Next, the PIs will employ the
newly developed algorithmic tools in key problems from the fields of data
analytics, machine learning and computer vision. In addition, research
activities under this project will be integrated with education. Participating
students, at both graduate and undergraduate levels, will gain important
experience in optimization theory, machine learning, computer vision, and data
mining, among other areas. Moreover, the project plan includes multiple STEM
outreach activities?and supports diversity in STEM by involving?students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.