* 1808664
* Controlled Nanoparticle Size Modifications and Functionalizations through controlled polymeric Nanonetwork Expansion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Eva Harth, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Plastics that are composed from organic networks are one of the most widely used
materials. However, most polymer networks are difficult to manipulate once the
material is formed. The research group of Professor Eva Harth at the University
of Houston aims to develop robust synthetic methods for the fabrication of tiny
organic network structures (of dimensions much smaller than the width of hair)
with the ability to modify a parent structure into various other networks of
different sizes and functions. The ability to add functions to, modify
composition of, or expand the network to allow for repair would broaden the
applications of nano-scale polymer networks. This interdisciplinary project
educates graduate and undergraduate students in STEM fields. Rising high school
seniors and seniors have the opportunity to engage in this research through the
Welch Summer Scholars Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
preparation of photoresponsive nanomaterials and their manipulation in
dimension, molecular weight and chemical functional groups. The research team of
Professor Harth is establishing methods to synthesize photogrowable nanonetworks
from a variety of degradable and non-degradable polymer backbones and cross-
linking units containing trithiocarbonate units. Photoinduced polymerizations in
the presence and absence of photoredox catalysts are utilized for the dynamic
growth to expand the networks and introduce functional monomers into the
existing schaffolds. Conditions of photo-controlled radical polymerizations for
these expansion processes are thoroughly investigated as these determine the
final dispersity of the network. Ultimately, this research is directed to test
the capability and range of manipulation which is possible by applying photo-
controlled radical polymerization techniques to generate the next generation of
nano- and micron scale network materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.