* 1808440
* Collaborative Research: 1D Nanoconfined Helium: A Versatile Platform for Exploring Luttinger Liquid Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Adrian Delmaestro, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds a collaborative
effort to explore the physics of one-dimensional (1D) systems. Ordinary matter
confined in 1D can behave quite differently than in two or three dimensions.
Understanding this behavior has become increasingly important as the feature
sizes in electronic devices continue to decrease. To explore the effects of
confinement in 1D, the research team will use a model system of helium atoms
confined in tailored materials with nanometer channels that are only a few atoms
wide. This system offers the unique advantage that the interactions of the
particles can be varied over a large range: from weak interactions, relevant to
trapped atoms used for quantum computing, to strong interactions, as in one-
dimensional electronic wires in integrated circuits. Neutron scattering studies
which can probe both the structure and motion of the nanoconfined helium will
allow the investigators to measure and discover unique physical behavior in one
dimension. State-of-the-art computer simulations will be used to perform
numerical experiments in tandem with those undertaken in the laboratory,
providing an opportunity to test theoretical predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also support broad interdisciplinary
training of graduate students in sample synthesis and characterization, and in
experimental and high-performance computational techniques. In addition, the
researchers will develop an online course in Quantum Fluids and Solids, filling
an existing curricular gap and engaging with a broad group of students on a
topic of fundamental and technological
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports joint experimental and
theoretical research to explore quantum many-body physics in one spatial
dimension using helium as a model system. One-dimensional systems have been of
long-standing interest due to a profound difference from their two- and three-
dimensional counterparts, whose properties can be described in terms of
quasiparticles. This quasiparticle picture breaks down completely in one
dimension where the fundamental excitations are collective and described by the
universal Tomonaga-Luttinger-liquid (TLL) theory. The research team will
develop, optimize, and explore a novel platform for TLL physics. The project
consists of tightly coupled experimental and quantum-simulation research to (1)
fabricate ordered templated porous materials preplated with rare-gas adsorbates
as a confinement platform exhibiting nanometer-scale pores; (2) Perform elastic
neutron scattering measurements of the static correlation function; and (3)
Carry out inelastic neutron scattering measurements. The main focus of the
research team will be on two areas where theory predicts novel new behavior that
has not been verified experimentally: (1) static correlations where TLL predicts
an algebraic decay in the correlations even though no true long-range order is
possible; and (2) the dynamical excitations of the liquid where a particle-hole-
like excitation spectrum is predicted independent of the particle statistics.
The integration of ab initio simulations with experimental scattering
measurements will yield unambiguous confirmation of exotic field theory
predictions in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a
deeper fundamental understanding of a model that is not only central to many
areas of current interest, but also has technological applications in
nanoelectronics, atomtronics, quantum sensing, and quantum-information science.
The project will also provide students with broad interdisciplinary training in
synthesis and characterization, low-temperature techniques, x-ray and neutron
scattering, use of national facilities, as well as field theory and high-
performance computation. In addition, the researchers will develop an online
course in Quantum Fluids and Solids, filling an existing curricular gap and
engaging with a broad group of students on a topic of fundamental and
technological importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.