* 1808711
* Mechanistic Studies on Fe-Type Nitrile Hydration Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Richard Holz, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 525,000.00

This award by the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division, is
funding Drs. Bennett and Holz from Marquette University to investigate how the
enzyme Nitrile hydratase (NHase) transforms chemical groups called nitriles into
amides under ambient conditions. Interestingly, NHases can hydrate not only
nitriles found in biological systems but also a wide range of synthetic
nitriles. Hence NHases are extensively used in preparative organic chemistry
laboratories and in the industrial production of acrylamide and nicotinamide.
NHases have also proven useful in the cleanup of nitrile-based chemicals and
pesticides from the environment and are thus becoming increasingly recognized as
a new type of "Green" catalyst. Knowledge of the mechanisms that underscore
their chemical reactivity and applications could provide an impetus for the
development of new biocatalysts. Drs. Bennett and Holz's research use an
interdisciplinary experimental approach to gain insight into how nitriles are
hydrated by NHases. Their research and education efforts help promote teaching,
training and learning for graduate and undergraduate students, particularly
those from underrepresented groups. Their research also enhances the
infrastructure for research and education at Marquette University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the biological roles of NHases are not well
understood, they likely include nutrient metabolism, nitrile detoxification
and/or nutrient assimilation. Nitriles are most commonly found in biological
systems as cyanoglycosides or cyanolipids, but many plants also produce nitriles
such as ricin and beta-cyanoalanine for self-defense purposes. The major
impediment to understanding their biological and bioremediation roles is the
lack of understanding of their catalytic mechanism. Drs. Bennett and Holz
provide molecular level insight into the hydration of nitriles by NHases using a
combination of kinetics, spectroscopy, biochemistry, computational chemistry,
and X-ray crystallography studies. Answers to three specific questions are
sought: (1) What is the transition-state of nitrile hydration? (2) Is a
transient disulfide bond between the sulfenic acid cyclic intermediate and the
axial alpha-Cys ligand required for catalysis? and (3) What controls
metallocenter assembly in Fe-type NHases? Successful completion of this project
enhances our understanding of the catalytic mechanism of NHases and stimulate
development of engineered bioremediation catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.