* 1808475
* Redox Photochemistry in Genomes of Microorganisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Cynthia Burrows, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 525,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry is awarding
funding to Dr. Cynthia Burrows at the University of Utah. Her research team
plans to investigate how the genomes of microorganisms adapt to environmental
stress. Many species of plants, algae and bacteria have adapted to live under
extreme conditions of heat, salt, drought or intense UV light, all of which
place chemical stress on the cell's DNA. Other organisms, such as the coral
symbiont zooxanthellae, a close cousin of algae, have not adapted to stress, and
rising ocean temperatures are leading to coral 'bleaching' due to loss of their
algae, a food source for the coral. Research supported by this grant
investigates the hypothesis that sequences of DNA that can fold into a motif
termed "G-quadruplex" may help the organism respond to oxidative stress caused
by an increase in temperature and increased photosynthesis. Students involved in
this work are to learn how the chemistry of the environment influences the
chemistry of the cell at the level of the organism's genetic code. In addition,
the PI is developing a series of lectures, "Beyond Watson and Crick," that
communicate the importance of changes in the DNA to life
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the question of why certain
microorganisms, notably algae and thermophilic bacteria, have dense potential
G-quadruplex sequences (PQS) in their genomes, a reporter plasmid assay is to be
developed in the model algal organism Chlamydomonas. Synthetically altered DNA
sequences is to be inserted into promoter sequences of a reporter gene, and gene
expression will be monitored as a function of oxidative stress. In addition, the
PQS density in Thermus bacteria is to be investigated. The sites of oxidative
damage are to be mapped onto the promoter regions and PQS sites to discover
correlations between G-quadruplex sequences, regulation of oxidative damage, and
adaptive responses to environmental stress. These studies help define the
circumstances under which chemically-modified bases in DNA, such as
8-oxoguanine, serve as epigenetic markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.