* 1808011
* NSF-BSF: The Hard-Soft Interface -- Integrating 2D Semiconductors with Functional Polymers for Nanoscale Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical description: Two-dimensional (2D) materials are a class of
crystalline materials composed of extremely thin sheets (one or a few atoms in
thickness) with the potential to create smaller and faster electronic and
optical devices. However, since existing methods for preparing such devices are
not suitable for 2D materials, new approaches must be discovered that promote
their easy integration into device constructs. This project studies 2D materials
that are coated with polymers, which can be applied with extreme precision to
manipulate the physical and electronic properties at specific locations. This
promotes inexpensive, large-scale fabrication of electronic and optical devices
within single sheets of 2D materials, enabling applications in low-power,
nanoscale electronic and optical devices, including wearable and conformable
devices. This project includes summer research opportunities for middle and high
school students as well as recruitment and mentoring of underrepresented
minority students at UMass Amherst, and outreach to the community in Western
Massachusetts. US-Israel scientific collaborations are enhanced by graduate
students exchanges between partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: A major challenge in harnessing 2D materials for optoelectronic
devices arises from limited avenues for exercising precise control over charge
carrier concentrations (doping). This project focuses on Mo and W transition-
metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) with the goal of modulating their optoelectronic
properties through novel interfacial chemistries that are more straightforward
and robust to implement than direct substitutional doping of the TMDC itself. An
integrated theory-synthesis-characterization approach facilitates rational
design and application of organochalcogen- and dipole-rich functional polymers
for precise, spatially-targeted control over carrier doping, work functions, and
band gaps of TMDCs. This hard-soft, 2D materials platform, enables the
preparation of optoelectronic devices such as photodiodes, transistors, and
inverters - key building blocks of digital electronics - fabricated within 2D
monolayers using methods that are scalable and compatible with existing
semiconductor technology. Fundamental advances in the development of polymer-
TMDC semiconductors project far-reaching impact on optoelectronic devices,
enabling technologies in computing, data storage, and consumer electronics. The
research program is integrated with formative summer research opportunities for
undergraduates from minority-serving institutions, as well as local middle- and
high-school students, thereby nurturing the next generation of materials
scientists and engineers. Researchers also deliver informal lectures to the
broader public in Western Massachusetts to kindle interest in the emerging field
of 2D materials. US-Israel scientific collaborations are enhanced by graduate
students exchanges between partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.