* 1808613
* Hybrid wireless localization with a new radio frequency beamforming scheme
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 12/31/2023
* USD 429,998.00

Many solutions have been developed in recent years to meet the increasing demand
of short-range localization in the internet of things (IoT) era. Examples
include systems based on wireless communication networks, sensor networks,
radio-frequency identification (RFID), as well as frequency modulated
continuous-wave (FMCW) and ultra-wideband (UWB) systems. Most of the solutions
rely on established networks or interrogators, and the targets must carry
devices such as cellular phones and RFID tags. FMCW/UWB systems can localize
objects without requiring the targets to carry any device but need a large
transmitted signal bandwidth to achieve desirable range resolution. This project
will explore a radio frequency (RF) compressed sensing solution and a hybrid-
mode localization mechanism for short-range wireless localization. The proposed
solution will also be user-centered by efficiently sensing user activities and
optimizing resource allocation. It will significantly reduce the hardware cost,
power consumption, circuit complexity, spectrum usage, and signal processing
load. The ultimate goal of this research is to achieve ubiquitous short-range
wireless localization on low-cost mobile devices. It will influence many
wireless systems and applications, and thus have broad impacts to our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop the next generation
wireless localization system. Different from conventional compressed sensing
radar or localization systems that mostly perform data compression during or
after demodulation, the proposed solution will efficiently compress data based
on multi-beam radiation patterns produced by an advanced RF beamforming array.
The array will probe the space with randomized radiation patterns instead of a
single scanning beam, thus reducing the amount of spatial samples and the
resources required to take the samples. Compared with conventional digital
beamforming, the proposed solution is advantageous in lower hardware cost, less
power consumption and lower circuit complexity. In addition, a hybrid-mode
localization mechanism will be devised to fuse the advantages of
Doppler/interferometry, frequency shift keying (FSK), and FMCW detection modes,
so that the spectrum usage and signal processing load are kept to the minimum by
switching the detection mode based on the status of the targets. The system will
further reduce spectrum usage by user-centered operation, which efficiently
senses and tracks human subjects based on human motion characteristics. Special
localization algorithms will be derived to identify the unique human behavior
that is distinct from other objects. The project will actively involve K-12 and
undergraduate students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.