* 1808120
* Design of oligozulene-based organometallics for probing new paradigms in charge delocalization, transport, and storage at the nanoscopic scale
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Mikhail Barybin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Professor Mikhail V. Barybin of the University of Kansas is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry to design, synthesize and characterize azulene-based molecules
(combination of 5- and 7-membered carbon rings) that are capable of electric
charge transport. The goal is to develop molecules with improved functionality
relevant to organic electronic, computer, optoelectronic, and energy storage
(battery) applications. A major emphasis is placed on targeting molecules
comprised of multiple azulenic units to enable efficient molecular charge
transport and rectification. Such molecules offer the potential of creating
ultra-small molecular components for electronic devices that function with
minimal power consumption. This project improves our understanding of charge
transport through single molecules. It also affords a platform for the
development of functional materials with surfaces modified by self-assembled
monolayers. The award supports training of graduate and undergraduate students
in an interdisciplinary research environment. A partnership with Clayton State
University (a primarily undergraduate institution with a predominantly African
American student base) attracts students from underrepresented minority and
involves them in the project. The PI brings a first-hand perspective on
challenges faced by science students and faculty affected by a chronic illness
in pursuit of their educational and professional aspirations. By showcasing the
scientific and human resource development outcomes of the project at
professional conferences and less formal community-centered venues, the PI's
advocacy highlights societal benefits of enhancing the diversity of university
campuses through inclusion of persons with chronic
illnesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, synthetic, computational,
electrochemical, spectroscopic and surface chemistry techniques are
synergistically employed to develop nonbenzenoid, aromatic azulene-based
platform that exhibit redox, electronic, and optoelectronic properties,
typically inaccessible through the use of benzenoid aromatics. The molecules are
designed to have anchoring groups, such as mercapto and isocyano, capable of
self assembly on surfaces without affecting the azulenic scaffold's aromaticity.
DFT calculations are used to inform the design of the azulenic molecules. The
products are characterized and tested as potential components in nanoelectronic
devices. The specific aims are: (1) to design asymmetrically anchored organic
linkers that feature key structural rigidity and spatial separation of the
bridge's frontier molecular orbitals; (2) to evaluate the
conductivity/rectification profiles and the electron transfer dynamics in
azulene self-assembled monolayers; and (3) to construct molecular electron
reservoirs composed of azulene-based organometallic nanocomplexes with at least
12-electron reversible organic redox capacity, and to examine their charge
delocalization potential, including organic intervalence
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.