* 1808622
* Thermoelectric Properties of Doped Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Chabinyc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 436,137.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the energy from burning
fossil fuels to generate electricity in the U.S. is wasted as heat. Materials
can convert a difference in temperature into an electrical voltage through the
thermoelectric effect. This can be used in devices that help capture wasted
heat. The most efficient thermoelectric materials are currently made from rare
elements. Advanced plastics made from abundant carbon can also be tailored to
conduct electricity and also have a thermoelectric effect. This project, funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, develops methods to understand and optimize the thermoelectric
properties of plastics by controlling their electrical conductivity and the
voltage generated by differences in temperature. The researchers create new
materials that could be used to capture waste heat or integrated with common
electronic devices for energy harvesting from the environment. This research is
carried out by graduate students who gain skills in analyzing the properties of
plastics and how to develop new materials. The training prepares graduate
student researchers in multidisciplinary science for future careers in the U.S.
workforce. These students also help to engage a diverse population in the
benefits of research through outreach activities in local public schools. The
broader public is engaged through partnerships with programs focused on science
and engineering design projects for
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic thermoelectric materials present an
opportunity to develop new means of controlling the conversion of electrical and
thermal energy. New methods to control the thermoelectric properties of
semiconducting polymers through processing, theory, and development of new
electrical doping methods are being investigated in the project, which is funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF. Because the properties of semiconducting polymers are strongly
dependent on processing methods, electrical doping methods that allow fixed
morphologies of semiconducting polymers are studied to provide insight into the
thermopower in disordered materials. Models for determining the changes in the
electronic density of states upon doping are investigated using temperature-
dependent measurements of thermopower and electrical conductivity. The interplay
between crystallinity and electrical conductivity is studied to determine the
evolution of the electronic structure upon doping. The properties of bulk
polymers and controlled methods for doping them that leverage chemical
activation in the solid state are also investigated. The resulting
microstructures of materials are studied using advanced synchrotron X-ray
scattering techniques and by spectroscopic methods. The impact on thermal
conductivity by electrical doping is examined to determine if processing methods
that improve electrical conductivity also increase the thermal conductivity.
This research is carried out by graduate students who gain skills in analyzing
the properties of plastics and how to develop new materials. The training
prepares graduate student researchers in multidisciplinary science for future
careers in the U.S. workforce. These students also help to engage a diverse
population in the benefits of research through outreach activities in local
public schools. The broader public is engaged through partnerships with programs
focused on science and engineering design projects for
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.