* 1808361
* Investigating Tunneling Across Self-Assembled Monolayers Using the Eutectic GaIn Junction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* George Whitesides, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2023
* USD 780,381.00

While electrons flow easily through metals, they have much greater difficulty
passing through insulators such as glass and plastics. At least this is the
situation when the insulator is thick. Reduce the thickness to a single
molecular layer, and electrons can undergo charge tunneling, a Quantum
Mechanical process that allows them to pass through insulating barriers. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor George Whitesides at Harvard University is
exploring how electrons tunnel though molecular layers. Working with his
students, Professor Whitesides is developing new experimental tools to probe
tunneling and using them to study how charge flows through self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs). The discoveries could have broad implications for our
understanding of biological processes, such as photosynthesis, where charge is
transferred across cellular membranes, as well as advance technologies ranging
from modern electronics to the lubrication, friction, and wear in soft
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is examining the rates of quantum
tunneling across organic and organometallic SAMs using EGaIn junctions, which
are constructed by sandwiching a SAM between a metal electrode (e.g. Au or Ag)
on one side, and an EGaIn (i.e. liquid eutectic between Ga and In) electrode on
the other. The project's goal is to correlate the tunneling current density with
the atomic structure of the molecules that make up the SAM, as well as
monolayers in contact with polar and non-polar liquids. The team is
collaborating with theorists from around the world, who are aiding in the
interpretation of the observations. This highly interdisciplinary project is
contributing to the development of the Nation's science and technology workforce
by training students on how to combine concepts, techniques, and tools in
chemistry, biology, and physics, and at the same time is producing knowledge
that is relevant to high-technology companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.