* 1808775
* Mechanistic investigation of processive and distributive DNA modification
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Norbert Reich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 608,500.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Norbert Reich from the University of California at Santa
Barbara to understand how proteins scan DNA in order to find specific sites for
action. This process is essential to all known cellular systems. A new idea
about how this happens is that enhanced motion over large distances requires DNA
looping. This highly efficient approach is investigated and modeled using a
newly developed theoretical approach. The implications of this work are quite
broad as this means of movement is likely to be used by various proteins. This
project also supports the development of a university course focused on teaching
STEM students how to design experiments through extensive lab work as well as
lectures and discussions. Furthermore, the expansion of a large outreach program
is proposed (SciTrek) which reaches thousands of K-12 students by bringing
trained university students into the classroom for several weeks to guide self-
directed investigations on diverse topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In studying the
bacterial DNA adenine methyltransferase (Dam, modifies 5'-GATC-3'), it was noted
that the ability to rapidly modify two or more sites is enhanced when the sites
are separated up to 500 bp. Furthermore, current models of processive and
distributive DNA modification fail to fully account for the efficient search
processes by Dam and other proteins. A new understanding of the underlying
mechanism is needed. Aim 1 attempts to answer the question: Do proteins relying
on different mechanisms display distinct trajectories away from the DNA?
Sliding, hopping, intersegmental transfer and intersegmental hopping mechanisms
predict distinct protein movements away from the DNA and anovel experimental
approach to address this is proposed. The second aim attempts to answer the
question: What is the mechanism of intrasite processivity? How widespread is
this activity? Dam as well as several other DNA modifying enzymes modifies both
strands of DNA within the same recognition site, without dissociating (intrasite
processivity). The third aim attempts to answer the question: Is efficient
multisite DNA modification important in vivo? The fourth aim develops and
applies quantitative theoretical/numerical tools for analyzing activity-based
kinetic assays of DNA modifying enzymes. Particular emphasis is placed on
elucidating the behavior of Dam, but additional systems (CcrM, uracil DNA
glycosylase) are also studied to test and validate the approach more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.