* 1808928
* Overcoming plasmonic loss to realize high performance telecommunication devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Umit Ozgur, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 12/31/2023
* USD 490,000.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Today, optical technologies are the backbone
of our information society, empowering impactful services such as virtual
medical consultations, access to data stored in the cloud, and energy-efficient
high-performance computing in largescale datacenters. Photonic solutions are
particularly suited to enable these services due to the advantages of light such
as multi-terabit bandwidths, low-loss propagation over kilometers, and low
cross-talk. In fact, some internet provides have begun providing service
entirely through light (fiber optics). As a result, the advancement of photonic
telecommunications technologies will have a profound impact upon our nation by
providing improved performance of internet-based services, reduced energy
consumption, and a lower cost of construction/operation for networks. Current
photonic modulators, small switches which convert electrical signals into
optical pulses, are limited in their speed due to the weak interaction of light
and matter. More recently, metals have been utilized to enhance this
interaction, facilitating a reduction of device size and increase of speed. Yet,
these devices struggle to achieve efficient transmission ~10%, which is simply
insufficient for many applications. Here, we look utilize the benefits of both
approaches by allowing the lossy metallic nature to be engaged and disengaged
when desired. This approach limits the loss of the structure while still
maintaining the benefits of metal plasmonic structures. By partnering with
existing programs at the home university, the research will provide avenues for
local high school students, teachers, and undergraduates to learn about impact
of light-based technologies on our society while providing a platform to train a
highly skilled workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant research in the areas of photonic and
plasmonic-based approaches, there is yet to be a device which achieves efficient
all-around performance (modulation strength, insertion loss, energy consumption,
size, and speed). Photonic approaches suffer from poor light-matter
interactions, requiring speed restricting resonators and long interaction
lengths, while plasmonic approaches have yet to overcome the large insertion
loss associated with their metallic components. This proposal seeks to solve
this dilemma through a new design approach in which plasmonic elements are
disengaged in the off- (transmissive) state to minimize insertion loss, yet are
engaged in the on-state to achieve large modulation in a short distance. This is
achieved through a specifically chosen set of oxide layers which appear
dielectric to the optical mode under no electrical bias, yet can be modulated
into an epsilon-near-zero condition (effectively engaging the plasmonic nature)
to achieve efficient modulation through free-carrier accumulation and depletion.
It is shown that this approach is able to produce the first modulator design
capable of efficient all-around performance: area of 3 square microns, 1.5 dB,
9dB extinction ratio, 12 fJ/bit energy consumption, and 112 GHz bandwidth.
Although it is impactful for integrated systems, the approach is general and may
also find applications in related areas such as metamaterials and sensors.
Additionally, the realization of the device will demonstrate that plasmonic
systems are not synonymous with loss and the benefits of such systems
(confinement, enhanced light-matter-interaction) can be employed without
detrimental loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.