* 1808484
* Thiol-Thioester Dynamic Covalent Chemistry in Polymer Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 455,576.00

There are two broad categories of synthetic polymers familiar to everyday use.
Thermoplastics (typically abbreviated simply as "plastics") are versatile and
can be melted, dissolved, remolded and recycled. In contrast, thermosets are
typically harder materials that are solvent and heat resistant and but cannot
generally be reprocessed or recycled after their initial formation. Prof.
Christopher Bowman at the University of Colorado is exploring the use of dynamic
covalent chemistry approaches to transition between these two states of matter.
In dynamic covalent chemistry as implemented here, upon application of a desired
stimulus such as exposure to light or heat, chemical bond structures become
activated - repeatedly breaking and reforming the bonds within the polymer
structure in a manner that converts one type of polymer to the other. This
project investigates the fundamental relationships between the polymer structure
and the inherent aspects of the dynamic covalent chemistry including the
reactive chemical functional group, the catalysts used to facilitate the
reaction, the kinetics of the reaction, and the concentration of the dynamic
covalent bond. This project investigates fundamental phenomena of synthetic and
polymer chemistry as well as demonstrable advancement of applied science all
while providing profound educational experiences for graduate and undergraduate
students alike. Further, the project trains diverse personnel, comprising a
large number of undergraduate and graduate students, in a unique combination of
chemical synthesis, materials science, and polymer
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular
and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, the Bowman research
team aims to implement the thiol-thioester exchange reaction as a
photoactivatable and photodeactivatable dynamic covalent chemistry in
crosslinked polymer networks. The project focuses on understanding chemical
structure-property relationships that arise with changes to the thioester,
catalyst and polymer molecular structures and their impact on the covalent bond
exchange rate. Fundamental understanding of the thiol-thioester exchange
reaction and the kinetics of its catalysis in a non-polar, relatively immobile
environment allows researchers to fine-tune the desired bond exchange process
and the corresponding dynamic polymer properties. Combinations of various
exogenously delivered stimuli (i.e., different wavelengths of light, addition or
removal of heat) are used to control the activation of compounds within the
network that catalyze the dynamic covalent chemistry between pendant thiol
groups and thioester crosslinks and to arrest the exchange reaction with
orthogonal stimuli. Specifically, dual handles of light and heat-based stimuli
for starting and stopping the dynamic covalent chemistry are developed. Taking
advantage of the thiol/thioester exchange reaction the Bowman research team aims
to create covalently crosslinked polymers that are capable of user-directed,
reversible transitions from rigid thermoset to malleable thermoplastic that has
applications in optical materials, additive manufacturing, and
adhesives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.