* 1808931
* Electrowetting-Tuned Liquid Droplets on Lubricated Superhydrophobic Surfaces for Whispering-Gallery-Mode Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jiangtao Cheng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 363,690.00

Miniaturized, portable, sensitive, and low cost sensing systems are important
for medical and environmental diagnostic and monitoring applications. Chip scale
integrated photonic sensing systems that combine optical, electrical, and
fluidic functions are especially attractive for sensing applications due to the
high sensitivity of optical sensors, the small form-factor of chip scale
systems, and the low-cost processing possible for systems fabricated with well-
developed mass production techniques. While optical sensing with a detection
limit down to single nanoparticles has been achieved by various methods, such as
scattering interferometric and photothermal microscopy and nanofiber sensors,
microcavity sensing attracts much attention because their high quality factors
(Q factor, which physically represents the rate of energy loss relative to the
total stored energy) and small mode volumes enable significant enhancement of
light-matter interactions. Microcavity sensing has seen tremendous progress and
the sensing performance has been demonstrated by detecting single nanoparticles
and single biological molecules. However, detection in liquids with whispering
gallery mode (WGM, i.e., closed circular beams supported by total internal
reflections at the external cavity interface) cavities was achieved only in rare
cases using dielectric micro-resonators that were immersed or filled with
liquids in a closed environment. No real and stable high Q-factor sensing
experiment with non-solid optical resonators has been reported to date. In this
program, the team formed at Virginia Tech aims to perform optical sensing with
micro-resonators made directly of liquid droplets. New research outcomes from
this project will be integrated with educational endeavors. Bio-inspired
nanoscience and mechanical engineering will be integrated with all levels of
K-12 education. Participation in the proposed researches will motivate the
underrepresented groups for advanced degrees. In addition to graduate students,
undergraduate and female students will participate in the research through
thesis, project-based courses, or multidisciplinary senior design
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
assist in realizing on-chip detection and sizing systems with ultra-high
sensitivity and Q-factor, laying the groundwork to investigate the properties
and dynamics of single particle analyte and single biological molecules with an
accuracy that cannot be achieved using ensemble measurements. The research tasks
are below: (1) The lubricated superhydrophobic surfaces with engineered
micro/nanostructures can make the liquid droplet stand with a sufficiently large
contact angle for WGM sensing and the lubricant cloaking can help prevent fast
evaporation of water droplet; (2) The novel WGM system configuration enables
resilient coupling of the liquid microcavity with the built-in waveguide on the
substrate; (3) An ideal detection system requires not only the ability of trace
analyte response or single-particle-level response, but also the rapid detection
of targets. Electrowetting will be applied to actuate liquid droplets in a
programmable path and transport to the target with built-in waveguide for WGM
sensing; (4) For the first time, ultra-sensitivity WGM will be employed to
detect the existence of depletion shell on a liquid droplet; (5) The overarching
goal is to develop chip-scale integrated photonic sensing systems that combine
optical, electrical, and fluidic functions. This proposed high Q-factor approach
will pave the way for sensors that have unprecedented sensitivity to tiny
changes in their environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.