* 1808660
* Sensitivity-Enhanced High-Field Solution-State NMR by Gyrotron-Driven DNP
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Lucio Frydman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is one of the most important and widely used
methods for characterizing molecular structure and dynamics, but its sensitivity
- especially when applied to liquid samples - is inadequate for many important
applications. With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program
in the Division of Chemistry, Drs. Sungsool Wi, Lucio Frydman, and Stephen Hill
at Florida State University's National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL)
are working to achieve solution-state applicability for recent technological and
conceptual breakthroughs that have dramatically improved the sensitivity of
high-field NMR for characterization of solids. Extension to liquids (including
aqueous solutions) may have transformative consequences in chemistry and
biochemistry, particularly for characterizing limited quantities of small to
medium-sized molecules. Potential applications include natural products and
pharmaceutical chemistry; petroleum and polymer analytical chemistry; food and
environmental sciences; and metabolomics. The NHMFL setting facilitates wide
dissemination of the techniques, and provides accessibility to outside users in
diverse application areas. It also enables extensive outreach efforts targeting
high school students and involvement of undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Wi group is developing solution-state Overhauser-enhanced dynamic nuclear
polarization (ODNP) NMR for large volume samples (&gt; 100 uL) at high magnetic
fields (&gt;= 14.1 T/600 MHz), aiming to dramatically improve NMR sensitivity
under typical conditions using conventional and cryogenically-cooled solution-
state NMR probe heads. The research leverages the recent development of a high-
power Gyrotron source operating at 395 GHz, with matching quasi-optical
technologies, and a 600 MHz NMR solution-state spectrometer incorporating a
customized NMR probe. These breakthroughs are being extended to a far wider
range of organic analytes by employing new hardware which enables ODNP-enhanced
double-resonance experiments in low-viscosity, low-dielectric-loss solvents such
as hexane, in supercritical fluids, and using novel radical combinations. In
situ EPR spectroscopy, executed in the same 600 MHz spectrometer and enabled
through modifications to the existing quasioptical interface, is being employed
to provide unique mechanistic insights and to further optimize these ODNP-
enhanced NMR experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.