* 1808115
* Mass Spectrometry Methods for the Comprehensive Analysis of Emerging Functional Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Chrys Wesdemiotis, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2022
* USD 219,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Chrys Wesdemiotis and his group at the University
of Akron are developing new methods for the characterization of advanced
materials used in mechanical, electrical, biomedical, optical, or environmental
applications (such as implants, coatings, adhesives, membranes, and "smart
surfaces"). The methods are based on mass spectrometry, a powerful tool for
characterizing the compositions and structures. They allow accurate and
sensitive analysis of the molecular structures of the synthetic macromolecular
compounds comprising these materials, enabling meaningful understanding of the
relationships between molecular structure and useful properties, thus
facilitating the design of better, commercially viable products with desired
macroscopic features. The research provides opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students (including students from underrepresented groups) to engage in
modern chemical analysis and materials research, two areas with growing
employment opportunities that are vital for our nation's technological
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major objective of this research is to
integrate mild thermal desorption/degradation with online mass spectrometry for
the microstructural characterization of crosslinked polymers and materials with
very high molecular weight, such as hydrogels and rubber copolymers. Relatively
low temperatures are employed in order to preferentially break weak bonds or to
probe sterically crowded sites, yielding oligomeric species that provide
molecular connectivity detail as well as insight into crosslinkers and polymer
precursors. A further objective concerns the development of surface-layer matrix
assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometric imaging for the
detection of intact molecules within the top 2 nm of synthetic material
surfaces. Understanding of the surface composition and detection and
characterization of unwanted defects or deliberate surface modifications is
imperative for deciding a material?s suitability for a given application, since
the surface is the first point of contact with the environment. The Wesdemiotis
group uses multidimensional approaches (combining mass analysis, tandem mass
spectrometry, and orthogonal separation by polarity and/or shape) to enable
sensitive and precise analysis of the composition, structure, and architecture
of synthetic macromolecular compounds that are widely employed in industrial,
biomedical, and technological applications. They specifically target materials
that are challenging to characterize by other methods because of their
complexity, size, or topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.