* 1808174
* Understanding Person-Situation Transactions in Real Life
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Ryne Sherman, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 89,311.00

Fundamental to personality and social psychology is the premise that human
behavior may be determined by the person, the situation, or a combination of
both. While instruments for assessing the psychological characteristics of
persons have been well developed, parallel instruments for situations have
lagged far behind. Laboratory experiments have demonstrated that small changes
in situations can create large change in behavior; however, the impact of real
situations that people actually experience has rarely been investigated. The
proposed research will fill these important gaps, and examine the nature of
situational transitions, their antecedents, and their consequences in daily
life. The results will afford a better understanding of the relationship between
personality, situations, and behavior as they naturally occur. Moreover, the
proposed research has the potential to be transformative by providing a template
for investigating psychological processes in natural environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the study aims, the proposed research will
capitalize on several recent methodological and technological advances. First,
Ryne Sherman (Florida Atlantic University) and his colleagues have developed a
psychometrically valid way to measure situations, which will be used in project.
Second, it has been difficult to study real world situations due to a lack of
technology for collecting information about situations as they are experienced
in real time. This research will utilize advances in mobile sensing technology,
which can visually capture the situations experienced by a participant. These
images will later be rated by both participants and coders. Data analyses will
examine associations among elements of situations, personality traits, and
specific behaviors. The novel methodological approach developed in this project
could be applied to other important questions, such as how naturally occurring
situations affect outcomes such as aggression, relationship satisfaction, or
well-being.