* 1808159
* Collaborative Research: Multimodal Sensing and Analytics at Scale: Algorithms and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Xiao Fu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 265,991.00

Finding highly correlated latent factors in multimodal signals and data:
Scalable algorithms and applications in sensing, imaging, and language
processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Multimodal signals and data arise
naturally in many walks of science and engineering, and our digital society
presents ever-increasing opportunities to collect and extract useful information
from such data. For example, brain magnetic resonance imaging and electro-
encephalography are two modes of sensing brain activity that can offer different
"views" of the same set of patients (entities). Co-occurrence frequencies of a
given set of words in different languages is another example. Crime, poverty,
welfare, income, tax, school, unemployment, and other types of social data offer
different views of a given set of municipalities. Integrating multiple views to
extract meaningful common information is of great interest, and finds a vast
amount of timely applications -- in brain imaging, machine translation,
landscape change detection in remote sensing, and social science research, to
name a few. However, existing multiview analytics tools -- notably (generalized)
canonical correlation analysis [(G)CCA] -- are struggling to keep pace with the
size of today's datasets, and the problem is only getting worse. Furthermore,
the complex structure and dynamic nature of some of the underlying phenomena are
not accounted for in classical GCCA. This project will provide much needed
scalable and flexible computational tools for GCCA-based multimodal sensing and
analytics, thereby benefiting a large variety of scientific and engineering
applications. It will produce a framework allowing for plug-and-play
incorporation of application-specific prior information, and distributed
implementation. Beyond linear and batch GCCA, nonlinear GCCA and streaming GCCA
will be considered. These are appealing and timely for many applications, but
associated computational tools are sorely missing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms
of theory and methods, many key aspects of GCCA (such as convergence properties,
distributed implementation, and streaming variants) are still poorly understood.
The research will provide a set of high-performance computational tools that are
backed by advanced optimization theory and rigorous convergence guarantees. The
research will evolve along the following synergistic thrusts: 1) scalable and
stochastic GCCA algorithms; 2) distributed, streaming and nonlinear GCCA
algorithms; and 3) validation, using a series of timely and important
applications in remote sensing, brain imaging, natural language processing, and
sensor array processing. Devising scalable, flexible, streaming, and nonlinear
GCCA algorithms is very well-motivated for modern sensing and analytics problems
which involve rapidly increasing amounts of data with unknown underlying
dynamics. Using GCCA for large-scale dynamic and complex data also poses very
challenging and exciting modeling and optimization
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.