* 1808926
* Self-mixing Active Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kevin Mitchell, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 624,833.00

Active matter is one of the most exciting frontiers in soft matter science.
Unlike typical fluids, active fluids are not in equilibrium. Instead, they
consume energy locally, translating this energy into internal flows and
spontaneous mixing. In this project, mass transport and chaotic mixing in active
fluids will be investigated using a fluid consisting of microtubules and
kinesin, biological molecules found in the cell. Densely packed microtubules
slide antiparallel to each other at a controlled rate due to coupled kinesin
molecular motors. An exciting outcome of this work could be the development of a
new class of self-mixing active solvents. Such a solvent could revolutionize our
understanding of the kinetics of mass transport and chemical reactions. The
present proposal concerns much larger length scales than that of standard
solvents and will thus serve as an experimental model for these new ideas,
helping to establish fundamental laws that govern the behavior of active matter.
Since the contents of biological cells are highly complex active materials, far
from equilibrium, this work is expected to yield new insights into the role of
active materials in biology. A proposed Telluride workshop on transport in
active fluids will help to bring together the relatively disparate fields of
liquid crystals, biological fluids and nonlinear dynamics. This work will have a
significant educational impact at UC Merced, a new university in one of
California's most socio-economically disadvantaged areas. This research will
provide the basis for several undergraduate theses and the PIs will use insights
from this work to introduce cutting edge materials to their graduate and
undergraduate teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on transport
and mixing in a biologically inspired extensile active nematic. Densely packed
microtubules slide antiparallel to each other at a controlled rate due to
kinesin molecular motors and the resulting chaotic advection will be measured on
different length scales, using the experimental tools of particle tracking,
particle image velocimetry, and fluorescence imaging of labeled tracers.
Experimental data will be theoretically interpreted using the tools of nonlinear
and topological dynamics, thereby merging the fields of chaotic advection and
liquid crystals in a unique collaborative effort. Topological entropy will play
a central, unifying role in this study. Topological entropy is well known in
studies of chaotic advection, but has been thus far overlooked in studies of
active nematics. Specific aims are to: 1) use bead tracking and velocity
reconstruction, together with tools from nonlinear dynamics, to measure the
topological entropy of active nematic mixing; 2) measure the effective
diffusivity, enhanced by chaotic advection, of the active nematic on the
macroscale; and 3) investigate correlations between molecular-scale dynamics,
mesoscale mixing, and macroscale diffusion by varying system
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.