* 1808126
* Quantifying Hydroxylating Species in Dissolved Organic Matter Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Fernando Rosario-Ortiz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 475,373.00

With funding from the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the Division of
Chemistry, Drs. Fernando Rosario-Ortiz and Garrett McKay, from the University of
Colorado at Boulder, are studying the photochemistry of dissolved organic matter
(DOM). DOM is a mixture of organic molecules present in all aquatic
environments. DOM impacts many environmental processes, including the
degradation of organic contaminants in water. A fraction of the DOM absorbs
sunlight, and this fraction is commonly referred to as chromophoric DOM (CDOM).
Once CDOM absorbs light, it can form a collection of reactive species, including
the hydroxyl radical (OH) and other species that react in a similar manner
through hydroxylation reactions. These species collectively impact how organic
contaminants are degraded in the environment. The results from this study help
environmental chemists better understand the fate and transport of organic
contaminants in surface waters. Data from the research are incorporated into a
course and disseminated in seminars. &lt;br/&gt;The mechanism by which OH and
other hydroxylating species are photochemically produced from CDOM remain
unclear. Overall, the measured quantum yields for the production of OH from CDOM
are very small. The low steady-state concentration and transient nature of OH
require the use of probe compounds for its measurement. Over the past decade, a
consensus has grown that OH formation from CDOM photolysis can be apportioned
into both free OH as well as OH-like species, which are lower in energy and less
reactive than free OH. The latter of these species reacts with OH probes to
produce products identical to reaction with free OH. The contribution of OH-like
species to overall OH reactivity is up to 50% in some instances, and thus OH-
like oxidants produced from CDOM photolysis play an important role in
environmental photochemical processes, and ultimately in the degradation of
organic contaminants. This project focuses on characterizing the formation and
reactivity of OH-like species produced in CDOM photohydroxylation reactions. To
accomplish this, two aspects are evaluated. First, Drs. Rosario-Ortiz and McKay
characterize the reactivity and identity of low-energy oxidants produced in CDOM
photochemistry. Second, the relationship between CDOM composition and reactivity
towards formation of low-energy oxidants in CDOM photohydroxylation reactions is
being investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.