* 1808539
* Cooperative Action of Light and Surfactants in Plasmon-Driven Anisotropic Growth of Silver Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Wei Wei, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

Metallic nanoparticles can be created in a variety of different shapes. The
loosely held electrons in these small particles, which can be pushed around by
light, slosh around like waves in a pool. As the light intensity increases,
these waves (called plasmons) become bigger, and with enough energy they can
cause chemical reactions. The particle's shape can also affect the size of the
plasmon waves, with corners creating bigger waves than other parts of the
particle. As a result, particles with sharp features are desired. One strategy
for creating these complicated structures is to use light to promote the growth.
The problem is that the mechanism by which these sharp features form is not
understood, and therefore difficult to control. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Wei David Wei at the University of Florida is exploring
the light-driven growth of Ag nanostructures with prismatic shapes. Insights
gained from the project could lead to new materials, advancing technologies that
range from cancer therapies to solar energy conversion. The project is also
providing training opportunities for the next generation of scientists, as well
as educating high school students, teachers, and the general public on plasmonic
nanomaterials. Professor Wei also plans to develop radio modules in Spanish to
bring general science to groups historically underrepresented in the scientific
community in Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with his students, Professor
Wei is exploring the role of the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in driving the
growth of Ag nanoprisms. The process starts with spherical Ag nanoparticles,
which are then exposed to an intense light source. The team then watches the
particle grow using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) methods and electron
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and computer simulations aid in the
interpretation of the experimental data. Observations at the single-nanoparticle
level provide a detailed view of the underlying photophysical and chemical
processes regulating the plasmon-driven synthesis of the Ag nanoprisms. The
project is exploring the importance of a cooperative interplay between
surfactants and metal SPR to effectively harness plasmon-driven photochemistry
for nanomaterials synthesis. The molecular-level insights obtained in this
project not only lay the groundwork for the design and construction of other
types of shape-controlled plasmonic nanostructures, but more importantly, their
implications benefit a broader field of plasmonic photochemistry beyond
nanomaterials synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.