* 1808225
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Mechanisms of Microfluidic Traveling-Wave Electrophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Boyd Edwards, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This project is funded by the Chemistry Division of the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. Professors Aaron Timperman from the University of
Illinois and Boyd Edwards from Utah State University are investigating the
fundamental mechanisms of a new separation method called microfluidic traveling-
wave electrophoresis (TWE). TWE is a promising method for reducing the
complexity of samples that may come from biological organisms or the
environment. In the investigation of the mechanisms of TWE, the team is
determining precisely how TWE works and on optimizing its performance. The
unique characteristics of TWE separations make it well-suited for applications
that cannot be achieved with other separation methods. The TWE separation is
driven with very low voltages (+/-0.5 V) which are 1,000 to 10,000 times smaller
than its nearest relative, microchannel electrophoresis. This low voltage
requirement makes TWE highly compatible with fieldable sensing systems. TWE
should prove helpful in applications such as detection of biomarkers in human
medical, forensic, and drug testing, detection of toxic substances in the
environment, and detection of threat agents for homeland defense. The team
collaborates with the Illinois Academic Ambassadors to enhance exposure of
middle school and high school students to STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;A combined
experimental and theoretical modeling approach is used to provide a thorough and
quantitative description of the mechanisms of TWE. TWE is distinct as a low
frequency AC electrophoretic separation in which a longitudinal electric field
wave propagates through the microfluidic channel. The separation mechanisms of
TWE are unique: TWE can rapidly switch between separative transport, non-
separative transport, and immobilization simply by changing the frequency of the
traveling wave; and both anions and cations move in the same direction. The goal
of this work is to fully understand and quantitatively describe the fundamental
mechanisms of traveling wave electrophoresis. The objectives are: 1) determining
the mechanisms of zone migration, 2) determining the mechanisms of zone
dispersion, and 3) defining the fundamental equations of separation efficiency,
resolution, and peak capacity. The experimental results guide the development of
the theoretical models, and the fundamental equations derived are experimentally
verified. These fundamental equations provide a basis with which this separation
method can be quantitatively compared with others and inform optimal device
design. The experimental team includes both undergraduate and graduate students.
This is an interdisciplinary project that exposes students to separations,
theoretical modeling, and fabrication in Engineering. An outreach component is
included that impacts middle and high school students, exposing them to STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.