* 1808372
* A Multifocal Approach for Improving the Speed of 1064 nm Raman Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 439,500.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Chan at the University of California, Davis, is
developing a new imaging instrument to look at chemical samples. He plans to
design and build a microscope that can improve the imaging speed and can go to
the deep infared region (1064 nm wavelength excitation), which would allow the
detection of deeply embedded chemical species. Professor Chan's new instrument
is expected to be useful in many areas, including forensics, pharmaceutics,
archaeology, and agriculture, to name a few. Professor Chan also plans to work
with his collaborator in University of Nevada, Reno, to apply this method to
study the uptake of nanoparticles from the environment in plant tissue. The
particular type of nanoparticles they are interested in, carbon nanotubes (CNT),
are used in many commercial products and their inevitable release into the
environment poses many potential environmental, food safety, and human health
concerns. Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of CNT uptake into plant
materials is very important to mitigate this effect. The collaborative nature of
this research effort provides participating students with unique experience at
the interface of chemical measurement and environmental engineering. It also
promotes cross-disciplinary activities in science and technology at UC Davis and
University of Nevada, Reno. In synergy with the research, Professor Chan is
developing an education and outreach program to include participation of local
high school and college undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Improving
imaging speed is a major challenge in the field of Raman microscopy. This
project is focused on addressing this issue by developing a novel multifocal
system designed to detect spectra from multiple regions within a specimen
simultaneously. This multifocal design generates a 2-D array of laser spots that
illuminate the sample, and the laser spots are rapidly turned on and off by
scanning the laser beam using fast scan mirrors in defined patterns to acquire a
series of superimposed spectral data that is then deconvoluted to retrieve the
individual spectra from each laser focus with minimal spectral crosstalk. The
goal of this project is to integrate this design into a 1064 nm Raman microscope
equipped with an indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) photodiode linear array and to
demonstrate improved imaging speeds at fast read out rates. The imaging speed
and signal-to-noise ratio is characterized as a function of different sized
laser focal array patterns and the optimal multifocal design is determined. This
instrument is then used to image carbon nanotubes that have been uptaken into
plant tissues using the characteristic G-band and D-band Raman signatures of
CNTs. Uptake and retention times, as well as spatial distribution of the CNTs
are to be determined and quantified based on the Raman images. The effect of
microbial activity (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-degrading bacteria) on
CNT degradation and its impact on CNT plant uptake dynamics is to be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.