* 1808311
* Scaffold-based Synthetic Models of Mono-Iron Hydrogenase: Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Rose, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Prof. Michael Rose at the University of Texas at Austin to
investigate the role of the iron center in an enzyme called mono-iron
hydrogenase. This enzyme is molecule important for the capture of carbon dioxide
(CO2) in methanogens, which are single cell microorganisms that can be found for
example in the human gut and in wetlands. These organisms are very efficient at
transforming dihydrogen (H2) and CO2 from the environment in which they live
into methane. In contrast, artificial way to capture and transform H2 and CO2
are much less efficient. Furthermore while the enzymes, in particular mono-iron
hydrogenase, utilize earth abundant metals like iron and nickel, many synthetic
analogues of the enzymes utilize precious metals like platinum, iridium or
palladium. The research of Professor Rose focuses on understanding how the mono-
iron hydrogenase catalyzes the chemical transformation in the methanogens and
applying this understanding to developing artificial catalysts as efficient as
the enzyme. Professor Rose also participates in the outreach program called
H2fromH2O. He interacts with high school students in the central Texas region to
demonstrate the fundamental science, environmental impact and possible
applications for splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen and derive energy from
this process. The students who participate in the outreach program further
disseminate such lessons to their families and communities. This serves to raise
awareness about the importance of developing renewable energy technologies. UT
Austin undergraduates directly participate in the outreach efforts, become
motivate to do research, and pursue job opportunities and graduate education in
energy-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The available, iron-based synthetic
(artificial) systems of a molecular nature do not replicate the speed and
efficiency of the naturally occurring system. This research seeks to understand
how components of the natural system can be incorporated to provide for enhanced
reactivity. There are three technical approaches to understanding the
H2-activating and hydride transfer activity of the enzyme mono-iron hydrogenase.
First, synthetic model complexes are hybridized with protein hosts to determine
the effect of the protein environment on the spectroscopic properties and
functional reactivity of the model complexes (versus stand-alone metal
complexes). Second, the "anthracene scaffold" strategy for assembling the
biomimetic fac-CNS motif is modified with more flexible "anthranoid" scaffolds
to investigate the role of protein-like flexibility of the donor arms on the
reactivity of the model complexes. Third, the complexes contain a biomimetic
pyridine moiety, which is hypothesized to assist in H2 heterolysis as a pendant
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.