* 1808163
* Surface and Interface Effects on Photovoltaic and Light-Emitting Characteristics of Colloidal Nanocrystal Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 467,631.00

Nontechnical Description: Semiconductors have enabled numerous technologies
including computers, solar cells and LED lighting. The emerging ability to make
semiconductor materials sufficiently small such that varying their size and
shape drastically alters their optical and electrical properties is paving new
paths to improving device efficiencies and, more importantly, imparting them
with new capabilities. This project examines and improves on such semiconductors
that can be synthesized and processed by relatively simple means, using chemical
solutions. These materials can enable new or multiple functions in devices, for
example, allowing a pixel in a display screen to not only emit but also sense
light. Such a capability may in turn simplify the design and manufacturing of
electronics such as smart phones and tablets, to imbue them with multiple new
functionalities while reducing their size, weight, and energy consumption.
Multi-faceted challenges to be tackled here provide ample educational and
training opportunities for the students involved, helping them be better
prepared to become leaders in interdisciplinary science and engineering fields.
The PI is committed to building on the research results of this project to
enhance teaching and promote benefits of emerging science and technologies to
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Colloidal
quantum dots and, in particular, their heterostructures that can be processed
through simple solution means are generating new opportunities through
simplified fabrication processes, improved device performance and new functional
capabilities. Central to incorporating these materials into
electronic/optoelectronic devices is the understanding of how their surfaces and
interfaces affect placement of charge carriers in and out of these materials. In
turn, exploiting different surfaces/interfaces to control these fundamental
processes and therefore improve device characteristics is essential in paving
the path to the next generation of devices incorporating emerging nanoscale
materials. This project examines critical surface and interfacial factors that
impact photovoltaic and electroluminescence characteristics of devices
consisting of colloidal quantum dots and in particular, their anisotropic
heterostructures. Varying composition and shape provides a deeper understanding
of the interplay between surface/interface effects, the underlying band
structure, and shape/anisotropy. The knowledge gained should be broadly
applicable to designing new materials with appropriate surfaces and interfaces
for radically improved device performance and capabilities. The research
endeavors of this project are synergistic with education and outreach efforts.
Research findings inspire teaching and mentoring activities, impacting education
while also promoting interest in fundamental science among the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.