* 1808978
* Advanced Research on Second-Order Variational Analysis with New Applications to Optimization, Control, and Practical Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Boris Mordukhovich, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 239,975.00

This project is devoted to developing advanced tools of mathematical analysis
and optimization of large-scale systems arising in various applications. Such
systems include nonstandard optimization-related and equilibrium problems with
data that may not be differentiable in the usual sense. Besides developing new
mathematical knowledge, the principal investigator and his seven PhD students
who participate in the project (including four students from underrepresented
groups in the mathematical sciences) pay particular attention to a variety of
models arising in applications from socioeconomics, traffic equilibria,
behavioral science, and water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
studies new topics in second-order variational analysis, optimization, and
systems control that are largely motivated by problems arising in applications.
It is conditionally divided into five interrelated parts. Part I concerns open
problems in second-order generalized differential theory and its applications to
optimization-related areas of nonlinear analysis. Particular attention is paid
to constructive computations of major second-order generalized derivatives for
remarkable classes of extended-real-valued functions which play a crucial role
in the subsequent parts of the project. Part II is devoted to second-order
characterizations of various stability notions, including tilt and full
stability in nonpolyhedral conic programming, and elliptic variational
inequalities. Part III of the project deals with the study of critical
multipliers in variational systems that are largely responsible for the slow
convergence of primal-dual algorithms of optimization. Here, the PI and his
collaborators develop new Newton-type methods to solve nonsmooth optimization
and related problems. Part IV is devoted to novel developments in control
theory, including feedback control and stabilization of ODE and PDE systems.
Another major topic considered is optimal control of nonconvex versions of the
sweeping process that plays a key role in subsequent applications. Some of these
applications are the focus of Part V of the project, where the PI and his
collaborators undertake a comprehensive study of the optimization problems for
the controlled planar crowd motion model, which is well recognized in
socioeconomics and traffic equilibria. Other types of applications considered
stem from behavioral sciences and water resource
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.