* 1808449
* Covalent and Transition State Inhibitor Design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrew Murkin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 468,000.00

This award funds Professor Andrew Murkin of the University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, to develop a series of compounds that may serve as
specific inhibitors of an enzyme critical to metabolism in plants and bacteria,
known as isocitrate lyase (ICL). One of the obstacles to inhibitor design is
ensuring selective binding to ICL over other potential targets. Meeting this
goal usually requires a special interaction or group of interactions between the
inhibitor and the enzyme. One strategy for accomplishing this is to introduce a
part of an inhibitor that only sticks to the target if it is in just the right
place for an interaction. A second strategy is to have the inhibitor resemble
what is happening during the catalyzed conversion. This tricks the enzyme into
binding to the inhibitor tightly and with great specificity. The current
research aims to develop compounds that inhibit ICL by one of these two
strategies, which may prove to be a general means for inhibiting numerous
enzymes. Educational development is provided to undergraduate and graduate
students, and local area teachers will be trained to perform hands-on lessons
that introduce enzymes to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
exploits two properties of aliphatic nitro compounds that may lead to potent
enzyme inhibition. The first of these is previously unknown and therefore
investigated in detail. Specifically, the carbon adjacent to the nitro group can
act as an electrophile for covalent reaction with a neighboring cysteine residue
under certain conditions when bound to an enzyme. Kinetic, mass spectral, and
X-ray crystallographic experiments are proposed to elucidate the mechanism by
which this reaction occurs between a simple nitro compound and ICL. In an
attempt to improve selectivity, more elaborate nitro compounds will be prepared
and tested. The second property of nitro compounds that will be utilized here is
the resemblance of their conjugate bases, called nitronates, to the aci enolate
form of their carboxylic acid equivalents. Through the use of kinetic isotope
effects and computational modeling, the transition state of ICL will be
determined. Nitronate analogues of the transition state will be prepared, with
the goal of obtaining strong binding with ICL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.