* 1808829
* Controlled Molecular Assembly for 3D Nanoprinting
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2023
* USD 702,597.00

Professor Gang-Yu Liu of the University of California Davis is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry to further miniaturize three-dimensional (3D) printing technology
from its current minimum feature size of about 0.3 micrometer to less than 0.1
micrometer (100 nanometer), which is a tiny fraction (less than 1/100,000) of
the thickness of a human hair. While 3D printing at the macro- and micro-scale
is relatively mature, achieving nanometer feature size and precision is still a
challenge. To address this, the project tackles two fundamental issues: (a) how
to deliver ultra-small amounts of material; and (b) how to deliver the materials
to the designed location with nanometer precision. The project advances a new
approach with novel chemistry concepts for the assembly of molecules into 3D
nanostructures by design. This approach may bring us closer to achieving
controlled physical and chemical properties by controlling how the molecules are
put together. This project broadens the application of 3D printing in diverse
fields, such as in nanotechnology, nanodevices and sensors, tissue engineering,
and in biochemistry and biomedical research. It also boosts the capability of
additive manufacturing down to the nanometer scale and consequently enhances the
competitive edge of the United States 3D printing industry. Graduate students
are trained in research methods at the forefront of nanotechnology and additive
manufacturing. Professor Liu continues her long-term collaborations with local
community colleges and her international education and outreach activities. The
outreach activities include summer research opportunities and seminars to
stimulate the interest of a diverse group of students in advanced chemistry
education and to increase awareness of 3D printing and its societal
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on controlling the assembly
of polymer molecules by direct writing of solutions containing designated
components. To achieve molecular level control, a state-of-the-art atomic force
microscope is interfaced with a nanofluidic delivery system. The former is an
existing technology for high-resolution imaging with nanometer precision, and
the latter can be considered as an ultra-small needle (opening as small as 30
nm). The research team has recently improved the delivery of femtoliter
droplets, and prior work and preliminary data have demonstrated the feasibility
of assembly at the microscale level. The project builds on this foundation. The
aim is to reduce the droplet size down to the sub-attoliter level. Towards this
end, contact time, pressure and the hydrophobicity of surfaces are modified to
weaken inter-molecular and molecule-surface interactions and consequently
enhance the kinetics of the assembly process. Long-term collaborations with
local community colleges continue with the designed research project, summer
research program, seminar and educational activities. These activities attract a
more diverse population of students into advanced chemistry education.
International research and education activities keep the team well informed and
updated in the field of atomic force microscopy and&lt;br/&gt;3D printing
research and development efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.