* 1808888
* Labor Market Mobility and Migration
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Joshua Wassink, Wassink                 Joshua         T
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Sociology
program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Douglas Massey at Princeton University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the relation between migration and mobility. While extensive
research explores patterns of migration and immigrant incorporation in the
United States, comparatively little is known about the reintegration of those
who return. This project investigates return migrants labor market reintegration
and repeat migration behavior. This study will guide policymakers in sending and
receiving countries as they seek to monitor international migration and
facilitate returnees' labor market reincorporation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research addresses four broad questions: First, what are the most
common labor market trajectories among return migrants? Second, why do some
return migrants achieve upward mobility while others drift to the margins of the
unregulated economy? Third, how does return migrants' labor market reintegration
affect their risk of subsequent internal or international migrations? Fourth,
how do return migrants' labor market trajectories and migration behaviors vary
across time and space? To address the stated questions, the PI will 1) use
sequence analysis to identify distinct labor market trajectories among return
migrants; 2) fit hazard models with competing risks to predict entry into
different labor market trajectories; 3) test the association between returnees'
labor market trajectories and their socioeconomic status - income and wealth; 4)
fit multinomial logistic regression models to assess the effect of return
migrants' labor market trajectories on the odds of re-migrating to the United
States or migrating internally; 5) use stratified models and interaction terms
to assess changes in labor market reintegration and repeat migration across time
and space. This study makes four contributions to research on international
migration and economic mobility. First, using sequence analysis, the PI will map
return migrants' heterogeneous labor market experiences. Second, using these
trajectories, the PI will determine how theoretical expectations match return
migrants' observed labor market experiences. Third, this project advances
knowledge about the perpetuation of international migration by examining the
relation between labor market reintegration and the odds of repeat or internal
migration. Fourth, this project investigates how time and space in turn shape
return migrants' labor market trajectories and repeat migration
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.