* 1808507
* Development of Sensitive Electrochemiluminescent Immunoassays through Electric Field Assisted Rapid Analyte Capture and Rational Design of the Reporter Catalyst/Reaction System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Debashis Dutta, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 459,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program
of the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program. Immunoassays offer a powerful approach to
quantitating a variety of biological substances such as proteins, peptides,
antibodies, and hormones, etc., in complex mixtures such as blood, saliva and
sweat. Immunoassays are based on antigen-antibody interactions and as such, are
very specific, capable of measuring very low concentrations. Professors Debashis
Dutta and Michael Taylor of the University of Wyoming (UW) are developing
electrochemiluminescent (ECL) immunoassays. The limits of measurement with this
technique are over 1000-10,000 times lower than those using the current Enzyme
Linked ImmunoSorbent Assays (ELISA). The development of even more rapid
processes and new antigen-antibody interactions are central to this research.
Education efforts include constructing a portable ECL instrument for use in the
undergraduate classroom as well as developing a laboratory module for the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum at UW. The team also continues to develop an
outreach program with the Central Wyoming College (CWC). CWC enrolls significant
numbers of Native Americans and first generation college students. The outreach
activities with CWC include presentations on micro-/nanoscale analytical devices
to the Science, Math and Engineering Club at CWC, as well as intensive on-site
demonstrations of nanotechnology for the interested club member. These
activities encourage the students to pursue careers in biotech and biomedical
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the capture of antigen
molecules on an electrode surface using a steady or a pulsating electric field.
This technique improves the analyte capture efficiency as well as reduces the
sample incubation period in the immunoassay. Moreover, the integration of an ECL
detection method to the assay is pursued by triggering ECL reactions at the same
electrodes. As part of this effort, the signal-to-noise ratio in the experiments
may be improved through the synthesis of peptide-based catalyst oligomers which
are chemically appended to well-defined locations on an antibody using cysteine-
based conjugation chemistry. This project advances the national health and
increases the participation of a wide range of students, including Native
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.