* 1808160
* Workshops for Facilitating Faculty to Teach Electric Energy Courses for Combating Climate Change. To Be Held at The University of Minnesota.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ned Mohan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2023
* USD 277,697.00

The global climate is changing rapidly and 97% of the climate scientists agree
that it's changing because of human activities. The business as usual will
result in catastrophic consequences with poorest of the poor at the frontline.
Combating climate change in a serious way will necessitate that the emission of
greenhouse gases be reduced to near-zero levels very soon, before the point of
no return is reached.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will require converting much of
our energy use including transportation from fossil fuels to electricity
generated from renewables such as solar and wind. Renewables are variable in
nature and therefore an uninterruptible supply of electricity will require a
"smart grid" with storage. Finally, this energy must be conserved and consumed
very efficiently. &lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal will entail a sea change in
designing, manufacturing, delivering and consuming electricity. Education is
always the first step and a thorough look at the titles of the courses offered
at the U.S. universities shows that only a handful of universities are offering
appropriate courses. Therefore, it is essential to quickly implement such
courses at as many universities as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
challenge in mind, large numbers of forward-looking courses have been developed
at the University of Minnesota through funding by the U.S. Navy, the Office of
Naval Research (ONR). These courses archive the institutional knowledge of
academic and industrial experts from across the country, with the express
purpose of being a resource for instructors at all universities and colleges to
teach their own students teaching the teachers, as a force-multiplier. In
addition, the content of all the course can be freely downloaded by anyone, thus
making it accessible to practicing engineers as well.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through this NSF grant, three faculty workshops will be held where
the experts who developed these courses will familiarize the university
instructors in-person who can then quickly implement these courses at their home
institutions for the nationwide development of the workforce to combat climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.