* 1808087
* Unfolding Noncanonical Functions of Lysine Acetyltransferases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Y George Zheng, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 471,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Y. George Zheng from University of Georgia to
investigate novel functions of enzymes called KATs. Previously the actions of
KATs were known to control genes in an on-off fashion. Recent discoveries
revealed new biological roles for KATs nearly every place in the cell, beyond
the effect on genes. Functions of KATs are far more complex than previously
regarded with impacts on multifaceted biological processes, including promoting
entirely new chemical reactions. In this project, the PI designed a series of
biochemical and cellular experimental studies to discover and characterize new
functions of the major KAT enzymes. A highly multidisciplinary approach is
proposed to dissect novel KAT functions. This pursuit is directly related to the
PI's efforts in the training of graduate and undergraduate students in chemical
biology and biochemistry. By undertaking these projects, students will learn how
to apply advanced technologies to resolve key biological research problems. This
project also integrates outreach activities to introduce high school students to
the science of enzyme biochemistry. These research-related educational efforts
are important to prepare next-generation scientists in chemical and biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project undertakes the development
and application of new chemical biology tools to profile cellular substrates and
new functions of the major KAT enzymes, with the goal of significantly advancing
protein acylation research. The PI refines and applies a bioorthogonal labeling
technology to investigate substrate profiles of the major KATs at the proteomic
level. The PI and coworkers also investigate a novel lysine acylation mark in
histones and non-histone proteins that they recently discovered. In these
experiments, the team identifies enzymes that catalyze the addition and removal
of the novel modification mark. The proposed research has great potential to
generate new chemical tools for KAT activity investigation, offers a systematic
view of KAT substrate distribution in the cell, provides a mechanistic
understanding of KAT functions, and to a broader level, advances the knowledge
of posttranslational modifications in chromatin remodeling, metabolic pathways,
and signal transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.