* 1808483
* Collaborative Research: Conformal Assemblies of Polyphosphazenes with Controlled Biofunctionality
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Svetlana Sukhishvili, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,999.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on engineering
multifunctional biomaterials with advanced capabilities such as controlled
protein adsorption and the ability to self-heal. Many current, clinical polymer
coatings are susceptible to a build-up of proteins on the surface once in the
body. While solutions have been proposed, it remains a challenge to combine the
ability to repel proteins with other advanced capabilities such as self-healing
and controllable drug release. This project focuses on the creation of coatings
for devices such as coronary stents, catheters, or artificial implants, which
are all in intimate contact with a large variety of biological milieu.
Therefore, it is desirable for such coatings to (a) be easy to apply to a
variety of biomedically relevant substrates in a controllable manner; and (b) be
biocompatible and biodegradable with predictable, non-toxic degradation
components. The layer-by-layer (LbL) technique is chosen as a powerful means to
create conformal coatings of controlled thickness on virtually any surface from
all aqueous assembly. This project will explore the ability of novel hybrid
polymers, which are based on an inorganic backbone with structurally diverse
organic pendant groups, to assemble via the LbL technique, undergo controlled
degradation, and facilitate modulated release of bioactive molecules. The goal
will be to achieve easy to manufacture biocompatible coatings that combine the
desired properties. Advanced instrumental techniques will be used to understand
the effects of coating chemistry on ability to self-heal, prevent protein
adhesion, and load/release drugs along with the ability to control interactions
with biological surroundings. Importantly, this project will create a fertile
training ground for the participating graduate and undergraduate students which
will be recruited via the Aggie Research Program. One PI is currently the
academic advisor of the "Women in Materials Science" (WIMS) organization, which
promotes the inclusion of female and minority students in science &amp;
engineering through active engagement in outreach activities both on and off
campus. The other PI is actively involved in "Frontiers in Science and Medicine
Day" for middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;PART II: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The search for multifunctional biomaterials interfacing
biological systems, such as artificial implants, including coronary stents and
catheters, is one of the most critical and challenging areas of life sciences.
Current polymer coatings in clinical use are based on traditional commodity
polymers, are often deposited on solid surfaces via solution casting using
organic solvents, lack desired chemical functionalities, and reliable control
over loading and release of bioactives. This proposal aims to (a) explore the
fundamental properties of layer-by-layer (LbL) assemblies based on novel
polyphosphazene (PPz) polyelectrolytes with tailored bio-functionality, (b)
probe structure-property relationships through a set of experiments addressing
physico-chemical properties of the films, and relate them to protein adsorption
and adhesion of smooth muscle and epithelial cells, and (c) explore the
combination of self-healing and controlled drug release. This project will
involve synthesizing novel PPz polyelectrolytes, which combine a unique mixture
of properties (extreme chain flexibility, unprecedented structural diversity,
multi-functionality, and controlled hydrolytic degradability). Electrostatic
interactions will be used to form well defined polyelectrolyte multilayers,
whose thickness and growth patterns will be characterized with ellipsometry.
Inclusion of bioactive molecules will be studied through direct self-assembly of
PPzs with small charged molecules, while amount loaded and released of small
molecules will be studied using LC-MS. Moreover, the interaction of such
coatings with human endothelial and smooth muscle cells, adsorption of proteins,
(HSA, fibrinogen) and biocompatibility will be assessed. These findings will
enable rational design of biocompatible coatings for self-healing and drug-
loading for applications such as coronary stents, catheters, or artificial
implants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.