* 1808213
* Probing Contrast Mechanisms of Super-resolution Atomic Force Microscopy for Imaging Multifunctional Self-assembled Monolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2023
* USD 538,244.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Tao Ye and Ashlie Martini at University of California,
Merced, are combining experimental and computational approaches to study how
molecules interact at the atomic level and how this interaction affects the
resolution of an imaging tool -atomic force microscope. They hope their findings
could improve the ability to image complex, technologically relevant surfaces
such as biosensors and devices under practical operating conditions. Given the
importance of biosensors and devices in wearable technologies, personalized
medicine and national security, the advances made through this project could
potentially offer long-term economic and societal benefits. The research goals
of the project are complemented by education/outreach objectives that leverage
the diverse student population at UC Merced. Professors Ye and Martini plan to
actively recruit and train talented graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups. The research team is also engaging with pre-college
audiences through a variety of mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key goal of
the research project is to understand the interaction forces between a small
number of atoms at the very end of the atomic force microscope (AFM) tip, i.e.,
the tip apex, and a small number of atoms on the surface; these interactions
ultimately determine the subnanometer scale contrast of in situ atomic force
microscopy. Professors Ye and Martini are elucidating the nature of the chemical
forces responsible for subnanometer-scale contrast by combining non-contact
imaging of nanoscale chemical patterns with a chemically modified AFM tip apex
and state-of-the-art molecular dynamics simulations of AFM imaging. Moreover,
the team is applying the knowledge to obtain more reproducible super-resolution
mapping of the molecular components of DNA-functionalized self-assembled
monolayers that have been widely used in electrochemical DNA sensors. The
proposed new experimental and computational approaches are filling a critical
knowledge gap in the image contrast mechanisms of subnanometer resolution AFM
and allow it to become a more reproducible and broadly applicable surface
chemical imaging tool. The new advances may be applicable to a variety of
surfaces, including self-assembled monolayer-based biosensors, microarrays, and
supported lipid bilayers, and can impact fields from biotechnology to life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.