* 1808189
* Efficient and Scalable Production  Efficient and Scalable Production of Biomolecular Materials Using Enzymatic Oxidative Coupling Strategies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Matthew Francis, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 435,000.00

The interface between biological molecules and synthetic materials represents a
major research frontier that has potential applications in medical diagnostics,
disease treatment, pathogen detection and monitoring, and industrial catalysis.
Key to these applications is the availability of efficient chemical technologies
for the attachment of synthetic components to specific locations on complex
protein and nucleic acid surfaces. Although a number of time-tested strategies
already exist for this purpose, they are generally difficult to control and
costly to use on large scale. Additionally, most of these strategies generate
complex mixtures of products leading to poorly-defined materials. In this
project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Matthew B. Francis of the University of California,
Berkeley, will develop a new enzyme-based reaction for the incorporation of
proteins and nucleic acids in synthetic materials. Relative to other methods,
this technique can modify complex proteins in single locations and relies on
inexpensive building blocks that are available on any desired scale. The program
yields a powerful technology that can be used to combine any protein with
virtually any material of interest through well-defined linkages. Outreach
activities supported by this program spark science interest in K-5 students in
local schools. Classroom presentations based on "Chemistry and Biology in the
Kitchen" are being developed. The presentations will include memorable and
engaging demonstrations of chemical concepts using marshmallows, chocolate, blue
berries, and other foods kids love. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The chemistry in this
program is based on a series of oxidative coupling reactions that generate
ortho-quinone and ortho-iminoquinone intermediates. These intermediates can
react with anilines, N-terminal prolines, and free cysteine side chains of
various materials with very high rates to yield highly stable conjugates. This
class of reactions has been found to work with a full range of biological
functional groups attached to polymers, chromophores, and nanoparticles.
Previously, this reaction was initiated by the addition of oxidants, such as
ferricyanide or periodate. We explore an enzyme-catalyzed method that has
similar efficiency using atmospheric oxygen as the oxidant and producing water
as the sole byproduct. Specific goals of this program include (1) demonstrating
the utility of the technique on a series of interesting protein substrates, (2)
optimizing the enzyme component of the reaction to afford greater catalytic
efficiency and storage stability, and (3) showcasing the application of the new
chemistry to the modification of cellulosic substrates, such as paper and cotton
to produce low-cost, biodegradable materials for water
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.