* 1808276
* RUI: Determination of the Kinetic Expressions and Mechanisms of the Photochemical Degradation and Oxidation of Dicamba
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Amanda Nienow, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 217,674.00

This award by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Chemistry
Division supports work by Professor Amanda Nienow at Gustavus Adolphus College.
She is examining chemical reactions of the herbicide dicamba. Although dicamba
has been on the market for over thirty years, it is being used more often on
agricultural fields now as new genetically-modified soybean plants can tolerate
dicamba. The 2017 growing season saw the first use of these soybeans in the US -
and by the end of the summer, there were thousands of complaints from farmers on
land adjacent to fields. Herbicide drifting through the air appeared to be
causing crop damage in down-wind fields. In this project, environmental systems
(for example, water or air based systems) are examined to understand how dicamba
changes through reactions with other compounds in the environment and through
interactions with sunlight. In addition, this project provides research
opportunities for undergraduate students, which prepares them to enter the
workforce or graduate or professional schools. These students will also help
develop and institute a "Chemistry Night" for regional high school students. The
team also collaborates with international partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The photochemistry and reactivity of the
chlorinated herbicide dicamba and the impact of additives in formulated
agricultural products is being examined from several angles. These include
heterogeneous photochemistry on the surface of epicuticular waxes and leaves,
gas-phase photochemistry, and heterogeneous reactivity with hydroxyl radical,
the primary gas-phase oxidant. The influence of surfactants and inactive
ingredients in the commercial formulation of dicamba on these reactions is
examined. The results may provide insight into the photodegradation and
oxidation mechanisms and (photo)products of dicamba. This research enhances the
current understanding of the environmental chemistry of dicamba. This work also
provides new methods to examine the photolysis of chemicals sorbed to surfaces
and heterogeneous reactions with gas-phase oxidants. Undergraduates participate
in all aspects of this interdisciplinary project and gain experience in a wide
range of fields. Prior success with chemistry outreach with young students is
expanded upon with programming for regional, mostly rural, high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.