* 1808239
* Understanding Surface-Mediated Hyperpolarization of Water and other Neat Liquids from Parahydrogen
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Clifford Bowers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 470,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Measurements and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division, Professors Clifford R Bowers and Wenyu Huang and their
groups at the University of Florida and Iowa State University seek to understand
the SWAMP effect (surface waters are magnetized by parahydrogen), a recently
discovered phenomenon which could significantly increase the sensitivity of
molecular analysis by magnetic resonance in aqueous media - a key challenge for
improving, for example, medical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The SWAMP
effect could provide an inexpensive, portable, and continuously generated source
of "hyper-magnetized" water needed for some types of MRI, offering an
alternative to the expensive, high-maintenance approaches normally used. Hence,
the SWAMP effect could facilitate medical diagnostic MRI in remote or
impoverished areas. The concepts are adapted for outreach presentations to high
school students through coordination with several programs in the University of
Florida?s Center for Precollegiate Education and Training (CPET). At Iowa State,
related outreach activities include science shows and involvement of
undergraduates and high school students in suitable research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is inspired by the recent
discovery of surface-mediated proton hyperpolarization of liquid water,
methanol, and ethanol by heterogeneous catalysis over Pt3Sn intermetallic
nanoparticles (iNPs) sheathed in mesoporous silica (Pt3Sn@mSiO2). Guided by
theory, structure/activity correlations are systematically studied as a function
of the catalyst properties (e.g. surface structure, composition, particle sizes,
encapsulation shell termination) and reaction conditions (temperature, magnetic
field, solvent composition (chemical and isotopic)). Variation of catalyst
properties is based on well-established principles of heterogeneous catalysis
involving the d-band center and electronegativity properties of the constituent
atoms. The goals of this project are to (1) understand the mechanism
underpinning the SWAMP effect, (2) use the mechanistic understanding to develop
new catalysts to increase the efficiency of the SWAMP process, (3) explore the
generality of the NMR signal enhancement on a variety of neat liquids and
solutions, and (4) investigate potential applications. The research and outreach
plans are being carried out by an interdisciplinary team of chemists ? a
catalyst materials specialist (Wenyu Huang, Iowa State University), an NMR
spectroscopist (Russ Bowers, University of Florida), and a computational chemist
(Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas, Austin).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.