* 1808751
* Tailoring electronic and photonic properties of van der Waals semiconductor heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nontechnical description: The ability to tailor materials at the nanoscale has
been a key enabler for many technology breakthroughs, exemplified by the
continuing development of semiconductors for computing and information
technologies. Over the last few years, a new class of electronic materials has
emerged - atomic crystals with a thicknesses of only one or a few atoms, known
as two-dimensional materials. These materials systems provide a new platform for
electronic and photonic devices. One interesting approach to investigating the
nature of these materials is by stacking various types of them to form new
hybrid layered materials. The electronic properties of the resulting stacks are
governed by electrical forces and interactions between the various layers. This
research explores the controlling factors that determine the interlayer
interactions. Findings from this study are used to achieve rational design of
stacks with desirable electronic and optical properties, which may be suitable
for new types of optoelectronic devices. Educationally, a special topic course
work is designed to introduce this new frontier of materials research to
graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, a laboratory-based discovery
process is designed to reach out to high school students through a summer
internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The introduction
of semiconductor heterostructures enabled many novel designs of electronics and
photonics, leading to transformative semiconductor technologies. The recent
emergence of atomically thin crystalline two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors
creates exciting new opportunities for pushing semiconductor heterostructures
towards a new frontier. In particular, vertically stacked van der Waals (vdW)
heterostructures were quickly recognized as a powerful platform for creating
atomically thin heterostructures with great design flexibility. A central
scientific issue is the role of interlayer coupling, which can alter the
electronic structures of each vdW layer individually, and the stack as a whole.
This project systematically investigates how interlayer atomic alignment impacts
the electronic structure of vdW heterostructures. Moreover, using interlayer
coupling as the design parameter, the research creates a sequence of 2D
electronic superlattices with novel electronic and photonic properties.
Scientifically, activities provide researchers in the field with important
design parameters to tailor the electronic and photonic structures of vdW
heterostructures. Technologically, the new generation of electronic and photonic
materials and devices driven by this new line of research have important
applications that benefit society. Educationally, graduate students trained
through this study gain a broad scientific perspective. Through the design of a
special course, the PI continues to enhance campus-wide graduate/undergraduate
education in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The research also enables
broadening participation of students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.