* 1808304
* Structural Basis for Glucan Phosphatase Function in Photosynthetic Organisms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Craig Vander Kooi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Craig Vander Kooi from the University of Kentucky to
investigate a fundamental and as yet poorly understood aspect of carbohydrate
metabolism. Plants store energy in the form of carbohydrates in starch. Starch
is ideally suited to store energy, but the properties that make it able to store
the energy present a barrier to releasing the energy. Plants utilize direct
chemical modification of the components of starch to overcome this barrier,
allowing efficient and rapid energy release. While of clear biological
importance, there are key gaps in our understanding of how this takes place. The
tools of structural biology and biochemistry are employed in this research to
address these key questions. Understanding and controlling this modification has
considerable promise as an innovative strategy to both understand the chemistry
of this process in living systems and harness it to engineer and utilize starch.
This project impacts training of students in both fundamental and applied
research. Innovative approaches allow preparation of the next generation of
highly skilled young scientists with training in cutting edge interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural basis for the specificity and
functional coupling of the members of glucan phosphatase family members are
defined, elucidating the critical function of this modification. This research
project utilizes high resolution X-ray crystallographic studies coupled to
biochemical methodology to define the molecular enzymology of glucan
phosphatases. Crystal structures determined as part of the studies will be made
publicly available in the Protein DataBank (pdb.org). Structure/function studies
of glucan phosphatases from diverse kingdoms of photosynthetic organisms define
the shared and specific features of enzymatic activity critical for starch
metabolism. Information from this study defines the structural mechanism of
glucan phosphatases in diverse photosynthetic organisms and explores methods to
harness this unique chemical carbohydrate
modification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.