* 1808242
* D3SC: Data-Driven Modeling and Experimental Investigation for Discovery of Aquatic Chemistry Reaction Kinetics: New Tools for Water Reuse Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Haizhou Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2022
* USD 501,059.00

This award is supported by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
NSF Chemistry Division. Professors Bryan M. Wong and Haizhou Liu at the
University of California-Riverside combine computational techniques with
laboratory measurements to understand changes in chemical reactions that occur
in wastewater during treatment and reuse. The researchers seek to understand the
rate of oxidation reactions of organic compounds in water by reactive species
called radicals. The computational tools used include data visualization, data
mining, machine learning, and data analytics techniques. Predictive theoretical
models and quantum-based methods are developed that are applicable to water
reuse applications. With these, the chemical reaction rates for water reuse are
calculated. The models are then validated and improved through targeted
experiments. This approach advances the basic scientific understanding of
reaction dynamics in molecular radicals. This project allows a seamless
connection of both theory and experiment to address the efficiency and reaction
pathways of radical-organics interactions associated with water purification
processes. Professors Wong and Liu engage students at all levels in their
research, including community college students. A total of three Hispanic-
Serving Institutions are involved in this project. The investigators also reach
out to K-12 students and their teachers to promote understanding of the role of
computing in environmental science and engineering. By examining wastewater
treatments, this project promotes human health and sustainability efforts in
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses aquatic reaction kinetics
for advanced water treatment and reuse. The combined multidisciplinary approach
leads to a systematic understanding of how molecular structure influences
thermodynamics and kinetics in complex aqueous environments. This is a
significant scientific and technical challenge and critical to providing a
guided, rational path for improving water reuse. Furthermore, this project
establishes a computational screening effort to identify fundamental
physicochemical characteristics that affect aqueous chemical kinetics. Both
density functional theory (DFT) and rigorous many-body wave function CCSD(T)-F12
methods are used. The project also establishes a series of guided kinetics and
characterization efforts that closely follow the computational screening
efforts, including numerical sensitivity analyses. These calculations provide a
systematic understanding of electronic structure of organic molecules in aqueous
environments. The experiments in turn guide the computational studies and afford
the capability to understand the detailed, complex contributions that modulate
the reaction dynamics in these aqueous systems. The fundamental knowledge
generated by this work has broad societal impact, particularly for regions and
industries that critically rely on water treatment and
reuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.