* 1808385
* Superconductor-(Metal)-Insulator Transitions: Understanding the Emergence of Anomalous Metallic States
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Aharon Kapitulnik, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 648,463.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conductivity of metals is
determined by impurity scattering, and is given by a simple expression known as
Drude Formula. As explained by Bardeen-Cooper-Schriefer in their celebrated
"BCS" theory, at low temperatures electrons in such metals may also form an
exotic state known as a condensate of bosonic Cooper pairs. However, despite the
vast experimental data supporting the above "standard paradigm", anomalies in
experimental data, particularly in the limit of two-dimensions (2D), have been
accumulating. It became clear that there exists a new class of metallic states
at low temperatures, where the electronic properties cannot be understood on the
basis of existing theories. The project focuses on the investigations of novel
metallic states that emerge at low temperature, primarily in proximity to
superconducting states. The project includes training of graduate students, and
a post-doctoral scholar. The project will also seek to continue this tradition
by actively recruiting women graduate students and post-docs to the group, while
also maintaining strong international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A metallic state is defined as a state in which
the conductivity remains finite as the temperature tends to zero. There is an
extraordinarily successful "Fermi liquid theory" of clean 3D metals with long
mean free path and relatively weak interactions. In this theory fermionic
excitations (quasiparticles) have a finite density of states at the Fermi level,
while bosonic excitations (e.g. zero sound) have lesser role at low
temperatures, since their contribution to the current is negligible due to their
vanishing density of states. The low-T conductivity of relatively pure 3D metals
is determined by impurity scattering, and is given by the Drude formula. Another
well-established paradigm is the BCS theory of superconductivity, which is based
on the idea that under some circumstances electron attraction can dominate the
electron repulsion so that at low temperatures electrons form a condensate of
bosonic Cooper pairs. It is this condensate that carries the supercurrent. As
parameters controlling the electronic environment change, the system may exhibit
a superconductor to metal transition, which at zero temperature is a quantum
transition. The conventional theory of metals also predict that as the system
approaches the BCS superconducting state from the metallic side, its properties
in no way reflect the proximity of the superconducting phase, and the
conductivity of the system is controlled by the fermionic excitations everywhere
in the metallic phase. Despite the vast experimental data supporting the above
"standard paradigm", especially on bulk superconductors, anomalies in
experimental data, particularly in the limit of two dimensions, have been
accumulating. It became clear that there exists a new class of metallic states
in the zero-temperature limit, where the electronic properties cannot remotely
be understood on the basis of Fermi liquid and Drude theories. This observation
by itself is astonishing because it points to a new paradigm for the electronic
properties of metals. Exploring the properties of such anomalous metallic states
is the focus of this project. This will be done by fabricating a variety of
thin-films superconductors, and study their transport properties. While in the
past such studies focused solely on longitudinal conductivity measurements, this
project will emphasize transverse transport, and will include thermal transport,
which can further shed light on the nature of the metallic state. The
application of electromagnetic perturbations such as magnetic and RF electric
fields will be used to tune through these metallic states, or in some
circumstances promote them. The project trains one or two graduate students, one
post-doctoral scholar. The project will also seek to continue this tradition by
actively recruiting women graduate students and post-docs to the group, while
also maintaining strong international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.