* 1808752
* Collaborative Research: Reinforcement learning based adaptive optimal control of powered knee prosthesis for human users in real life
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Jennie Si, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,925.00

The proposed research aims at designing robust, real time learning controllers
for powered lower limb prosthesis worn by above-knee amputees. It centers on
adaptive optimal tuning of prosthetic knee joint impedance parameters with an
ultimate goal of achieving human-prosthesis symbiosis. Current state-of-the-art
approaches rely on a predetermined collection of knee joint impedance
parameters, resulted from tedious manual tuning in a clinic. In addition to a
lack of adaptability to different users, current impedance controls do not adapt
to different use environments. One of the key design challenge is due to the
constant interaction between the human user and the robotic leg. As such,
advanced robotics including those employing latest artificial intelligence
technologies, control system theory and design, and existing biomechanics based
controls cannot meet the needs of real time learning control of a powered
prosthetic leg in a human-prosthesis system. Given the nature of the problem,
reinforcement learning based adaptive optimal control, also referred to as
adaptive dynamic programming (ADP), holds great promise to delivering the next
generation of prosthesis control solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The design challenge requires innovative approaches of real time
reinforcement learning control. The learning controller has to be designed
without knowing an explicit dynamic system model describing the human-prosthesis
system, while assuring human user safety and system stability, and being
scalable and adaptable to different users and use conditions. Putting it all
together, the success of this project will be an important milestone for machine
learning, control engineering, and rehabilitation engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research has a direct impact on
improving the lives of above-knee amputees. Also of great societal impact is the
potential of reducing health care cost. New knowledge gained from human-robot
interaction will not only aid amputees but also stroke patients who use
exoskeleton as assistive devices. The proposed research will also benefit
several research communities such as wearable robots, machine learning, and
rehabilitation to develop new technologies addressing real applications. To
excite and educate future leaders and researchers in science and engineering,
the project will provide an opportunity for integration of our research work
into graduate education and postdoc training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.