* 1808502
* Correlative Tools for in Situ Analysis of Single Nanoparticles and their Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 803,253.00

Designer gold nanoparticles consist of a metallic core surrounded by a molecular
shell. Recent advances in nanoparticle growth have produced complicated star-
like shapes that exhibit unique physical properties and are about 1/100 the
diameter of a human hair. While the formation of the stellated structures is
linked to the reaction conditions, controlled formation of particles with
specific structural features remains a challenge since the growth mechanism is
still unknown. With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Teri Odom of
Northwestern University is developing a series analytical tools to achieve
higher structural and chemical information of single nanoparticles in their
native growth environments. Using this toolkit, Professor Odom and her students
are identifying key intermediates in nanoparticle formation that could advance
our understanding of how complex nanostructures grow. The project could pave the
way to create particles with specified shapes that would have broad implications
for a range of technologies, including personalized medicine and single-molecule
contaminant detection. The project trains future scientists, with outreach
efforts focusing on developing a new general chemistry sequence and developing
graduate and junior faculty training initiatives. The project also provides
training opportunities for future scientists through programs such as 'Nano
Scout Day' at the Alder Planetarium. Professor Odom also actively outreaches to
local middle school students targeting underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop correlative tools to study
metal nanoparticles and their immediate surrounding environment at the near-in
situ, single-particle level. The work combines multiple tools in an integrated
strategy to access real-time, statistical, and multi-functional information from
individual nanoparticles. Although seedless growth conditions using a gold salt
and Good's buffers have been shown to promote distinct curvature regions in
nanoparticles that can result in specific, exquisite macroscale properties,
identification of intermediates key to nanoparticle formation has not yet been
possible. To determine how nanoparticle shape and their ligand distribution
interacts with local environments, high-throughput, single-nanoparticle
statistical data is required. The research objectives include: (1) repurposing
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to correlate the generation of
different radicals with nanoparticle intermediate shapes and final products; (2)
visualizing structural evolution of single nanoparticles during growth with
wide-field differential interference contrast optical microscopy; and (3)
mapping ligand distributions on different particle surfaces with one-of-a-kind
tools such as time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry using particle
projectiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.