* 1808459
* Programming innate immune responses using glycomimetic macromolecular complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Gerard Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2023
* USD 645,282.00

Non-Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innate immunity is a part of the
immune system that recognizes specific chemical patterns used in pathogens (ex:
bacteria, viruses, and fungi) but not common to our cells and mammalian cells.
These patterns include double-stranded RNA, certain types of DNA and sugar-based
molecules known as lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Detection of these molecular
patterns is a potential sign of invasion, and trigger defensive responses. It
has been discovered that certain molecules that are not supposed to be detected
by the innate immune system can in fact stimulate and greatly amplify this
innate immune response, by simply forming organized structures with DNA and with
RNA. This is completely unexpected, and can potentially revise fundamental
understanding of molecular recognition. The goal of this proposed research is to
understand the rules governing these phenomena, and design and test new
synthetic molecules that can mimic this immune system amplification, and to
design new synthetic molecules that can turn off this process. The basic
knowledge gained as a result of this research will be broadly enabling.
Potential long term outcomes include biomaterials for better control of the
immune system and better sensors for detection of specific chemicals. This work
will broaden participation in a number of ways. The multi-disciplinary nature of
the proposed work will provide ample educational opportunities in this emerging
field. The research topics here are conducive to training for academic and
industrial employment. Research internships will be provided through
underrepresented undergraduate and veteran outreach programs. Results from this
will be incorporated into the PIs' advanced undergraduate/graduate classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innate immunity is a non-specific defense
mechanism against pathogens bearing specific chemical recognition motifs not
common to mammalian cells. Detection of these pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) signals the presence of foreign cells, and trigger inflammatory
responses. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are capable of recognizing specific immune
ligand classes: dsRNA is recognized by TLR3, while TLR9 recognizes pathogenic
dsDNA; both activate signal transduction pathways that lead to the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and upregulation of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) for
pathogen defense. Recent work from his research group on TLR9 and TLR3
activation reveal a new, unexpected physical basis for immunomodulation.
Molecules with specific structural characteristics can co-assemble with immune
ligands into nanocrystalline complexes that drastically upregulate immune
responses: The spatially-periodic presentation of immune ligands by these
complexes drive amplification via intercalative binding with multiple TLRs. This
represents a significant generalization of the central paradigm in molecular
recognition. Innate immune receptors can recognize not just PAMPs on single
ligand molecules, but also recognize nanocrystalline arrangements of ligands.
Here, the aim is to understand this new type of molecular recognition, and
design chemically-cognate, structurally-characterized families of self-assembled
dsDNA complexes and quantitatively control downstream immune stimulation.
Potential long term outcomes include biomaterials for better control of the
immune system and better sensors for detection of specific chemicals. The multi-
disciplinary nature of the proposed work will provide ample educational
opportunities in this emerging field. The research topics here are conducive to
training for academic and industrial employment. Research internships will be
provided through underrepresented undergraduate and veteran outreach programs.
Results from this will be incorporated into the PIs' advanced
undergraduate/graduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.