* 1808805
* GOALI: Advancing Thermal Field-Flow Fractionation for Complex Polymers and Colloids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Kim Williams, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 03/31/2023
* USD 412,875.00

This project is supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the
Chemistry Division. Professor Kim Williams of the Colorado School of Mines (CSM)
is developing thermal field-flow fractionation (ThFFF) as a versatile platform
for separating and characterizing complex polymers and colloids. Thermal
diffusion in liquids presents a novel way of separating and analyzing mixtures
of plastics and other very large molecules. This project uses the NSF Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) mechanism to for a
collaboration between Dr. Williams' lab and Dow Chemical Company. The
academic/industrial collaboration serves as a model for combining expertise in
separation science, that may lead to insights about product performance. An
outreach program developed by Professor Williams brings science and discovery to
students with learning disabilities (dyslexia) and introduces future teachers in
the STEM Teacher Education program at CSM. Students relate well to the textural
and visual nature of these polymer and colloid activities and thus, outreach
activities are carried out at the Rocky Mountain Camp for Dyslexic Youths. These
low cost and safe hands-on experiments introduce to students in the STEM Teacher
Education program at the Colorado School of Mines. The broader impacts of this
work include technical benefits through better designed (more environmentally
friendly) products, and educational benefits for the students and scientists who
are trained in an industrial and academic setting.

Ultrahigh molecular weight or ultralarge polymers and colloid surface
characterizations are analytical challenges. Reliable methods for determining
molecular weight distributions do not currently exist for these materials. The
objectives for this work are to develop and test thermal field-flow
fractionation (ThFFF) for ultralarge (>100 nm or >103 kDa) polymers. The
researchers determine experimental approaches that provide additional control of
thermal diffusion of colloids and demonstrate their use for surface
composition/charge separations and analyses. They also identify a working
particle thermophoresis theory. An outreach program developed by Professor
Williams brings science and discovery to students with learning disabilities
(dyslexia) and introduces future teachers in the STEM Teacher Education program
at CSM. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits
through better designed (more environmentally friendly) products, students and
scientists who are trained in an industrial and academic setting, and more
experienced future STEM teachers. Innovative analytical methods that result from
this work may impact science and technologies associated with polymers and
colloids (natural, biological, and synthetic). The close collaboration between
CSM and Dow scientists improves research impact and develops the next generation
work force through students' exposure to industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.