* 1808383
* Manipulating and Exploiting Lattice Strain as a Novel Platform to Tune the Surface Work Function of Metallic Nanocatalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Jiye Fang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 12/31/2023
* USD 504,124.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lattice strain, arising from
crystal imperfections, is an important phenomenon of material modification and
can bring many novel advantages to catalysts as it changes the surface
adsorption behavior through a variation of the catalyst surface work function.
For noble metal-based ultra-small particles, that is, nanocrystals, manipulation
of the lattice strain could be one of the significant pathways to improve their
catalytic performance on chemical and electrochemical reactions. This project
focuses on the study of the lattice strain existing in bimetallic nanocrystals
that are produced via a gas-phase etching approach. One of the proposed
materials is a Pt-Ni nanocrystal system from which the Ni-component is extracted
by combining with carbon monoxide to form gaseous nickel carbonyl at a mild
temperature, thus creating a strain in the nanocrystal. Through this lattice
strain concept, the research aims to seek some fundamental understandings of the
lattice strain formation and solutions of catalytic improvement in some emergent
electrochemical reactions in energy conversion and environmental protection,
such as reactions in fuel-cell, water-splitting, and carbon-neutral conversion.
Specifically, this study will answer the following questions: How can the
lattice strain be generated and controlled during a de-alloying process? How can
the lattice strain be explicitly identified? And how can the lattice strain be
used experimentally to promote the reactivity? This project will have profound
impacts on various ongoing outreach and education programs through
multidisciplinary research platform. The insights and knowledge gained from this
study will stimulate the NSF-supported S-STEM program, Binghamton University's
"Transdisciplinary Area of Excellence" campaign, and novel curriculum
development. This project will also promote lab-based training activities of
graduate and undergraduate students through summer research programs by forging
links among diverse research fields. In addition, the success of this study will
bring multifold benefits to the general public through scientific discoveries
and resultant technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For noble metal nanocrystals, lattice strain
can generally cause a lattice contraction featuring a down-shift d-band center,
which weakens the adsorption strength of species on the catalyst surfaces. The
goal of this project is to significantly advance the development of catalytic
sites with lattice strain that exists in several types of shape-controlled
state-of-the-art nanocrystals as the model systems. The lattice-stressed systems
can be created from Ni-containing bimetallic precursors by taking advantage of
the Mond process as an unprecedented etching protocol. The related de-alloying
mechanism will be understood in depth through a systematical structure-analysis
of the highly porous nanoframes generated from a gaseous de-alloying process.
With an evaluation of their electrocatalytic performance using several typical
reactions including but not limited to ORR, HER, and eCO2RR, a comparison of the
identified performances with and without the strain stress will be implemented,
and a reactivity-strain correlation that provides guidelines for tuning
electrocatalytic activity will be uncovered. The proposed Pt-Ni precursor will
also be extended to other bimetallic systems, such as Cu-Ni, Ag-Ni, Pd-Ni, and
Fe-containing bimetallic system. This project will have profound impacts on the
exploitation of mechanistic origin of the catalytic activity as well as novel
insights of the electrocatalytic performance
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.