* 1808518
* Covalent Polymer Mechanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 926,000.00

Organic polymeric materials, or plastics, break down due to the mechanical
forces they experience during their use cycles. The mechanical degradation of
polymers limits their use in lightweight structural materials, consumer
products, and biomedical applications. Prof. Stephen Craig at Duke University is
learning how to dictate the rates and outcomes of chemical reactions that are
accelerated by an applied mechanical force. These reactions impact multiple
aspects of materials design, including the macroscopic failure and mechanical
limitations of current polymeric materials. In addition, mechanically responsive
functional groups might serve as the critical elements in new stress-responsive
and self-healing polymeric materials. Prof. Craig's studies aim to provide
insight into how the macroscopic mechanical forces experienced by polymers
during use can be effectively channeled into desired chemical responses,
providing a foundation for new classes of polymers. Broader impacts of the
project include: (1) integration of research and education through a new,
regional technical training program that supports and enriches the research
activities and scientific training experiences provided by primarily
undergraduate institutions, community colleges, advanced high schools, and
smaller research universities; (2) active learning modules and associated
laboratory experiences in introductory chemistry and through coupled
undergraduate and high school research experiences; (3) broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups by engaging and recruiting young
scientists early in their scientific careers, before the onset of
disproportionate attrition from the sciences; (4) disseminating the results of
the research broadly; and, (5) addressing fundamental questions of molecular
behavior in materials in a manner that will have an impact on a broad range of
fields including polymer chemistry, physical organic chemistry, and self-healing
and stress-responsive materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching technical
objective is to lay a quantitative foundation for mechanochemical kinetics by
employing state-of-the-art physical measurements and developing new methods for
quantitation. Specific experiments include the direct, experimental
characterization and quantification of the effect of mechanical forces on
covalent reactions triggered along overstretched polymer backbones. Because
mechanical force, unlike conventional forms of energy input such as heat or
light, is directional, the coupling between mechanical force and reactivity
provides insights into the structure of transition states and the shapes of
reaction potential energy surfaces. Despite its importance, however,
quantitative measures of the effect of force on chemical reactions are rare.
This project aims to develop two novel approaches to quantifying mechanochemical
reactivity: pulling on single molecules of multi-mechanophore, non-scissile
polymers with an atomic force microscope, and the pulsed sonication and
molecular weight degradation of multi-mechanophore, scissile polymers. Models
for the observed mechanochemical activity enable quantitative assessment of
reactivity in both classes of mechanophores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.