* 1808111
* Time-Resolved, Electric-Field-Induced Vibrational Spectroscopy for Molecular Conformation Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 467,196.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging and Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Xiong
and Paesani at University of California, San Diego, are developing new methods
for studying molecules and their behaviors at interfaces. The study is essential
for optimizing performance of many chemical systems and devices. The team is
using a combined experimental and theoretical approach to find a technical
solution for some important societal needs, ranging from renewable energy to
next generation flexible electronics and displays. This collaborative research
project provides participating students with unique experiences at the interface
of laser spectroscopy and computational chemistry, and thus promotes
interdisciplinary research at University of California, San Diego. This project
also provides opportunities for undergraduate students to gain hands-on research
experience with cutting-edge technology through a summer research program and
through other existing UCSD-based outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed time-resolved electric-field-induced heterodyne sum frequency
spectroscopy enables studies of interfacial charge transfer and delivers an in-
depth understanding of hidden relationships between molecular physics and
ultrafast charge transfer dynamics at complex interfaces. The multidimensional
SFG is a recently developed spectroscopic technique that can resolve fine
spectral signatures of various conformations on heterogeneous interfaces.
Together with computer simulation, molecular conformation and spectral
relationships are revealed. The time-resolved electric-field-induced effect
enables following ultrafast charge transfer at interfaces through the modulation
of SFG signals. By integrating time-resolved electric-filed-induce effect with
the multidimensional SFG spectroscopy, molecular conformations that favor charge
dynamics at complex interfaces are discovered. This new approach is used to
study interfacial charge transfer between organic semiconductors and metal or
inorganic semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.