* 1808232
* Collaborative Research: Novel Laser and Nonlinear Properties of Anderson Localization Optical Fibers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* John Ballato, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Optical fibers have been the enabling backbone for many technological
advancements over the last half-century. As just one example, transoceanic
telecommunications via optical fibers connect nearly all the world's peoples and
cultures. Those fibers confine light in a central glass core made from an
optically denser material than the surrounding glass cladding. The proposed
fundamental investigation here is focused on a novel class of optical fibers
that guide light by means of Anderson localization. In such fibers, first
brought to practice by the PI and team, an internal random microstructure guides
the light due to a Nobel-Prize-winning phenomenon proposed by Phillip Anderson.
The immediate advantage is that any location across the fiber, not just the
core, can be used to guide and control light. Such Anderson localizing fibers
have many other novel properties that make them attractive for both basic
science exploration and device-level application. The proposed study will
explore laser and nonlinear properties of these novel fibers. Device
investigations include the study of ultra-broad color spectrum lasers for
imaging and illumination. Imaging can benefit from bright laser sources;
unfortunately, conventional lasers are single-colored and the proposed lasers
can provide a considerably broader color gamut. Also to be studied are tunable
quantum-correlated photon pair generators for secure communication and high-
speed computation, afforded by the diversity of possibilities in the random
underlying structure. In addition to the advancement of new science, a major
outcome will be the exposure of the graduate and undergraduate students working
on this project to a broad range of topics in an interdisciplinary environment.
This broad exposure to different disciplines is a platform to train the highly
skilled workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative program will provide an in-
depth investigation of a novel class of optical fibers that guide light, not in
a conventional core-cladding setting, but by means of Anderson localization,
where any location across the transverse profile of the fiber can be used to
guide light. The study is particularly focused on the lasing and nonlinear
properties of these novel fibers with potential benefits to both basic science
exploration and device-level utility and insights. The research will unravel
outstanding problems on the nature of localization and its interaction with
nonlinearity and to explore the impact of Anderson localization on laser
characteristics such as threshold behavior, slope efficiency, stability, and
frequency spectrum. Conversely, the impact of the nonlinearity and gain on
localization properties will be explored. Anderson localization fibers have been
explored over the past six years, and are quite promising for beam multiplexing,
image transport, wave-front shaping, sharp focusing, and single-photon data
packing. However, there are still many open questions regarding the optical
properties of these fibers that must be addressed first. For example, the
statistics of the phase and group velocities of the modes in these fibers will
be explored to determine their potential for optical communications, quantum
information processing, imaging and illuminations, and ultra-short-pulse lasers
for medical and industrial applications. Their laser properties and modal
dynamics will be studied for applications in high-power fiber lasers. Examples
of the proposed devices include broadband low-spatial coherence rare-earth doped
fiber lasers for illumination and imaging, especially in the near infrared
spectrum, ultra-high power Ytterbium-doped fiber lasers, tunable lasers using a
single strand of fiber, and tunable sources of quantum correlated photon pairs
via four-wave mixing for quantum information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.