* 1808123
* Janus Liposomes: Formation, Self-Assembly and Controlled Motion
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Wei Zhan, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 471,772.00

Liposomes are small spherical particles of lipid bilayer(s) self-assembled in
water. Ever since their discovery in the 1960s, liposomes have proved to be an
enabling tool in fundamental research (e.g., cell biology, biophysics and
biotechnology) and invaluable material in industry (e.g., food, drug delivery
and cosmetics). With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Zhan of Auburn
University is developing a new type of liposomes - Janus liposomes. Unlike
conventional (symmetrical) liposomes, Janus liposomes contain two opposing
halves with different chemical identity and surface characteristics. Professor
Zhan's research focuses on harnessing the unique properties of Janus liposomes
to create new lipid materials with advanced functionality. Professor Zhan is
also creating new opportunities for high school students and underrepresented
college students in the region to participate in research on lipid materials and
self-assembly chemistry. Professor Zhan's work aims to make discoveries with
significant scientific and industrial impact and to help nurture next-generation
workers who have advanced skills in a key branch of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Janus liposomes display heterogeneous surface
chemistry and broken symmetry, properties distinct from those of conventional
liposomes. These unique attributes fundamentally alter the ways Janus liposomes
interact with each other and with the surrounding media, which have yet to be
explored and understood. To this end, Professor Zhan studies the preparation,
self-assembly and motional behavior of Janus liposomes. In the first direction,
Professor Zhan is developing a general method to prepare Janus liposomes in
batch quantity. This new method helps to remove a bottleneck hampering the
advancement of a promising new area and can enable other interested researchers
to make contributions to this field. In addition, he is also using Janus
liposomes to build complex lipid architectures via self-assembly and to achieve
their controlled motion through selective functionalization of specific lipid
domains. These activities begin to provide a detailed understanding on the self-
assembly of Janus liposomes and establish several robust methods to drive,
direct and control motion of aqueous-suspended Janus
liposomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.