* 1808468
* RUI: Adsorption and Surface Mediated Photo-Degradation Rate of Contaminants on Colloidal Natural Organic Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Mahamud Subir, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 248,364.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Mahamud Subir and his students at Ball State University explore
the influence of Natural Organic Matter (NOM) on the transport and fate of
emerging contaminants (ECs). ECs, such as pharmaceuticals and endocrine
disruptors, are commonly detected in aquatic environments. NOM are particles
suspended in environmental waters that consist of carbon-based molecules. NOM
plays a role in aquatic pollutant distribution and transformation, but exactly
how and to what extent remains unclear. This study focuses on finding the effect
of NOM particle size and surface constituents on the uptake and photochemical
breakdown of organic contaminants. The projects provide undergraduate students
with a unique opportunity to perform hands-on experiments. The study creates
information about binding strength of the contaminant molecules and NOM, and the
rates of reactions that are mediated by the NOM surfaces. These findings help to
explain the impact of ECs on our ecosystem and our health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses both traditional and advanced laser
spectroscopic tools in the areas of nano-, surface, and environmental chemistry.
Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) and other analysis techniques isolate the
surface effect from the bulk solution phase photochemistry of organic
pollutants. The project develops model colloidal NOM using humic substances of
distinct composition. The binding affinities of various ECs to the model NOM
surfaces are measured. The rate of photolysis of both chemi- and physi-sorbed
molecules at the NOM-aqueous interface is determined. In addition, the project
investigates the influence of NOM size, solution acidity, and presence of
reactive hydroxyl radicals on the processes of interest. These results are
expected to yield an extensive catalogue of adsorption equilibrium and photo-
kinetic parameters. They also provide fundamental insight into the nature of
specific EC-NOM surface interactions. This knowledge can potentially assist in
developing remediation methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.