* 1808491
* Two dimensional atomic crystals under strain
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Xu Du, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 454,757.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional atomic crystals, the
building blocks for layered materials, have promising electrical/optical
properties that are strongly affected by their structures. Formed through strong
chemical bonds, these materials can be atomically thin yet act like a crystal
with the ability to bend. It is both interesting and important to understand how
the crystal deformation (strain) may modify their electronic and charge
transport properties. Based on such understanding, lattice deformation may be
used for better electronic properties and to create novel material systems for
the study of low dimensional physics. This project studies the impact of strain
on the electronic and charge transport properties of two-dimensional atomic
crystals in their nanoelectromechanical devices, where strain can be
independently tuned and accurately characterized. This project addresses some of
the key scientific and technological issues in a highly active research area. It
also provides graduate students with research experience both in the PI's Stony
Brook laboratory and in national laboratory settings. Undergraduate students
drawn from the diverse student body of Stony Brook University and high school
students from the greater New York region will be brought in to play active
roles in the research. To widen the general public interest in sciences, the
research team will broadcast original videos on student research in the lab, and
introductions to basic experimental research
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Two-
dimensional atomic crystals are formed through strong chemical bonds which
render them flexible and stretchable in nature. As a result, lattice deformation
may be utilized to achieve more favorable electronic properties and to create
novel material systems for the study of low dimensional physics. The project is
developing a nanoelectromechanical resonator device scheme with large strain
tunability and transport measurement capability, through which both the
mechanical and charge transport properties are studied and correlated. This
approach is applied to two-dimensional atomic crystals including (but not
limited to) single- and bi-layer graphene, phosphorene, and ZrTe5. The research
team focuses on the impact of mechanical deformation (including uniaxial, shear
and triaxial strains) on charge carrier scattering, valley polarization, band
structure tuning, and topological transitions in these two-dimensional
materials. The project advances the understanding in the fundamental physical
properties of novel two dimensional materials and in modulating their electronic
properties to study novel two-dimensional physics. Modification of lattice
structure and/or symmetry can effectively create new artificial material systems
which allow the study of novel physical phenomena inaccessible in conventional
materials. This proposal, which focuses mainly on charge transport studies,
directly addresses fabrication and measurement of the electronic devices. Hence,
it further advances the concept of strain-tunable electronics beyond the
previous efforts which are mainly based on optical and local probe
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.