* 1808571
* Contributions of Episodic Retrieval to Problem Solving
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Daniel L. Schacter, Brashier                Nadia          M
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is supported by
both the Perception, Action and Cognition and the Cognitive Neuroscience
programs in SBE. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Daniel Schacter at Harvard University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist studying how
remembering shapes problem solving. Converging evidence suggests that people
rely on past experiences when faced with a difficult problem. Groups with known
memory deficits (e.g., older adults, patients with hippocampal lesions) struggle
to solve problems. Brief training in recollecting details of a recent event
helps people to solve social means-end and personally worrisome problems. This
behavioral work suggests that episodic retrieval contributes to problem solving,
but cannot speak to the neural mechanisms underlying this relationship.
Meanwhile, emerging research in cognitive neuroscience shows that internally
directed cognition (e.g., future thinking, creativity) requires coordinated
activity in large-scale networks that usually oppose each other. The proposed
research investigates the network dynamics underlying both the benefits and
costs of remembering a recently encountered solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines how episodic retrieval improves and constrains solutions to
worrisome problems. For the first time, the means-end problem solving task will
be modified for functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Participants will
either generate steps to solve problems or retrieve them from memory. Functional
connectivity analyses will measure dynamic coupling between the executive
control network (ECN), which typically comes on line during abstract problem
solving, and memory regions in the default mode network (DMN). While episodic
retrieval clearly supports problem solving in many contexts, recent experiences
can also interfere with finding solutions. Old, inappropriate ideas can lead to
fixation, preventing the generation of new ideas. Participants will also
generate novel steps in the presence or absence of interference from previously
encoded steps. Again, functional connectivity analyses will assess how
interference changes DMN-ECN coupling, as recalled steps are actively inhibited.
The results will inform information-processing theories of problem solving, as
well as our understanding of when and how the ECN and DMN cooperate to modulate
self-generated information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.