* 1808400
* OP: Hyperbolic nano-optical tweezers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Juan Sebastian Gomez Diaz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The manipulation of small particles with light has enabled many applications in
bioengineering and nanotechnology, including the trapping and accurate
positioning of molecules, cells, and micro/nano-objects. These applications rely
on the optical forces induced on the particles when they are illuminated by
light. Since the strength of such forces is usually weak, laser beams with very
high power are required to effectively control the position and motion of the
particles. Recently, optical forces acting at the nano-scale have been enhanced
by locating the particles near metallic surfaces, such as gold or silver, that
support certain types of electromagnetic (EM) waves. It has been shown that the
strength of the induced forces strongly depends on how confined these EM waves
are. This project aims to achieve giant optical forces by replacing these
metallic surfaces with engineered hyperbolic metasurfaces, which are advanced
composite surfaces able to support extremely confined EM waves. The resulting
devices will be able to route nanoparticles with very high accuracy using low-
power laser beams. The educational and outreach efforts will focus on engaging
Hispanic students, ranging from K-12 to college, in science, technology,
engineering and math. Specifically, several undergraduate students will actively
participate in the proposed research, providing them a path towards graduate
school. K-12 activities include the participation in the California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science, as well as a set of talks on Hispanic
schools in the Sacramento area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to theoretically model, numerically simulate and
optimize, and experimentally realize and characterize a novel class of
hyperbolic nano-optical tweezers with engineered near-fields able to generate
giant optical forces several orders of magnitude larger than those attainable in
isotropic, plasmonic surfaces. The proposed devices are based on combining the
photonic spin Hall effect with ultra-confined surface plasmon polaritons in
hyperbolic and anisotropic ultrathin metasurfaces. Rooted in this concept, the
project objectives are to (i) reveal the fundamental limits and maximum strength
of optical forces that can be attained by engineering the near-field of
extremely anisotropic films; (ii) analyze and design realistic hyperbolic
tweezers with near-optimal performance able to realize functionalities such as
sub-diffractive nanoparticle positioning, optical trapping and binding; and
(iii) fabricate and characterize hyperbolic nano-optical tweezers made of
nanostructured silver. The resulting broadband devices will (i) provide
attractive and repulsive forces of unprecedented strength at the nanoscale; (ii)
reduce the intensity of required laser beams, thus avoiding damage to the
particles due to photoheating; and (iii) enhance the local density of states,
thus boosting the Raman spectroscopy and photoluminescence of trapped particles;
and they have the potential to be transformative in the manipulation, trapping,
assembly, and characterization of individual and multiple nanostructures, force
measurement, and biological systems. The technical program will be combined with
a number of outreach and educational activities aimed at integrating plasmonic
tweezers into undergraduate/graduate education, with strong emphasis on the
underrepresented Hispanic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.