* 1808147
* Spray Pyrolysis Synthesized Self-biased Hexagonal Ferrite Thin Film on GaN, AlN, Si Substrates  for Millimeter-wave Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

With the advent of advanced wireless communications the spectrum at lower
frequencies are congested. To overcome this congestion an alternative approach
is to develop compact and high efficient communication system using passive
devices operating in millimeter-wave frequency band. The materials used at these
frequencies are Ba- and Sr hexaferrites. The anisotropy of these ferrites
exhibit strong ferromagnetic resonance up to 60 GHz (5 mm in wavelength). The
oxygen molecule in the atmosphere exhibit a strong resonance absorption of
electromagnetic waves at 60 GHz. Thus makes it a very attractive frequency band
for shorter distance communication system. &lt;br/&gt;In current proposal, the
use of self-biased hexagonal ferrite devices is suggested in millimeter wave
frequencies. This led to shift from silicon, narrowband gap substrate technology
to GaN, wideband gap substrate technology for efficient performance of
communication system. The Ba- and Sr- ferrite nano size powders are now readily
available from a number of manufacturers. Recently it has been found that nano-
sized hexagonal ferrite powders can be mixed with commercially available
photoresist and then sprayed as a layer on to the GaN substrate. It is proposed
to use one ultrasonic generator with two ultrasonic spray nozzles with
compressed air shaper for spraying. The next step turns out to be curing of the
film in an oven up to 600 degrees centigrade for narrowing of the ferromagnetic
resonance peak. It also leads to doubling of the resonance intensity. The
comprehensive characterization study of deposited nano-ferrite film has been
performed by employing a custom made quasi-optical millimeter wave spectrometer,
scanning electron microscope, X-ray diffraction analysis and vibrating sample
magnetometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a communication system, one
would need a high efficient power amplifier, a low noise amplifier and a nano-
ferrite circulator. However, the process to manufacture high quality nano-
ferrite material with good grain size offer significant challenges. One of the
problem is how to deposit self-bias hexagonal ferrite thin film with both good
quality and acceptable cost has not been solved yet. Currently available wafers
for MMIC design are about 100 mm in diameter with a thickness of about 100m.
Typical thicknesses are 98 m of SiC and 2 m of GaN. The development of high
purity GaN thick film film on SiC turns out to be big challenge in the near
future. A thin film of highly pure wide bandgap semiconductor such as Aluminum
Nitride can also be deposited on SiC. It is a new technology and it will be
explored during the course of the proposed research period. Originally this work
was explored on IBM silicon CMOS substrates. The lower temperature operation
restricted the deposition of nano ferrite Ba- ferrite film to porosity and
uneven flatness. The work with silicon CMOS substrate will also be continued.
The collaborative partnership with QORVO has led to the use of GaN on SiC wafers
routinely. The ultimate goal is to have Ba-ferrite circulator, power amplifier
and low noise amplifier build on a single GaN on SiC wafer for operation at 60
GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.