* 1808590
* Transient Physicochemical Properties of Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Richard Schaller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 268,551.00

When the size of a semiconductor particle is reduced to just a few nanometers,
many of its properties can change. For example, the colors of light emitted by
these nanoparticles can be altered simply by changing the size. This type of
size-tunability is exploited in many modern electronic devices, such as high-
resolution displays and biomedical sensors. Other properties can also change
with particle size. For example, the melting point of nanoparticles tend to
decrease as their size is reduced, which presents problems for applications that
involve significant heating during manufacturing. In this project, funded by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Richard Schaller at Northwestern University is studying the
melting of nanoparticles after the sudden introduction of energy. Working with
his students, Professor Schaller uses very short pulses of laser light to
rapidly heat nanoparticles, causing them to expand and melt. The team then
employs a series of ultrafast experimental methods to monitor structural changes
in the nanoparticle lattice. The insights gained from the research could impact
technologies ranging from light-emitting-diodes (LEDs) to solar cells. These
insights may help to advance additive manufacturing in 3D printing, which could
benefit from facile melting and growth of particles into larger solids. The
project also provides education and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students. The results from the research are incorporated into
chemistry courses at Northwestern University. Professor Schaller and his
students interact with the City Colleges of Chicago, STEMfest events, and K-8th
grade students in&lt;br/&gt;Evanston's District 65, to spread interest in the
sciences through on-site classroom demonstrations and guest lectures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research experimentally probes equilibrium- and transient-
physicochemical effects that underlie properties of nanoparticles at elevated
temperature as well as in elevated temperature processing. The activities focus
on advancing the fundamental understanding of both nanoparticle and surface
chemistries, so as to develop strategies that can enable individual
nanoparticles to maintain their desired function at elevated temperature
(preventing the loss of ligands, change of crystal phases, or evolution of
chemical composition). The effort implements transient physical and
spectroscopic methods including high fidelity, synchrotron-based transient x-ray
diffraction to probe heating and phase behavior, and vibrational spectroscopies.
The research enables insight into ligand behavior and local chemistry, in these
important, yet poorly explored conditions. The targeted systems focus on shape-
controlled semiconductors and earth abundant semiconductors, such as silicon and
Cu2ZnSnS4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.