* 1808096
* Chemical Probes for Amyloid Oligomers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* James Nowick, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 488,250.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. James Nowick from the University of California Irvine to
investigate interactions between a class of dye molecules and small aggregates
of peptide molecules that are associated with amyloid diseases, such as
Alzheimer's disease. These aggregates, termed "oligomers," are thought to be the
damaging species responsible for neurodegeneration associated with the disease.
Dyes have long been used as chemical probes to visualize and monitor amyloid
fibril formation and recently have proven valuable in imaging to monitor amyloid
fibrils in the brain in a non-invasive fashion. Comparable small molecule probes
for amyloid oligomers are lacking. Chemical probes for amyloid oligomers offer
the promise of monitoring and visualizing amyloid oligomers in vitro, in
biological tissues, and in living cells. The current project will lead to a
better understanding of the interactions between the dye molecules and the
oligomers and will develop the dyes as useful tools with which to study amyloid
oligomers. This pursuit will allow graduate students to earn Ph.D. degrees and
enter the US work force as skilled scientists and undergraduate students to
receive training in research and go to graduate school or enter the work force
as a B.S. Chemists. Additional impact will be achieved through the training of
high school students and through K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
project relies on two discoveries in the laboratory of the Principal
Investigator. The first discovery is that macrocyclic beta-hairpin peptides
derived from the beta-amyloid peptide assemble to form trimers with well-defined
three-fold symmetry. The second discovery is that triphenylmethane dyes such as
crystal violet bind to the trimers with low-micromolar affinities. The dyes
provide a visible response to the oligomers, changing color from violet to blue
and becoming fluorescent. These spectral changes in response to amyloid
oligomers can also be measured spectrophotometrically or observed in
fluorescence microscopy. For these reasons, triphenylmethane dyes offer promise
as chemical probes for amyloid oligomers. Two aims will be achieved. The first
aim is to better understand the binding of triphenylmethane dyes to trimers of
macrocyclic beta-hairpin peptides. This goal will be achieved through structure-
activity-relationship studies in which the structures of the trimers and the
dyes are modified. The second aim is to develop triphenylmethane dyes as
chemical probes for synthetic and biogenic oligomers of the full-length beta-
amyloid peptide. One set of studies will focus on developing triphenylmethane
dyes bearing photo-reactive functional groups as photoaffinity labels for
oligomers of the beta-amyloid peptide. A second set of experiments will focus on
developing immobilized triphenylmethane dyes to allow affinity-based
purification of beta-amyloid oligomers from tissue. Additional experiments will
focus on using triphenylmethane dyes to discover novel ligands for amyloid
oligomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.