* 1808788
* Magnetically Responsive Tuning of Plasmonic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yadong Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

Metal nanoparticles can be 10,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human
hair, and can be made from metals such as gold and silver. Their interactions
with light make them useful for applications ranging from sensors to visual
displays. While many types of particles are spherical, they can also be made
into more complicated shapes. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor
Yadong Yin of the University of California-Riverside is developing ways to
incorporate magnetic components into rod-shaped metal nanostructures. The
optical properties of the hybrid structures can be controlled by applying
magnetic fields, giving rise to new functionality. The discoveries from the
project are advancing our ability to create new metal nanoparticles, and could
have broad implications for applications such as chemical detection, biomedical
sensing, and information encryption. The work is also providing training
opportunities for graduate students in interdisciplinary fields. In addition,
outreach to local schools and community colleges is engaging students,
especially those from underrepresented groups, in research-based learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims to develop effective approaches for
fabricating plasmonic/magnetic hybrid nanostructures to achieve active tuning of
plasmonic properties and explore their unique applications in photoactuation and
information encryption. Three unconventional approaches are proposed, including
two templating processes and one stepwise "embed and grow" process, to achieve
not only the hybrid composition but also the spontaneous orientational
association of the magnetic and plasmonic components. The guaranteed alignment
between the plasmonic and magnetic components makes it possible to precisely
tune the plasmonic excitation modes in a highly uniform and controllable manner.
The resulting hybrid nanomaterials have high structural integrity and colloidal
stability and can be processed in solvents or polymer matrices for fabricating
functional devices. The proposal also aims to take the advantages of the angular
dependent plasmonic property and the magnetic orientational alignment of the
hybrid nanorods to demonstrate their uses in two unique and important
applications including photoactuators and information encryption (anti-
counterfeiting) devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.