* 1808415
* New Inks for 3D Bio-Printing based on Bio-orthogonal Click Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Sarah Heilshorn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 454,540.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-dimensional (3D) printing
allows the user to make any physical object from a digital model. This is
achieved by laying down multiple layers of "ink", one after the other, to build
up a 3D object. Pioneering work has demonstrated that living cells can be mixed
into some inks to print tissue, which is called "bio-printing". Bio-printing has
the potential to transform the way one studies biology and create medical
therapies. However, current bio-printing inks have two critical flaws. First,
they use chemical reactions that can damage living cells. Second, current inks
cannot be customized to meet the differing needs of the many different cell
types found in the human body. Therefore, the PI proposes the development of a
new family of inks that overcome these two limitations. In Aim 1,the PI will
synthesize a family of inks using novel, cell-compatible chemical reactions that
do not damage cells. Aim 2 will customize the inks to meet the unique
requirements of two different cell types found in the brain: brain endothelial
cells and adult neural stem cells. Brain endothelial cells form blood vessels in
the brain, while adult neural stem cells can produce new nerve cells if the
brain has an injury or disease. In Aim 3, the PI will 3D print these two cell
types, each one with their own customized ink, into a single tissue. We will use
this printed tissue to study how the two different cell types communicate with
each other. Looking forward, these newly developed inks can be customized for
use with any cell type in the body, thereby significantly expanding the
potential of 3D bio-printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-dimensional (3D) cell-based bio-printing is
poised to transform biological science. However, current bio-inks suffer from
two critical limitations. First, current bio-inks have off-target chemical
reactivity that can damage cellular function. Second, current inks do not have
independent, tunable control over the final mechanical, biochemical, and
degradation properties of the matrix, all of which significantly alter cell
phenotype. Thus, to achieve functional printed tissue, there is a critical need
to develop modular bio-inks that can be customized to provide cell-type specific
cues without adversely impacting cellular function. We propose the development
of a new family of bio-inks that (1) undergo two-stage, cytocompatible
crosslinking using bio-orthogonal, click chemistry and (2) independent tuning of
matrix mechanics, cell-adhesion, and biodegradation rates for cell-type
customization. As proof of concept, the PI will use brain endothelial cells
(ECs) and neural stem cells (NSCs) to assess cellular responses to an in vitro,
bio-printed mimic of the NSC niche. In Aim 1, a library of engineered bio-inks
will be built with mechanical and biochemical properties that are independently
tunable. Importantly, these bio-inks will be crosslinked via a click reaction
that requires no catalyst, has rapid kinetics, and is fully bio-orthogonal to
chemical moieties on cells and in culture medium. In Aim 2, the PI designs two
different biodegradation mechanisms into the bio-inks: "global" degradation via
hydrolysis and "local" degradation via cell-enabled proteolytic cleavage, to
customize the bio-inks for maintenance of ECs and NSCs. In Aim 3, the PI will
evaluate the hypothesis that customized bio-inks and print geometries that
promote EC-NSC cell-cell contact will be capable of promoting NSC quiescence in
vitro, mimicking the native in vivo NSC niche. Looking forward, these newly
developed bio-inks can be customized for interactions with any cell type in the
body, thereby significantly expanding the scope of applications for 3D bio-
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.