* 1808281
* How do cytosolic proteins interact with lipid droplets? A bio-physical chemical approach to an unresolved biological problem.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Mann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 423,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division has funded Dr.
Edgar E. Kooijman and Dr. Elizabeth K. Mann, at Kent State University, to
unravel how proteins interact with the surface of lipid droplets. Lipid droplets
are fat particles that are crucial for supplying and regulating energy within
the cell, and are involved in a whole host of other cellular processes. This
research focuses on how proteins in cells are targeted to and bind to the
surface of these lipid droplets, where they regulate droplet structure and
function. While much is known about how proteins bind to the lipid membrane that
encloses complex cells, essentially nothing is known for lipid droplets. Using
model proteins, this research is determining the interactions responsible for
the binding of lipid droplet proteins. As such, this work is transforming
understanding of the structure and function of lipid droplets. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students are working together in a highly
interdisciplinary environment. Additionally, this work is resulting in
meaningful educational experiences for low socioeconomic and minority background
students, with the goal of increased STEM degrees among diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is an investigation of how
cytosolic lipid droplet binding proteins interact with the surface of these
crucial, but poorly understood, organelles. Elucidation of the exact protein-
lipid interactions is transforming the understanding of lipid droplet biology as
results are providing insight not only on lipid metabolism but also on the
diverse functions of lipid droplets. Perilipins, and specifically, perilipin 3,
are serving as the model protein(s) to characterize exactly how different
protein domains are involved in protein-lipid interaction at the lipid droplet
interface. Special attention is being given to the amphipathic alpha-helix
bundle domain found in many proteins that interact with neutral lipid particles.
A diverse array of experimental tools is being used, including a PI-built
monolayer trough, a PI-built oil drop tensiometer, site directed mutagenesis,
and protein expression and purification, supplemented by in vivo localization
studies. This work thus provides key insights into the structure and
physiological function of lipid droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.