* 1808136
* Quantitative Ambient Imaging and Analysis at a Subcellular Level using Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Julia Laskin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Systems and Synthetic Biology
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Julia
Laskin and her group at Purdue University are developing powerful new chemical
imaging capabilities that will enable accurate spatial mapping of both high- and
low-abundance biomolecules in cells using a combination of mass spectrometry,
electrochemistry, and topography-sensitive shear force microscopy. Whereas most
chemical imaging techniques are limited to specific molecules or groups of
molecules, mass spectrometric imaging enables mapping of hundreds of individual
biomolecules in one experiment. By improving the spatial resolution, speed of
analysis, and quantitation capabilities of mass spectrometry imaging techniques,
the Laskin group seeks to enable advances in understanding and controlling
processes occurring in biological systems. These developments will provide
unique insights into dynamic biological processes by examining both the
localization and transport of molecules involved in cellular signaling.
Collaborations with an instrument vendor and a National Laboratory enhance both
the interdisciplinary research opportunities of involved undergraduate and
graduate students, and the prospects for commercialization of the approach.

This project addresses several analytical challenges associated with accurate
measurement of chemical gradients in biological systems along with confident
identification and structural characterization of numerous compounds involved in
biological processes. In particular, the Laskin group is developing approaches
for robust imaging of biological samples with high spatial resolution using
ambient ionization mass spectrometry, on-the-fly structural characterization of
molecules in each pixel using ion mobility spectrometry and tandem mass
spectrometry, and identification of redox-active signaling molecules using
electrochemical microscopy. These new capabilities will be broadly applicable to
studying metabolic processes in diverse biological systems including living
cells, multicellular aggregates, and tissues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.