* 1808046
* : In situ observation of atomic scale twinning Process in HCP Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Guofeng Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 432,672.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Plastic deformation plays a crucial role in
mechanical behaviors of crystals. Particularly, where the atoms are arranged in
the pattern of hexagons, called hexagonal close packed metals and alloys such as
magnesium or titanium-based alloys, twinning (two separate crystals having the
same structure in a symmetrical manner) is an important type of plastic
deformation, which critically influences the mechanical behaviors such as
ductility, strength, work hardening, and fracture. As such, twinning has to be
understood and controlled for designing and processing the hexagonal close
packed metals and alloys. However, this has been impeded by the elusive
understanding of atomic scaled mechanisms of twinning processes in the metals.
Despite tremendous research efforts, for decades, how atom movements influence
the mechanism of twinning remains poorly understood. The proposed research will
employ high resolution transmission electron microscopy to investigate atomic-
scale twinning processes in the materials, providing in-depth understanding on
the role of atom movement in twinning of complex crystal structures. The project
will provide important guidance for twinning-based alloy design and processing
for achieving superior mechanical properties. Thereby, it will advance the
application of light metal-based structures. The program will integrate research
and education through training graduate/undergraduate students with diverse
demographic backgrounds (particularly, female and minority) and their
participation in national laboratories as well as outreach to elementary school
through Pittsburgh Carnegie Science
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Twinning
plays a crucial role in mechanical behaviors of crystals. Particularly, in
hexagonal close packed (HCP) metals and alloys, twinning, in addition to
dislocation slip, can be profusely activated and critically influences their
ductility, strength, work hardening, texture formation and fracture, primarily
because twinning can carry deformation along the &lt;c&gt; axis of the HCP
crystal where dislocation plasticity is limited. As such, twinning has to be
controlled for designing and processing HCP alloys with improved mechanical
properties. However, this has been impeded by the elusive understanding of
atomic scaled mechanisms of twinning nucleation and growth in HCP crystals. In
twinning, a part of the parent lattice is reoriented and the product lattice is
mirrored by the parent about the twinning plane. Classically, such a lattice
reorientation is achieved by a homogeneous simple shear which carries all or a
fraction of the lattice points to the twin. The shear is mediated by coordinated
movement of twinning dislocations on the twinning plane. The classical
description of deformation twinning has been validated extensively in cubic
structures. A significant difference in twinning of double-lattice structures,
such as HCP, is that a twinning shear cannot carry all the parent lattice points
to the twin positions. As a result, additional atomic movements, called
shuffles, are required to accomplish twinning. Despite tremendous research
efforts, for decades, how atom shuffles influence the mechanism of twinning
remains poorly understood. Atomically-resolved direct experimental investigation
are necessary for exploring the actual atomic shuffle and shear during twinning
nucleation and growth, and hence obtaining a fundamental understanding on
twinning mechanisms in HCP crystals. The proposed research will employ state-of-
the-art in situ high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) to
investigate atomic-scale twinning processes in HCP crystals, such as twinning
nucleation, growth and pertinent transformations as well as the orientation-
dependent competition between dislocation plasticity and twinning at atomic
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.