* 1808766
* Simultaneous characterization of near-field nanoplasmonic structure and function using super-resolved far-field optics: Solving the Inverse Problem
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 539,439.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professors Shimon Weiss and Daniel Neuhauser at University of
California-Los Angeles are studying light-matter interaction at the nanoscale.
Specifically, the study explores how light-emitting nanoparticles or molecules
interact with metal nanostructures underneath. The gained knowledge could find
applications in high resolution imaging in cells, high-speed integrated
circuits, and quantum information science. Professors Weiss and Neuhauser work
closely with graduate, undergraduate and high school students by providing them
multidisciplinary training opportunities. They also plan to make their software
broadly available to other scientists who are working on super resolution
imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Weiss and Neuhauser merge super-
resolution techniques, wide-field single photon detector, and multiscale
simulations to understand the coupling strength of point emitters to plasmonic
nanostructures. A novel probing technology is used to simultaneously resolve
plasmonic structure and field strengths well below the diffraction limit,
exploiting the dependence of the blinking statistics of quantum dots on the
electric field strength for Stochastic Optical Fluctuation Imaging (SOFI). An
additional layer of polarized excitation and emission is used to help understand
emitter-metal coupling/scattering strengths in close proximity. They then plan
to implement the method to solve the inverse problem, where structure and
function can be simultaneously measured without any a priori knowledge of the
underlying system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.