* 1808637
* Structural and Mechanistic Study of Mammalian Thiol Dioxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Aimin Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Aimin Liu from The University of Texas at San Antonio to
investigate the structure and mechanism of two human enzymes involved in the
oxidative sulfur metabolism. The two enzymes of interest, cysteine dioxygenase
and cysteamine dioxygenase, are responsible for activating oxygen to process
organic thiol moieties. The activity of these two enzymes is essential to manage
metabolic cysteine and taurine concentrations and it is associated with
autoimmune and neurological conditions, cellular signaling, energy balance, and
fat metabolism. Integrated training is incorporated in the research project,
which provides to students comprehensive and hands-on learning opportunities in
biochemical and structural biology techniques. A multimedia presentation on
electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy will be created and used to provide
to students a tangible demonstration of how this advanced spectroscopy can
clarify chemical properties of critical biomolecular systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to reveal the mechanistic implications of
adding oxygen atoms to electron-rich sulfur as well as the nature of the
catalytic contribution of a protein-derived cofactor. The thiol dioxygenases
utilize a mononuclear ferrous center to facilitate the incorporation of
molecular oxygen into the thiol moiety of their respective substrates. These
enzymes stand out as unique among dioxygenases because they add two of the
oxygen atoms of molecular oxygen to a single substrate atom. Though other
dioxygenases have been well studied, thiol dioxygenation is expected to proceed
via a distinct mechanism that has not been well established yet. Dr. Liu is
investigating the formation of the catalytic ensemble of these enzymes, namely
an iron- and oxygen-dependent process for generating a catalytic amplifier known
as the protein-derived cofactor. A wide array of techniques, including protein
engineering, EPR spectroscopy, stopped-flow rapid kinetics, and protein X-ray
crystallography, are employed in the determination of the chemical steps of
cofactor biogenesis and sulfur oxygenation. The completion of this project is
expected to reveal new mechanistic implications of adding two oxygen atoms to
one electron-rich sulfur as well as the nature of the catalytic contribution of
the protein-derived cofactor to sulfur metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.