* 1808828
* Electrical switching of magnetic devices by voltage-controlled proton insertion for low-power, high-performance data storage and computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Geoffrey Beach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

As conventional silicon-based electronics approaches fundamental physical
limits, new materials and devices are urgently needed to meet the growing demand
for low-power, high-performance data storage and processing technologies in
today's information-based society. Magnetic materials, in which both the charge
and the spin of the electron can be harnessed simultaneously, provide a path to
enable a new generation of advanced 'spintronic' devices with capabilities
beyond those that can be achieved using the electron charge alone. The ability
to electrically gate charge transport was key to the electronics revolution, but
at present, no mechanism exists to effectively gate magnetism in materials. This
project seeks fundamental understanding and practical application of a new
mechanism to control magnetism electrically that can enable an unprecedented
level of control with fast response, low gate voltage and power input, and
robustness over many cycles. The transformative aspect is the use of protons
instead of electrons to mediate changes in magnetic properties in solid
materials by injecting them towards and away from a magnetic thin film using a
small applied voltage. This new control mechanism could deliver superior
functionality to enable future memory, logic, and other spin-based technologies
that would have tremendous fundamental, technological, and societal impact. The
project provides a fertile training ground for undergraduate and graduate
students in key interdisciplinary nanotechnologies, and will include an
international collaboration that provides international scientific exposure for
the supported graduate student. Educational innovation will be achieved through
project-centric curriculum development at the undergraduate level. Outreach and
diversity activities will include hosting high school teachers through the
National Science Foundation Research Experience for Teachers program and by
developing and delivering a 'Magnetism in Action' program at a local elementary
school classroom for hands-on explorations in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM).

Technical: The objective of the proposed program is to enable a new means to
electrically gate magnetism and spin transport in spintronic devices by
exploiting reversible hydrogen insertion in all-solid-state thin-film
heterostructures. In ultrathin ferromagnetic films adjacent to a heavy metal
like Pt and Pd, broken inversion symmetry and spin-orbit coupling give rise to a
wealth of phenomena such as perpendicular anisotropy, chiral and other exchange
interactions, and spin-orbit torques. These same metals are well-known hydrogen
storage materials that undergo a reversible transition between metallic and
metal-hydride phases with correspondingly substantial changes to structural and
electronic properties. The transformative aspect of the proposed research is to
harness electrochemical water splitting in the ambient atmosphere catalyzed by a
rare-earth oxide/noble metal interface, to act as a solid-state proton pump
capable of driving H+ ions through the gate oxide and into/out of the heavy-
metal adjacent to a ferromagnet. Heterostructures will be designed to examine
and optimize low-voltage gating of critical magnetic properties, to assess the
reaction and diffusion kinetics, to identify and mitigate device failure modes,
and to apply this knowledge to exemplary devices in which spin waves can be
electrically gated in dynamic magnonic waveguides and crystals. The proposed
research will establish a revolutionary new approach that will enable new
devices and spin-based architectures, while providing a powerful knob to explore
the origins of some of the most important interactions being studied in
nanomagnetism today. The project moreover provides new interdisciplinary
insights by combining spintronics with solid-state ionics, two traditionally
distinct disciplines, which will lead to synergistic approaches to tackle key
fundamental and technological challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.