* 1808471
* Directing the synthesis of complex materials from metal fluxes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Susan Latturner, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 430,772.00

PART 1:   NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research at
NSF, explores the synthesis of new magnetic and electronic materials using
molten metals as solvents. Reactions of elements in molten metal fluxes take
place at temperatures above those used for reactions in water, and below those
used in traditional solid state synthesis. This unusual temperature range
promotes the discovery of new materials. Metal flux reactions also facilitate
the growth of new compounds as large crystals, which allows for the use of
advanced characterization techniques such as single crystal X-ray diffraction to
determine atomic positions, and oriented magnetic and transport measurements to
explore the directionality of magnetic and electronic behavior. The principle
investigator's research group explores the synthesis of new magnetic materials
using low melting mixtures of lanthanide and transition metals as a flux.
Reactions of silicon with other elements in molten magnesium alloys are carried
out to synthesize complex semiconducting compounds that may be useful for
applications such as solar cells. Further understanding of metal flux chemistry
is crucial to the advancement of synthesis science and the discovery of the next
generation of magnetic and semiconducting materials. Students involved in this
interdisciplinary research gain valuable experience in synthesis, a variety of
characterization techniques, and critical thinking. They interact with
scientists in the chemistry, physics, and materials engineering fields.
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:   TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, investigates the synthesis of new intermetallics from metal
fluxes comprised of two elements, a method that enables the formation of new
metastable phases and their isolation as large crystals. Crystal structures are
determined using X-ray and neutron diffraction, and magnetic and electronic
properties are studied. Two areas are explored: the synthesis of a) magnetic
intermetallic phases in lanthanide/transition metal eutectic fluxes, and b)
semimetallic phases in magnesium-rich flux mixtures. The former produce new
compounds with magnetic properties stemming from the combined contributions of
both the lanthanide and the transition metal element. Developing the synthetic
ability to control the formation of transition metal building blocks allows
tailoring magnetic properties and improved understanding of complex phenomena
such as spin glass behavior and long range magnetic ordering. Magnesium-based
fluxes are proving to be fruitful growth media for metal silicides, which have
potential as thermoelectric materials. Reactions of divalent metals (Ca, Sr, Ba,
Eu, Yb) with silicon in Mg/Al melts yield charge-balanced semiconducting or
semimetallic phases complex structure types, which are potential alternatives to
telluride thermoelectrics. Additionally, researchers explore effects of varying
heating profiles in order to isolate intermediate phases before their conversion
to more thermodynamically favored products, as well as trends in reactivity,
effects of element substitution on formation of common structural building
blocks, and structure-property relationships. Furthermore, this work expands the
understanding of metal flux chemistry, with the goal to control the process of
these reactions and target desired compounds. Students gain valuable experience
in synthesis, a variety of characterization techniques, and critical thinking.
They are exposed to the interdisciplinary nature of modern science through
interactions with scientists in the chemistry, physics, and materials
engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.