* 1808371
* Hydrothermal Brines: New Media for the Synthesis and Crystal Growth of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Joseph Kolis, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 540,666.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project explores new solid-state materials
with potentially useful properties. The funding from the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program supports continued development of a novel approach
to synthesis of new materials, specifically a high temperature hydrothermal
technique in which reactions are performed in water at exceptionally high
temperatures (700 degrees C) and pressures (20,000 psi). These conditions are
similar to those deep within the Earth, and often result in formation of high
quality single crystals of new products. Such extreme reaction conditions are
almost unknown in any other laboratories in the world. Because of this,
compounds can be prepared that are completely new and unanticipated, and
challenge existing theories of structure and bonding. Many of these unusual new
materials have unexpectedly useful properties. Some can be used in lasers,
ultrahigh resolution micromachining, new magnetic devices and possibly quantum
communication and quantum computers. This research is directly applicable to one
of the NSF Big Ideas: "The Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution".
The new techniques used in this program typically lead to crystals of
exceptional size and quality, therefore they can be studied in greater detail
than many other materials. The comprehensive investigation of these new crystal
materials provides important insights into the next generation of new materials.
Because the techniques employed in this research are used almost nowhere else in
the world, the students in this program learn a unique skill set enabling them
to stand out as the next generation of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This program,
funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, is a next-stage extension of high temperature hydrothermal
synthesis as a route to new solid-state compounds. The primary emphasis in this
project is on the investigation of a new class of mineralizers, namely
hydrothermal brines. Brines are fluids containing concentrated salts like
halides and carbonates. Such fluids have received almost no systematic
laboratory study, but preliminary investigation suggests that they are excellent
media for the synthesis and single crystal growth of an enormous new class of
interesting compounds. The program focuses on open shell first row transition
metal ions that are complexed by a range of oxyanion building blocks. These
include vanadates, phosphates, germanates, gallates, stannates and other related
building blocks containing a variety of structural and bridging characteristics.
The new crystals exhibit a number of attractive physical properties including
acentricity, polarity and frustrated magnetic behavior. The research targets
specific types of compounds with these desirable properties for new
piezoelectrics, multiferroics and similar materials. Because the synthesis
techniques employed in this research are used almost nowhere else in the world,
the students in this program learn a unique skill set enabling them to stand out
as the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.