* 1808791
* Nanohoops as Modular Building Blocks to Molecular Cylinders and Machines
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ramesh Jasti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

Professor Ramesh Jasti at the University of Oregon is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry to develop general methods to use nanohoop molecules as building
blocks to self-assemble into precise nanoscale materials with controlled shape
and function. Two forms of structures are envisioned: nanotubes and interlocked
structures. Novel synthetic approaches are explored to achieve these objectives.
The desired products are expected to have structural stability and unique size-
dependent optoelectronic properties. The products are rationally designed to
perform specific functions in gas adsorption, filtration, mass transport, and
molecular switching and sensing. Nanotubes with controlled geometry and diameter
are used to prepare one-dimensional materials from fullerenes (soccer-like)
carbon-based molecules. Students involved in the project are trained in an
interdisciplinary environment and acquire experience in organic synthesis,
supramolecular chemistry, and nanoscience. A partnership with the University of
Oregon Summer Science Program provides hands-on science experience to groups of
students who are traditionally underrepresented in the state of Oregon.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The assembly of molecular building blocks into precise
nanoscale materials with novel function is a grand challenge at the interfaces
of materials science, supramolecular chemistry, and synthesis. While synthetic
approaches for the preparation of nanohoops have been developed in the last
decade, the self-assembly of these nanohoops into nanoscale materials with
controlled shape and function is relatively unexplored. In the first aim of this
project, the Jasti research team is exploring weak aryl fluorine interactions as
means to guide the self-assembly of carbon nanohoops into noncovalent nanotubes.
The nanotubes are used to self-assemble fullerenes into 1D channels, which can
then undergo a polymerization reaction to lead to a host of new 1D fullerene
nanomaterials. In the second aim of the project, the Jasti group is exploring
nitrogen-doped nanohoop analogues and metal-coordination strategies to prepare
catenane structures, which would represent simple versions of molecular
machines. The Jasti group is probing these new catenane structures for novel
properties such as optoelectronic communication through the mechanical bond or
ultra-low friction motion on the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.