* 1808125
* Multiphase Chemistry of Reactive Oxygen Species and Free Radicals in Secondary Organic Aerosols
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Manabu Shiraiwa, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2021
* USD 398,890.00

This project is funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the
Chemistry Division at the National Science Foundation. Professor Shiraiwa, his
graduate student and postdoctoral fellow investigate atmospheric fine
particulate matter, or aerosols. Organic particles are a major component of
these aerosols. These particles influence climate, air quality and public
health. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) including hydroxyl (OH) and organic
radicals play a central role in the chemical changes that take place in organic
compounds in the atmosphere. ROS are poorly quantified in cloud droplets and
their role in aqueous chemistry is poorly characterized. This causes major
uncertainties in evaluating aerosol effects on air quality. Professor Shiraiwa
organizes an annual educational seminar for local high school teachers. This
educational seminar consists of three major activities: seminar, AirUCI lab
tour, and hands-on experiments. With help from his research group, high school
teachers operate instrumentation to measure free radicals contained in a variety
of samples such as atmospheric particles, diesel exhaust particles, and tobacco
ash. This research project advances the national health and prosperity by
developing a better understanding of our environment and how it can influence
human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the chemical mechanism
of ROS formation from atmospheric organic compounds. Organic particles are
generated in a reaction chamber. Ambient particles are also collected using a
particle impactor. ROS in organic particles are quantified mainly using electron
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy with a spin trapping technique. A chemical
kinetic model is developed and applied for data analysis and interpretation. The
project goal is to advance the fundamental understanding of multiphase chemistry
of ROS in atmospheric water. The project involves mentoring of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. An annual educational seminar on
environmental radical chemistry is organized for local high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.