* 1808517
* Correlations of Li Deficiency, Diffusion, and Interfacial Impedance in Solid-State Batteries Probed by In Situ Tracer Exchange NMR and Depth-Profiling MRI Combined with Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yan-Yan Hu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 301,570.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All-solid-state rechargeable
batteries promise high energy density, low cost, and improved safety. Therefore,
they are considered as the next-generation battery technology for electric
vehicles and expected to meet other critical needs for safer, more compact, and
higher-capacity energy storage devices. However, low power density and poor
long-term stability limit their practical applications and market
competitiveness. This research, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, uses new NMR and
MRI techniques to provide new insights into the cause of these limitations and
helps to develop high-performance solid-state rechargeable batteries. It also
generates new knowledge that promotes in-depth understanding of fundamental
interface chemistry, where the bottleneck lies for improved performance of other
technologies including fuel cells, super-capacitors, and solar cells. The new
NMR and MRI methodologies developed as part of this project not only facilitate
the discovery of novel functional materials for technological applications, but
might also benefit biomedical research. Additionally, the principle investigator
actively recruits students from a HBCU institution and engages women and
minority students in the ongoing research, thereby educating and training a
diverse next generation of STEM researchers. Outreach activities aimed at
engaging the general public in scientific discussions include the development of
an app with the title "The Sound of
NMR".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large resistance for mass and energy transport at
electrode-solid electrolyte interfaces impedes the success of high-performance
solid-state rechargeable batteries. Understanding Li-ion diffusion across these
interfaces and its relationships with structures and compositions of interfaces
is critical to addressing the challenges associated with interfacial impedance.
This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, probes ion transport through electrode-
solid electrolyte interfaces by employing the tracer-exchange NMR method, to
quantify Li deficiency with high-resolution depth-profiling magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and determines interfacial resistance with electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy, under both ex and in situ conditions. This study
provides insight into the critical factors that limit ion transport at the
interfaces, which aids interface design for optimal electrode-electrolyte
compatibility with minimized interfacial impedance. The researchers establish
real time correlations among Li deficiency, diffusion, and interfacial
resistance. Two model systems, Li/Li7La3ZrO12/Li and Li/Li10GeP2S12/Li, are
chosen for their representativeness of oxide and sulfide electrolytes and their
distinct differences at the Li electrode-solid electrolyte interfaces. Based on
the experimental investigation, an analytical model is developed to
quantitatively elucidate the impact of Li deficiency and diffusion on
interfacial impedance. This model is implemented in the RandFlux software, for
predicting the electrochemical processes and performance of all-solid-state
rechargeable batteries. For this project, the principle investigator actively
recruits students from a HBCU institution and engages women and minority
students in the ongoing research. Outreach activities aimed at engaging the
general public in scientific discussions include the development of an app with
the title "The Sound of NMR".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.