* 1809427
* Teacher-training to transform classrooms, teachers and communities
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Vesall Nourani, Nourani                 Vesall
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 170,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Economics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Abhijit Banerjee at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist studying the ways in which a novel pedagogical approach can
influence teacher ability and effort and student learning outcomes. Ensuring
quality teaching is a challenge around the world, so it is natural to ask: how
can teacher quality and effort be improved? Attempts to answer this question by
using material incentives (e.g., increased salaries or increased pay for
performance outcomes) have not produced definitive answers. The fellow and
sponsoring scientist have partnered with an NGO that implements a novel teacher
training to gain insights into the multifaceted challenge of increasing teacher
motivation and ability. The teacher training instils in teachers a love of
learning by deepening their appreciation and understanding of the scientific
method. By gaining the ability to practice methods of scientific inquiry,
teachers begin to see both themselves and their students as scientists with the
responsibility of building on accumulated knowledge to provide benefits to local
communities. They thus become researchers with a social mission to apply and
generate learned and, respectively, new knowledge to improve student and
community outcomes. A core hypothesis of the study is that teachers' love of
learning is transferred to students through a new orientation towards knowledge
and its potential uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research employs a
randomized control trial design to establish causal linkages between the teacher
training and relevant outcomes. Fifty schools out of 100 are randomly selected
to send teachers to participate in the teacher training. The study will compare
outcomes in treatment and control schools to test hypotheses using originally
collected datasets that include information on teacher attitudes, student
learning and community outcomes. The study will be among the first to advance
understanding about sources of intrinsic motivations in teachers and how they
can be tapped to create qualitative and quantitative improvements to teacher
quality and student learning. This is a significant contribution - studies
examining links between teacher effort and monetary incentives often lead to
outcomes that do not correlate with student learning. Additionally, the study
will explore whether the pedagogical approach from the training leads teachers,
and subsequently students, to apply knowledge to influence local community
processes. Such an experience may lead to more creative economic activity,
deeper engagement in civic processes. Thus, a second contribution of the study
is that it demonstrates the ways in which different pedagogical approaches
generate local and immediate returns to education in addition to delayed returns
stemming from human capital investments the leads to workforce participation
later in life. A second goal of the fellowship is to examine how nation-wide
teacher training and recruitment strategies can tap into such sources of
motivation to influence teacher quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.