* 1809936
* Dense Polarization-Keyed Fiber Optic Communication System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Kam Wai Chan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2020
* USD 118,517.00

Full Exploitation of Polarization Modulation for Increasing Data Speed in an
Integrated Fiber Optic Communication System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical fibers
form the workhorse of the telecommunications industry today. Their information
carrying capacity has risen spectacularly. Even so, demand for higher capacity
will continue at an increasingly rapid rate due to the rise of cloud computing,
distributed data centers, and the Internet of Things (IoT). The objective of
this proposal is to address such a need by fully exploiting the polarization
property of light for information transmission that can significantly surpass
the capability of the technologies employed in current optical fiber
communication systems. The outcomes of the research are expected to give a
significant boost to the channel capacity in a single fiber without the need of
fiber infrastructure upgrade, hence pushing the capacity limit of existing
optical fiber networks. The proposed work is compatible with current and future
fiber-optic technologies, making it readily deployable and future-proof. Aside
from technology advancement, the project offers undergraduate and graduate
students the opportunity to gain practical as well as state-of-the-art
technology experiences that are indispensable for the telecommunication
industry. The proposal will help train students and equip them with the
knowledge of technology and its commercialization leading to creation of new
businesses. In turn, this will increase the competitive edge of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polarization of light has been used in optical
communications for carrying or switching information. Current applications
mostly focus on utilizing the two independent polarization channels to double
the data transmission capacity of a single-mode optical fiber. The goal of this
research is to significantly increase the capacity by exploiting the very large
number of possible states of polarization (SOPs) to encode information. This is
accomplished by maximizing the number of distinguishable SOPs with the use of
optimal quantum receivers for SOP estimation and a machine-learning-based
optimal polarization modulation format in an integrated fiber optic
communication system. The research will explore this capacity in single-mode
fibers through theory as well as experimental results. Research tasks will
include the design of optimal polarization receivers for the optical
communication link, the combination of polarization shift keying (POLSK) with
phase-shift keying (PSK) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), deep neural
network-based optimizations for the polarization modulation format, and an
experimental testbed incorporating the optimal modulation and detection for the
entire optical link composed of the transmitter, channel and receiver.
Specifically, the optimal polarization modulation format obtained by machine
learning over the integrated transmitter-channel-receiver architecture will give
new insights to system optimization that incorporates data-driven information on
the optical link impairments. This is in contrast to the conventional approach
to optimizing the components of the communication system individually at the
expense of optimality of the composite system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.