* 1809594
* Frustrated and Allowed Structural Transitions:  Towards a Predictive Framework for the Structural Chemistry of Intermetallic Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Daniel Fredrickson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 466,101.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The development of new technologies is closely connected
to the discovery and optimization of new solid state materials. Intermetallic
phases-compounds formed upon alloying metals together-represent a rich source of
such materials, as the periodic table offers virtually infinite possible
combinations and ratios of metallic elements. However, the realization of useful
applications based on intermetallic phases is limited by the inability to
control their often complex and unpredictable geometrical arrangements at the
atomic level. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, is promoting the progress
of science through the creation of chemical principles for understanding the
crystal structures of these materials and eventually guiding them in ways that
enhance a desired property. Theory is used to identify ways that the different
aspects of atoms (such as their sizes and ways of bonding) can cooperate to
stabilize structures and facilitate transformations between structures. These
conclusions then guide the experimental discovery of new compounds, with their
structures and behavior providing feedback for theory. In addition, this project
continues the development of online resources that make solid state and
materials chemistry accessible for the public, including the living textbook
"Interactive Solid State Chemistry" (available as part of the Chemical Education
Digital Library), and "Science through Comics". The project also provides
educational experiences for undergraduate researchers as well as an internship
for a high-school student from a demographic group underrepresented in the
sciences each summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The structures of
intermetallic phases - solid state compounds derived from metallic and metalloid
elements - are known to be governed by the same chemical properties as
molecules: electron counts, atomic size requirements, and electronegativities.
However, in contrast to molecular chemistry, no broadly applicable predictive
schemes for guiding intermetallic structural chemistry through solid state
synthesis has been realized yet, which is a limiting factor in utilizing the
full potential of these compounds as applied materials. This project, funded by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, draws on recently developed theoretical tools for visualizing
strains in atomic packing and local electron configurations in intermetallics to
build a conceptual framework for predicting structural phenomena in these
compounds: the Frustrated and Allowed Structural Transitions (FAST) model. Here,
potential rearrangements of a parent structure are divided into those that are
frustrated or allowed, depending on whether the primary factor driving the
transition (either atomic packing or electronics) is supported or impeded by the
respective second factor, with allowed transformations predicted to be readily
realizable experimentally. Using a combination of theory and experiment, the
principle investigator's research group tests and refines this model through the
anticipation and discovery of new structural progressions (including
diffusionless phase transitions) and the selective stabilization of shallow
metastable structures in binary systems through elemental substitution.
Therefore they examine a vast range of intermetallic structures through the FAST
approach in search of hallmarks of responsiveness in the electronic and packing
factors (the violation of electron counting rules and intense chemical pressure
features, respectively). Those phases for which previously unobserved structural
chemistry is deemed allowed by this model are prioritized for experimental
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.