* 1809225
* Waveform Design and Processing for Next-Generation Radar Systems - Adaptivity, Agility, and Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Mojtaba Soltanalian, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 323,665.00

Next-generation radar systems will operate in the face of fast-changing target
scene parameters, demands for higher resolution and networked environments with
limited resources. The goal of this project is to establish the theoretical
foundations as well as the development procedures for novel extremely low-cost
waveform design and processing frameworks that address the fundamental
requirements of future radar systems - all in the pursuit of enhanced
adaptivity, agility, and reliability. The project investigates radar waveform
design and processing problems of interest through different theoretical lenses.
At the same time, it translates the theoretical outcomes into more practical
domains of vehicular technology and spectrum sharing. The project is thus
expected to have a significant impact on the theory and practice of radar, and
is of direct relevance to national and global needs. For instance, the project
contributes to national defense and security efforts: in radar applications, the
task of target detection/estimation relies on inference based on the collected
data. The power of reliable probing waveform design and inference in a short
period of time determines the level of confidence and agility we have in target
determination, and as a result plays a key role in the ability of defense
command or leadership to make confident and effective decisions. The project
involves preparing students for engineering in the 21st century through the
incorporation of practical design and problem-solving techniques into the
education curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Waveform design and processing for
radar has a crucial role in fulfilling the promises of adaptivity, agility, and
reliability: the radar performance is shown to be considerably improved by a
judicious design of the probing signals and processing schemes. The arising
design problems may deal with various measures of quality (including detection,
estimation, and information-theoretic criteria), and moreover, the practical
condition that the employed signals must belong to a limited signal set. Such
diversity of design metrics and signal constraints lays the foundation for many
interesting research works in waveform optimization. Additionally, waveform
design and processing for next-generation radars is a topic of great interest
due to the recent growing demands in increasing the number of antennas/sensors
in various radar applications (thus requiring an increased agility in design and
processing stages). In contrast, our current approaches are not fully adequate
in handling design metrics and practical signal constraints in an agile and
reliable manner. In light of such recent technological advances, the proposed
work seeks to overcome the limitations of the traditional methods by studying
and developing novel extremely low-cost waveform design and processing
frameworks that address the emerging requirements of modern radar practice. The
proposed research spans waveform design and processing problems: (i) with signal
constraints that typically make the problems intractable, (ii) for robustness
with a focus on system impairments and worst-case scenarios, as well as (iii)
for co-existence which is deemed to be a key component in enhanced access to
radio spectrum for both radar and communication users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.