* 1809728
* Collaborative Research: COMPACT SUB-1 Kelvin Resolution Video Rate 94 GHz Passive Imaging Camera Using Optical UP-Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Elias Alwan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 247,873.00

The potential benefits of passive millimeter-wave imaging have long been
recognized. It is an enabling technology for imaging and detection in degraded
visual environments. The large range of applications for this technology include
astronomy, aerial reconnaissance, stand-off threat detection, portal screening,
persistent surveillance, situational awareness, and video imaging navigation in
the absence of GPS signals. Millimeter-wave imaging can provide for high
resolution and has the added capability to "see through" smoke, fog, sandstorms,
and clouds. Therefore, it can provide pilots with valuable situational awareness
during hover, takeoff and landing operations. Further, millimeter-wave radiation
penetrates through plastic and clothing. With these advantages in mind, a
Passive Millimeter-Wave Imaging camera system can be used as a complementary
sensing modality in the emerging field of multi-sensor data fusion, and in
conjunction with visible spectrum and infra-red (IR) cameras, LADAR (Laser
Radar, a.k.a. LIDAR), RFID, and other range sensors to achieve inferences not
possible with a single sensing modality. To date, most fielded millimeter-wave
imaging systems focus on body scanning, as encountered at airports and building
entrances. These systems are considered effective, but not without drawbacks.
Specifically, they are bulky, slow, expensive, conspicuous and not suitable for
standoff imaging. Therefore, there is a need for low-cost, compact, sensitive,
and versatile imaging systems to enable a broader field of imaging applications.
Medical and other scientific fields can also benefit from a small and high-
performance millimeter-wave imaging camera. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research introduces a new millimeter-wave camera design with integrated antennas
and a photonic chip front-end using optical up-conversion, all in a staring
interferometric sparse array format for high contrast and high spatial
resolution. In the proposed camera system, the incident millimeter-wave
radiation modulates an optical signal within an optical electro-modulator. The
modulated signal, which consists of the optical carrier and double sidebands, is
then stripped of the carrier and one of the sidebands using an integrated on-
chip optical bandpass filter before being projected onto a standard near-IR
camera. A number of innovative approaches are proposed to achieve small camera
footprint, sensitivity, low cost and better resolution: 1) front-end antenna
array with integrated optical up-conversion for black-body radiation centered at
94 GHz without a need for amplification, 2) increased efficiency by directly
integrating the millimeter-wave antenna onto the electro-optical modulator and
the optical bandpass filter on a single chip, 3) electro-optical modulator
architecture using the electro-optic effect in polymer material in the active
area for low loss and high modulation efficiency, 4) engineered sol-gel
properties that promote high polling efficiency, low optical propagation losses,
and efficient single mode fiber coupling, 5) standard optical lens and near-IR
commercial cameras for low cost and simple reconstruction of high resolution
images, and 6) interferometric sparse staring array detector front-end
architecture for video rate functionality that avoids RF refractive lens in the
front-end. The impact of this research is profound at many levels. The proposed
camera will have a transformational impact since it can be used in the same
manner as an optical camera to identify and detect hidden objects below clothing
or behind obscurants at high speed. The proposed millimeter-wave camera is of
low cost, real time, high resolution and high contrast. Notably, the modulator
developed for this camera will benefit a multitude of portable devices for other
research fields and many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.