* 1809095
* Collaborative Research: Atomic Displacement Engineering of Post-epitaxial Thin-films (ADEPT)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Sang Han, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 293,742.00

Nontechnical Description: The advent of modern epitaxial semiconductor
technologies has resulted in a paradigm shift in optoelectronic and electronic
device fabrication. Specifically, the control of semiconductor layer thickness
to within a single atomic layer and the creation of multiple, abrupt interfaces
between two different semiconductor materials have led to the realization of a
host of structures that are key elements in modern lasers, detectors and
transistors. However, to date, precise control of chemical composition in
heteroepitaxial semiconductor assemblies has been limited to the growth
direction - the next leap in the evolution of semiconductor structures will be
to realize precise control of composition in all three dimensions, opening
routes to optoelectronic building blocks for new technologies, such as quantum
computing and cryptography. This project seeks to achieve this goal by using
mechanical forces induced by nano-indentation to laterally control chemical
composition in semiconductor heterostructures created with existing epitaxial
technology. The project integrates experimental measurements of chemical
composition and structure at the nanoscale with multiscale computer modeling of
atomic diffusion. Using computer models that have been partially informed by
specifically tailored experiments, the team explores a broad parameter space and
identifies the necessary operating conditions needed to efficiency and robustly
drive atomic diffusion. If successful, the outcome of this project could pave
the roadmap for creating a new class of semiconductor structures with broad
potential applications. The project serves as a multidisciplinary home for
training graduate and undergraduate students at both participating institutions.
Undergraduate research opportunities for underrepresented groups is a special
emphasis whereby students identified at the University of New Mexico are
recruited into summer research opportunities at the University of
Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: In this project, the
research team investigates a new strategy for laterally defining nanoscale
compositional patterns in epitaxially-grown III-V semiconductor systems. This
multistep strategy is referred to as Atomic-Displacement Engineering of Post-
epitaxial Thin-films, or ADEPT, which, coupled with traditional heteroepitaxial
methods, may provide a practical pathway for creating three-dimensional quantum
barrier configurations with a high degree of controllability. The ADEPT approach
employs spatially patterned stress fields and thermal annealing to drive
diffusion in a compound semiconductor alloy film comprised of two mobile atomic
species with different sizes and diffusional responses to elastic stress. The
stress fields are applied by pressing a reusable, pre-patterned array of
nanopillars against the semiconductor substrate. Notably, the "press-and-print"
ADEPT strategy does not rely on nucleation and growth of sub-phases that are
difficult to control and is applicable to any material system in which two
mobile atomic species of different sizes are present. The team has recently
demonstrated the ADEPT approach in SiGe and here investigates its broader
application to III-V heteroepitaxial systems, namely InGaAs and GaAsSb, both
supported on InP. In contrast to SiGe, atomic diffusivities in these materials
is not fully characterized, particularly as a function of temperature and
elastic stress, preventing predictive modeling and the ability to fully explore
the ADEPT process. The research activity seeks to overcome the obstacles posed
by a large process parameter space and limited experimental throughput with a
two-step, computer-aided experimental design approach. In the first stage, data-
assisted models are developed using a sequence of relatively "simple"
experiments specifically designed to generate information for parameterizing
models for interdiffusion in III-V materials. In the second stage, the
parameterized models are used to explore the multidimensional parameter space
and identify suitable conditions for performing experimental demonstrations of
the ADEPT process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.