* 1809673
* GOALI: Mid-infrared quantum-cascade metasurfaces for external cavity lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Philip Hon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 06/30/2022
* USD 422,518.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This research introduces a new approach for
making quantum-cascade semiconductor laser light sources that that emit
electromagnetic waves in the mid-infrared spectral region. Efficient and high-
power mid-infrared laser sources are desired for a wide range of applications,
including astrophysical spectral measurements, remote sensing, gas-phase
spectroscopy, and infrared countermeasures. In this proposed work, our team will
investigate a new strategy for developing high-power lasers with excellent beam
quality, the quantum-cascade (QC) vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-
laser (VECSEL). Part of our team has recently developed this technology in the
terahertz spectral region (wavelengths greater than 60 microns), in this project
we will re-envision the concept for the shorter mid-infrared wavelengths. We
propose a suite of approaches tailored for the various spectral sub-regions that
comprise the mid-infrared, including the very-long-wave-infrared (VLWIR)
spectral region (16-28 micron wavelength), the long-wave infrared (LWIR) (8-13
micron wavelength), and the mid-wave infrared (MWIR) (4-5 micron wavelength).
This work is a GOALI university-industry collaboration between the PI at UCLA
and an industrial partner at Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems. As a part of
the project, the research will train graduate and undergraduate students, and
will support recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities to
engineering through participation in a targeted research project
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The research goal
is to develop quantum-cascade (QC) vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-
lasers (VECSELs) in the mid-infrared spectral range. This is proposed as path
for (a) high brightness mid-IR sources with scalable output power (up to tens of
watts) in a circular diffraction-limited beam, and (b) a platform for
multifunctional lasers associated with the ability to locally engineer the
amplitude, phase, and polarization response of the metasurface. We propose a set
of distinct approaches tailored for the various spectral sub-regions that
comprise the mid-IR. The intellectual merit in the proposed work is present on
multiple levels. The primary innovation is the development of novel schemes for
implementing VECSELs for mid-infrared quantum-cascade lasers, in particular in
the MWIR and LWIR based upon surface-emitting gratings. The broader impacts are
addressed at several levels including undergraduate and graduate research
experiences, dissemination of results, technology advancement, outreach to
underrepresented minorities, and industrial interaction. Outreach to
underrepresented minorities (URM) will specifically occur through the PI?s
development of research projects for a course designed for the recruitment and
retention of URM engineering freshman. This GOALI program will result in
interaction between the university and industrial partner, potentially for
technology transfer and student training/exposure within
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.