* 1809092
* Guest-Induced Electrical Conductivity and Photovoltaic Activity of Metal-Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Sourav Saha, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 479,581.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The prospect of advancing modern technologies
in a clean, safe, and sustainable way depends on constant innovation and supply
of new functional materials that can produce and store energy and perform myriad
other complex functions. Self-assembled from metal ion clusters and organic
linkers, crystalline porous materials known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)
exhibit remarkable synthetic simplicity, structural diversity, and size-
selective guest uptake capacity, which make them attractive platforms for a
variety of advanced applications. Although their practical applications are well
documented, electronic and photonic MOFs are still at their infancy and evolving
rapidly. Supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program of the
National Science Foundation, this project focuses on developing stimuli-
responsive MOFs that not only capture complementary guest molecules inside their
cavities, but also engage them in specific electronic interactions to stimulate
new properties and functions, particularly, charge conduction and light to
electrical energy conversion. Precisely oriented films of electro- and
photoactive MOFs grown on functionalized electrodes are integrated into
prototype devices to exploit the preorganized porous architectures filled with
complementary guests to promote directional charge movement in electrical and
photovolatic devices. Systematic structure-property relationship studies
demonstrate how stimuli-responsive MOFs adapt to different physical and chemical
inputs and how their tunable electronic and optical properties can be exploited.
In addition to providing graduate students and postdoctoral researchers a
cutting-edge research and learning environment, this interdisciplinary project
is enabling the PI to engage undergraduate and high school students in research,
motivate younger generation to pursue higher education in science and technology
through outreach activities at local schools and science museum, and raise the
public awareness on the importance of basic research by discussing scientific
breakthroughs in public forums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The electrical conductivity and photovoltaic activity are
among the most coveted but remote properties of metal-organic frameworks. The
lack of intrinsic charge carrier density and the light-harvesting capability,
however, deprives many existing porous frameworks of tunable electronic and
optical properties that are key to their abilities to serve as viable
semiconductors and photovoltaic materials. To address these issues and transform
MOFs into viable electronic and photonic materials, in this project, the PI and
his team are (1) constructing stimuli-responsive MOFs based on redox- and
photoactive ligands that can interact with and respond to various guests,
applied electric field, and light to create new non-native properties, (2)
growing robust, oriented MOF-films in a bottom-up fashion on functionalized
electrode surfaces that can promote directional charge movement, and (3) doping
these stimuli-responsive MOF films with complementary redox-active guests that
can produce mobile charge carriers by interacting with the ligands and
facilitate charge dispersion through the frameworks by forming extended
รฐ-stacks. The current-voltage profiles of MOF films measured before and after
guest infiltration and in the presence and absence of light reveal their
stimuli-responsive nature and the impact of the encapsulated electroactive
guests on their electronic and optical properties. Since guest intercalation is
a ubiquitous and non-destructive process, it can be adopted broadly to engineer
non-native electrical and photonic behaviors in any adaptive MOFs. The prototype
MOF-based solar cells developed in the PI's lab are also used for outreach
activities to demonstrate light to electrical energy conversion to K-12 students
and motivate them to pursue higher education in science, technology,
engineering, and math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.