* 1809730
* Collaborative Research: The SuperCDMS SNOLAB Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Enectali Figueroa-Feliciano, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 12/31/2022
* USD 734,061.00

Observations indicate that 85% of the matter in the Universe is not made of
normal atoms but must be otherwise undetected elementary "dark matter" particles
that do not emit or absorb light. Remarkably, particle physics theories proposed
for other reasons predict the existence of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles
(WIMPs) with just the right properties to be this dark matter. If WIMPs are the
dark matter, they may be detectable when they scatter in Earth-based detectors.
Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituents of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. Over the past three years, the SuperCDMS
collaboration has led the field in the search for low-mass dark matter. The most
recent results from CDMSlite reached an energy threshold for electron recoils as
low as 56 eV. These results excluded new parameter space for the dark matter-
nucleon spin-independent cross section for dark matter masses between 1.6 and
5.5 GeV/c2. This project will focus on better understanding the response of the
signal detectors in a push to make the SuperCDMS yet more
sensitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment will have a
broad impact which extends beyond the search for dark matter. The experiment's
phonon-mediated detectors have applications in cosmology, astronomy and
industry. This effort will contribute opportunities for training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. SuperCDMS will
engage in education and outreach at local institutions and will coordinate
outreach at SNOLAB and the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in South
Dakota to increase the broader impact with a focus on secondary education. This
award will support participating in SNOLAB-hosted teacher workshops, modifying
and providing middle school dark matter education modules to U.S. educators, and
maintaining SuperCDMS-related outreach materials for SNOLAB in Canada and SURF.
Existing alliances will enable out-reach to Sudbury First Nations communities.
This effort will also support post-graduate education and outreach to
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to maximize the science
output of SuperCDMS SNOLAB, detailed understanding of the response of detectors
to potential signals and backgrounds is required. Measurements at two
underground facilities (NEXUS at Fermilab and CUTE at SNOLAB) will characterize
and calibrate pre-production SuperCDMS SNOLAB detectors and the first production
SuperCDMS SNOLAB towers, with supporting measurements from small devices at
university test facilities. Resulting data will allow energy scale calibration,
measurements of background levels, understanding of the detailed phonon and
electron physics of the detectors, development of improved background-rejection
techniques, validation and tuning of Detector Monte Carlo, and optimization of
SuperCDMS SNOLAB operational parameters. These data should also provide a dark
matter search with world-leading sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.