* 1809304
* Quantifying Interactions Between Polyelectrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 483,941.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are charged
polymers, found widely in nature and in manufactured goods. Polyelectrolytes
with opposite charges associate with each other, yielding versatile, soft solids
suited for use as adhesives, medical dressings, membranes for purification,
carriers for controlled drug release, and scaffolds for cell culture. These so-
called "polyelectrolyte complexes" have also been discovered as membrane-less
organelles within cells. Despite the promise and prevalence of polyelectrolyte
complexes, it is not known why some combinations of polyelectrolytes make
strong, rubbery materials while other combinations produce viscous fluids. This
project will investigate broadly the fundamental relationships between the
composition of individual polyelectrolytes and the properties of the hydrated
complexes they form. This understanding will guide the design and application of
known and new materials for new technologies. An emphasis on chemistry student
education and training, including broadening participation in STEM, will expose
participants to the latest ideas, techniques and problem-solving tools to better
serve the flourishing polymers industry. Student participation in high-value
video tutorials on aspects of polyelectrolytes will reach a broad audience of
scientists and will help build professional presentation skills of young
trainees involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of interesting and useful amorphous
phases spontaneously assemble when polyelectrolytes of opposite charge, Pol+ and
Pol-, are mixed. However, little is known concerning why different combinations
of Pol+ and Pol- have substantially different association strengths. This work
will quantitatively and systematically probe the dependence of Pol+/Pol-
association on "hydrophobicity," or water content. Using robust synthetic
methods, a series of increasingly hydrophobic cationic and anionic polymers will
be prepared and complexed. The free energy of association will be determined by
measuring, using sensitive radioisotope or spectroscopic methods, how easily
Pol+Pol- ion pairs are broken by the addition of salt. At the same time, the
amount of water in the complex will be determined with infrared spectroscopy.
The results will correlate the strength of association to water content and
number of methylene units added to enhance hydrophobicity. Complex formation
between charged polypeptides will reveal the association strength of an ion pair
or "salt bridge" formed between two amino acids. The fundamental insights
resulting from the project will also impact the biological/health field since
charged segment pairing of proteins is essential in protein folding (or
misfolding). In a final thrust on polyelectrolyte interactions, the pairing
strength between a polyelectrolyte and a nanoparticle of defined surface
composition will be measured. The exceptional educational resources available at
Florida State University's GEOSET studios will be employed to enhance the
professional development of undergraduate and graduate students. Undergraduates,
in particular women chemists, will be recruited through the University's
undergrad research program and will be mentored in science and presentation
skills. Building on previous successes within the research group, graduate
students will collaborate to produce several informative, competitive, well-
edited educational videos on polyelectrolytes and polyelectrolyte
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.