* 1809116
* Switchable Catalysis as a tool for the Synthesis of Novel Multiblock Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Paula Diaconescu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 817,144.00

Polymers are large molecules that are made up of smaller molecules (monomers)
linked together in a process called "polymerization". Polymers are found in
nature, which has evolved complex machinery for controlling polymerization in a
precise manner. While natural systems are limited to making polymers from only a
few types of monomers, synthetic chemistry offers the opportunity to create
polymers from an essentially infinite variety of monomers. These man-made
polymers make up a wide range of materials. Man-made catalysts, however, cannot
control monomer incorporation into a growing polymer to the degree that natural
systems can. As such, methods that can achieve precise control of monomer
incorporation and polymer structure are needed. Professor Diaconescu from
University of California Los Angeles is designing metal catalysts that can exist
in two states and can create different polymers in each of these states. By
switching the state of the catalyst, the Diaconescu group can make different
block copolymers (i.e., polymers that consist of a "block" of one monomer
followed by another block made of different monomers). With this award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program and the Chemical
Catalysis Program, Professor Diaconescu is studying the design and reactivity of
switchable catalysts and is applying the catalysts to the synthesis of new,
biodegradable polymeric materials. These materials are excellent candidates for
understanding the properties of multiblock copolymers. The project contributes
to the development of human resources in science, technology, and engineering
through the education of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduates. This project is also providing summer research opportunities for
high school students from the High School Nanoscience Program, a partnership
between UCLA and the Los Angeles Unified School District, organized by
California NanoSystems Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Diaconescu group is
studying the design and mechanism of action of redox switchable polymerization
catalysts for the formation of biodegradable copolymers. Applications of the
catalysts to the production of multiblock copolymers are also being pursued. The
polymerization methods rely on metal catalysts capable of carrying out the redox
switchable copolymerization of epoxides, lactide, lactones, and carbonates,
monomers that are biocompatible, biodegradable, and nonimmunogenic. The group is
using experimental and computational approaches, including quantitative
structure-activity relationships (QSAR) guided by principal component analysis
(PCA) to understand the mechanism and improve catalyst function. The properties
of the generated materials are investigated with an emphasis on characterizing
multi-compartment micelles and sequence-defined multiblock
copolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.