* 1809240
* OP: Super-Coupling Nanoplasmonics with Silicon Photonics for Mid-Infrared Biosensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 375,000.00

Nontechnical: This project aims to develop a miniaturized and integrated optical
sensor system to detect biomedical molecules with the potential for point-of-
care applications. The sensor measures the molecule's unique optical absorption
features of infrared light, with high sensitivity and the capability of
identifying them. Moreover, the project will realize a novel structure
consisting of metallic optical nanostructures and silicon waveguide, which are
efficiently coupled together. The new architecture may also lead to efficient
optoelectronic devices for high-speed optical communications that will play an
important role in future data centers and 5G wireless network. For education,
the project will provide graduate and undergraduate students with experience in
nanotechnology and instrumentation. For K-12 outreach, the PIs will build an
interactive Activity Station at the Science Museum of Minnesota every year and
enhance the public awareness of the benefits of nanotechnology to our society.
More women and underrepresented minorities will be given opportunities to
experience nanotechnology. Finally, the PIs will continue support for REU and
local recruit high school students for summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Nanoplasmonics and silicon photonics
are two categories of photonic systems with unique features and advantages in
the manipulation and detection of light. Integrating the two distinctive systems
in a synergistic way can potentially combine their merits and circumvent their
weakness, to enable applications ranging from chemical and biological sensing to
optoelectronics and optical communications. The realization of such a hybrid
integration approach with both efficiency and sensitivity, however, is hindered
by the large phase mismatching between the different types of optical modes in
the two systems, which leads to low coupling efficiency between them. This
program aims to solve the problem and achieve a hybrid platform that efficiently
integrates nanoplasmonic resonators and silicon photonic waveguides with an
emphasis on operation in the technologically important mid-infrared (mid-IR)
band. The phase mismatching challenge is resolved innovatively by utilizing the
super-coupling effect brought by the epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) phenomenon in ring-
shaped plasmonic coaxial resonators to achieve waveguide-plasmonics coupling
efficiency greater than 90%. The hybrid system enables surface-enhanced infrared
absorption (SEIRA) sensing, which will be demonstrated with model systems such
as lipid bilayer membranes and proteins. There are three-fold intellectual
merits of the program. First, the novel physics of super-coupling enabled by the
epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) phenomenon is explored and utilized to efficiently
couple nanoplasmonic resonators with silicon waveguides. The second intellectual
merit lies in the research emphasis in the mid-IR band, which is currently
experiencing very fast development and is exceedingly powerful for spectroscopic
chemical and biological sensing. The third intellectual merit of the program is
to achieve SEIRA biosensing. A new reflection mode detection scheme is
investigated that avoids the passage of IR light through the solution and thus
largely circumvents water absorption. The anticipated significant improvement in
the signal-to-noise ratio would directly lead to enhanced detection sensitivity
in SEIRA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.