* 1809612
* Modeling Perineural Invasion Using a Bioorthogonally Integrated Hydrogel Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Joseph Fox, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 545,960.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accelerate the development of
cancer therapies, we need to understand cancer metastasis, a process by which
cancer cells detach from the primary tumor site and spread to a different tissue
or organ. In addition to blood and lymph systems, cancer cells can hijack the
nerves to travel to a distant location. Although nerve-guided tumor
dissemination is clinically observed, the underlying mechanism remains largely
unknown. The goal of this project is to develop lab-grown tumor models for
studying cancer-nerve interactions. Prostate cancer cells will be allowed to
aggregate in a custom-designed mold to form compact, micrometer-sized spheres.
The multicellular spheres will be embedded in a gelatinous material exhibiting
spatial gradients of stiffness, degradability and cell binding capacity.
Aligned, micron-sized synthetic fibers capable of releasing molecules that nerve
cells produce will be included in the scaffold to mimic the cancer-associated
nerve fibers. Using this model, the PIs will investigate how cancer cells grow
and travel along the nerve-mimicking fibers. The PIs will determine whether the
nerve-guided cell migration can be blocked by compounds that reduce the
association of cancer cells with the nerve. These studies will improve
understanding of cancer metastasis and accelerate the design of innovative
strategies for cancer diagnosis and treatment, thus justifying the public
support. Our outreach and education efforts will help maintain the United
States' global competitiveness. In addition to course development and student
training, effort will be dedicated to the engaging and empowering of pre-
service, early childhood teachers who will inspire the next generation
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research to the
University of Delaware (UD) aims to engineer a physiologically relevant tumor
model with an integrated cancer-nerve interface to better understand perineural
invasion, a process in which malignant cells migrate along, around and through
nerves to a distal location. We will accomplish this goal by culturing pre-
assembled multicellular tumoroids in a hyaluronic acid-derived hydrogel matrix
containing nerve mimicking polymer fibers. The engineered microenvironment will
be produced via a novel interfacial crosslinking process employing the rapid,
bioorthogonal and highly efficient cycloaddition reaction between s-tetrazines
and trans-cyclooctene derivatives. The hydrogel matrix will exhibit defined
spatial gradients to promote cell proliferation, aggregation and migration,
while the aligned, micron-sized fibers will mimic the tumor-associated nerve
fibers structurally and biochemically. We will characterize the phenotype and
migration of prostate cancer cells, as well as their responses to
pharmacological inhibitors. The goal is to gain improved understanding of the
neurotropism of malignant cancer cells, accelerating the design of innovative
strategies for cancer diagnosis and treatment. The proposed research activity
will not only contribute to the education of the next generation scientists and
engineers, but also empower early childhood teachers. Concerted effort will be
dedicated to the creation of discovery-based teaching modules, lab-based
research modules and community-based design and innovation
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.