* 1809164
* Collaborative Research: Design and Control of Networked Offshore Hydrokinetic Power-Plants with Energy Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Manhar Dhanak, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2023
* USD 135,085.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Growing a vibrant clean energy industry will lead to major
societal benefits by reducing pollution and creating a large number of jobs. In
addition to well-established renewables like wind, solar and traditional
hydropower, marine currents have the potential to diversify and significantly
strengthen the global energy portfolio. This project will conduct basic research
focused on extracting electrical power from marine currents using ocean current
turbines. These turbines will operate near the sea surface in major offshore
currents and will be interconnected in arrays. The project will address
fundamental issues related to coordinated, safe, reliable, and robust operation
of these turbines within the array for maximum energy production. Networked
electrical interconnections between devices and energy storage will also be
investigated, with a focus on efficiently feeding electrical power from an array
of turbines to an onshore grid. A diverse population of Faculty and student
researchers will contribute to this project, creating a heterogeneous network of
scholars that will improve the infrastructure for research and education.
Important findings from this project will be integrated with active education
and outreach programs at Virginia Tech, the University of New Orleans, and
Florida Atlantic University which regularly share research outcomes with the
public through presentations, workshops, the web, conferences, and summer camp
activities. Broader scientific and technological impacts are expected in the
energy sector, ocean engineering and technology, marine vehicles and devices, as
well as autonomy and control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean current
turbines will be interconnected in arrays through a local feed-in which sends
generated power to a grid. These devices will be affected by flow perturbations
such as current shear, turbulence, marine waves, as well as the shear and
turbulence generated by neighboring turbines. The overall project goal is to
ensure autonomous, reliable and robust coordinated operation of these turbines
for maximum energy production and proper power conditioning in the presence of
realistic perturbations and sub-system failures. For this purpose fault tolerant
flight control, supervisory switching control to manage sub-system failures,
formation and network control for ocean current turbine farms with energy
storage will be investigated. Novel control systems, which include active blade
pitch angle control by leveraging helicopter flight control technology and
modern multivariable constrained control techniques will be developed. Control
algorithms will be created and evaluated using numerical representations of
commercial devices to increase applicability and encourage transfer to the
commercial sector. Power conditioning solutions that utilize energy storage will
be developed and evaluated to collect power from multiple devices for transfer
to shore and grid connection. The project will also investigate energy storage
and regeneration through fuel cells or hydrogen internal combustion engines.
Basic principles and experimental data series will be combined to create a
comprehensive simulation for the entire storage system. The model will be able
to provide steady-state performance data for system design and for operations
scheduling and control. Modeling and numerical simulation advancements will
enable development and testing of controllers on numerical representations with
dynamics very similar to commercial marine turbines. These will provide
solutions for testing and evaluating the developed controllers, as well as
advancements to turbine performance prediction capabilities. Dynamometer and in-
water testing data will help advance the developed technologies towards
implementation. Methods and tools from diverse disciplines such as control
systems theory and technology, hydrodynamics modeling, optimization, as well as
numerical computation and analysis will be involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.