* 1809932
* A new sensing device for disaster prevention and biomedical applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Piervincenzo Rizzo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

In petrochemical and nuclear power plants, aging pipelines and harsh environment
call for advanced methodologies to monitor the intricate network of piping to
prevent catastrophic explosions. Flow-accelerated corrosion and erosion-
corrosion are among the most common degradation modes of the steel piping. One
of the maintenance paradigms to mitigate the risks of structural failures
consists of measuring the thickness of pipe walls periodically, at predefined
locations using conventional nondestructive evaluation methods. However, this
maintenance strategy can do little when flaws are induced or become critical
between two maintenance inspections. In addition, the intricate network of
pipes, some of which operating at very high temperature, makes periodic
inspection neither trivial nor inexpensive. In this project, we propose a new
transduction mechanism that can be used to monitor continuously the pipes of
interests. The transducer consists of four main components: a chain of a few
millimeter spherical particles able to sustain the propagation of highly
nonlinear solitary waves; a mechanism to trigger the waves in the chain; an
embedded sensor to detect the waves; a hardware system to process in-situ the
data and transmit valuable information wirelessly. The research hypothesis is
that certain characteristics of the waves are dependent on the thickness of the
pipe. If the hypothesis will be validated, the new transducer will allow the
continuous monitoring of the structure of interest without plant shutdown, and
will not suffer from data fidelity due to high-temperature operation or
variability associated with coupling mechanism. Ultimately, the proposed
transducer shall enable the remote measurement of the wall thickness of pipes
operating at any temperature and at any location, above and below ground. While
studying the fundamental principles of this new transducer to address the
engineering problem of pipe bursts, the investigators will explore the
feasibility of the transducer, opportunely downscaled and designed, at measuring
the intraocular pressure of the human eye. The objective is to allow glaucoma
patients to perform frequent self-measurement of their intraocular pressure
without the burden of clinical visits. This will benefit the millions of
patients that suffer from glaucoma, an age-related disease and the second
leading cause of blindness in the world. To this end, this project represents
the initial step towards the development of a new portable tonometer for self-
measurements to allow glaucoma patients capturing the spontaneous circadian
rhythm of the eye pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main technological
innovations that are expected from the scientific advancements of this project
are: (1) a new transducer for the remote measurement of metallic pipe thickness
operating at any temperature and at any location; and (2) a new trans-palpebral
tonometer to perform self-measurements anywhere anytime. The research team is
formed by an expert in solitary wave propagation and nondestructive evaluation
an expert in the electronic development of electrochemical sensors and an eye
care professional with experience in glaucoma and cataract surgery. A graduate
student and a post-doc will work on the project. Many graduates and
undergraduates will be impacted as well, a plan to incorporate a few laboratory
sessions in their cross-listed courses. Following a consolidated record of
activities, the Investigators are committed to educating the youngest through
outreach activities, volunteering, or judging at international competitions.
Finally, the project results will be presented at international conferences and
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.