* 1809128
* Designing complex chalcogenides through building block approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Amitava Choudhury, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 411,664.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The performance of a device
is dependent on the performance of the materials it is made of. For example,
cell phones need a high efficiency lithium-ion battery to run longer without
recharging, while HDTVs need good quality phosphors (color generating materials)
for high resolution color. Scientists currently achieve and improve the desired
properties of the materials in devices by a combination of intuition and
painstaking trial and error, resulting in slow rate of discoveries of the new,
better and/or cheaper materials. Coming up with rational design principles for
new materials can speed-up these discoveries. With support from NSF's Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, the
team from Missouri S&amp;T develops new materials in a more rational and
predictive manner by performing experiments aided by theoretical predictions.
The team synthesizes and uses fixed molecular units to produce new materials
with tailored properties. These molecular units or building blocks are like
legos or bricks that come in various shapes and sizes and can be precisely
connected in different and predictable ways. Through this NSF award the team
prepares highly conducting solid ion conductors that are needed to enable all-
solid-state lithium ion batteries, which are much safer than current
technologies. Undergraduate and graduate students from Missouri S&amp;T are
involved in carrying out this project and are getting trained to work in the
realm of physics and chemistry. Knowledge acquired from this interdisciplinary
project is integrated into undergraduate and graduate level courses.
Additionally, workshops demonstrating the application of these materials in
batteries to high school students and teachers are designed to educate and
interest students with an underrepresented minority background in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Directed synthesis of materials possessing desired property is a
sought-after goal in solid state materials chemistry. This project, funded by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, develops direct synthesis methods for multinary chalcogenides
via metathesis reactions involving alkali chalcometallates and metal halides. It
is based on the hypothesis that in these reactions, chalcometallate building
blocks present in the starting reactants remain intact in the targeted
compounds. The availability of large number of chalcometallate units containing
main group elements with varying negative charge and degree of covalence makes
them ideal for the synthesis of materials with desired applications. By choosing
appropriate combinations of building blocks and metal ions materials that can
generate useful properties related to magnetism, ion conduction and redox
properties are rationally designed. The focus of this study is to create more
stable solid ion conductors and redox active chalcogenide lattices. Experimental
synthesis efforts are performed in tight integration with the predictive Density
Functional Theory (DFT) simulations of the thermodynamic stability of the
possible structures and compositions. DFT calculations are used together with
the chemical intuition to down-select the most promising candidates for
synthesis out of the compositional space, which are then synthesized to validate
the theoretical prediction. This synergetic experimental-theoretical approach to
rationally synthesize complex chalcogenides is translatable to a wide variety of
other materials systems with wide range of applications, including energy
storage, photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, and solid state
lighting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.