* 1809145
* Spatially-Resolved Electronic and Magnetic Structure of 2D Van der Waals Materials and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Randall Feenstra, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 548,982.00

Non-technical Description: In this project, a class of materials known as "two-
dimensional (2D) Van der Waals materials" are being studied. These materials
consist of individual sheets (planes) of atoms, with the sheets bonded to each
other with only very weak bonds (Van der Waals type bonds). In such materials,
the electrons move mainly within a sheet, producing special properties for the
electron orbitals (that is, the "quantum states" of the electrons). It is very
interesting from a fundamental physics point of view to study these orbitals of
the electrons, and the orbitals have potential application in electronic devices
such as low-power, high-speed transistors. An instrument known as a low-
temperature scanning tunneling microscope (LT-STM), recently installed at
Carnegie Mellon University and funded through the NSF Major Research
Instrumentation program, is being used for the research. With this instrument,
the individual atoms on the top atomic plane of the material are imaged, and the
electron orbitals are also imaged. The research also includes: (i) study of
magnetic properties of the materials, using a magnetic "probe" in the LT-STM
instrument; and (ii) assembling of stacks of atomic sheets, containing different
types of atoms in one sheet to the next. Forming such "heterostructures" leads
to new type of orbitals for the electrons, again with potential application in
variety of electronic devices. The project personnel are involved in graduate
and undergraduate student training on this unique LT-STM instrument operation,
as well as in assisting external users, and demonstration on nanoscience to
visiting middle school children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Initial studies are focusing on transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) materials,
such as MoS2 and WSe2. Typically in heterobilayers composed of atomic layers of
two different materials, the lattices in the two layers are rotationally
aligned, but nevertheless an interference pattern forms due to the different
lattice constants (separation between atoms) in the two layers. This pattern is
found to have a large influence on the electronic states in the heterobilayer.
In particular, states near the valence and conduction band edges are found to be
confined within the unit cell of the interference patterns, i.e. analogous to
confined states of "quantum dots". The relatively large size of the unit cell
(about 10 nm) leads to strong confinement of the lowest energy states, leading
to a very flat (width of less than 1 meV) electronic bands that are split off
from the usual valence and conduction band edge. New types of physics phenomena
may be manifest in these materials at low temperature, due to instabilities
arising from the large density of states of the flat bands; conceivably, the
confined states of the heterobilayers could find application, e.g., in quantum
computing. The research effort utilizes low-temperature spin-resolved scanning
tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy to investigate the band structures of a
variety of two-dimensional materials, including heterostructures, that exhibit
magnetic, superconducting and charge density wave phenomena. The spin-resolved
scanning tunneling microscope offers unique opportunities for the students
involved and benefits other research projects by being available to external
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.