* 1809977
* Multi-Scale Investigation of Metastable Phases in Sustainable Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2021
* USD 285,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastic materials have played a
major role in everyone's life for the last half century. However, the widespread
use of plastics has led to intense problems with respect to disposal as many
millions of tons of used plastics that occupy landfills, roadsides, as well as
open and confined waters. In order to keep the beneficial aspects of plastic
materials it is therefore critical to explore materials that are renewable, i.e.
both sourced from nature and biodegradable. Polyhydroxybutyrates (PHBs) fill
this need since they are synthesized by microbes and also biodegrade to form
carbon dioxide and water on relevant timescales. However, the switch from
petroleum-based plastics to materials like PHBs requires that the new
biodegradable plastics possess similar mechanical and electrical properties
compared to the petroleum-based plastics. Properties such as strength, stretch,
and stiffness must be at least equivalent to current commodity plastics. It has
been discovered in previous work that the ultimate mechanical properties of PHB
can be changed by how the PHB is processed. Mechanical strength can be increased
by stretching or compressing the material rapidly during the formation process,
resulting in a plastic that is still biodegradable but has the desired
properties. If the processing is fast enough, then new properties can be
generated in PHB plastics, such as improved mechanical properties, as well as
piezoelectricity (i.e., an electrical response to a mechanical stimulus, which
is a desirable electronic property). This work focuses on the rapid processing
of PHB plastic materials into fibers and films with higher strength, improved
toughness, and a piezoelectric response. These new properties arise from a
different arrangement of the PHB molecules in a crystalline lattice, obtained
when spinning fibers or rapidly stretching films. The resultant material can be
"locked" into this new arrangement, which yields improved properties. This
project is directed towards finding the appropriate conditions that maximize
this new polymer structure, and could thus enable the production of sustainable
plastics with new possibilities for packaging, environmental sensors, and
electronic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processing of semi-crystalline polymers to
produce films, fibers and molded articles involves manipulating the secondary
and tertiary structure to produce the required macroscopic properties for the
intended application. Since the bulk of the processing methods are slow relative
to the chain and segmental motion, generally the thermodynamically stable
crystalline structure is obtained. It has been shown that when
poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) is copolymerized with hydroxyhexanoate (Hx)
comonomers, using microbes, a random copolymer, PHBHx, is formed that exhibits
very different properties compared to PHB homopolymer. When these PHBHx
copolymers are processed (e.g., electrospun from a polymer solution into
nanofibers), a metastable beta crystalline form is produced in which the polymer
backbones adopt a planar zig-zag conformation. This crystalline modification
gives rise to a piezoelectric response and higher mechanical strength. The focus
of this research will address the following question: Under what conditions
(solvent and solvent evaporation kinetics, high pressure and temperature,
tensile deformation) can metastable crystalline form(s) be produced and
stabilized and how do these phases affect the mechanical properties and the
piezoelectric response of PHBHx as a function of Hx
concentration?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.