* 1809833
* The proximal augmented Lagrangian method for distributed and embedded nonsmooth composite optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Large networks of dynamical systems that combine sensing, computing, and
communication devices are ubiquitous in modern technology. One of the major
challenges in networked systems is the development of fast and scalable methods
for their analysis and design. Such systems involve large-scale interconnections
of components, have rapidly-evolving structure and limitations on
communication/processing power, and require real-time distributed control
actions. These requirements make control strategies that rely on centralized
information processing infeasible and motivate new classes of optimal control
problems. In these, standard performance metrics are augmented with typically
nonsmooth regularizers to promote desired structural features (e.g., low
communication requirements) in the optimal controller. The broader impacts of
the proposed work range from improved performance and reliability of power grid
to systematic design of combination drug therapies for HIV treatment. The
educational part of the proposal focuses on the development of new nonlinear and
distributed systems curricula. The PI will develop new introductory courses
aimed at attracting students from diverse engineering departments at senior
undergraduate and first year graduate levels. The courses will emphasize
practical applications, physical interpretations, structural features, and
common themes in analysis and design of nonlinear and networked systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in the development of theory
and techniques for distributed and embedded nonsmooth composite optimization.
Structured optimal control and inverse problems, that arise especially when
trying to identify and control dynamical representations of rapidly evolving
systems in real-time, typically lead to optimization of functionals consisting
of a sum of a smooth term and a nonsmooth regularizer. The PI's recent research
will be leveraged to develop theoretical foundation and methods for solving
these problems efficiently and reliably. The cornerstone of this proposal is the
proximal augmented Lagrangian, a continuously differentiable function of primal
and dual variables that enables the development of variety of first and second
order methods for nonsmooth composite optimization. The PI will utilize
structure of proximal operators associated with nonsmooth regularizers to
develop efficient algorithms for large-scale distributed and embedded
optimization and employ control-theoretic tools to establish their convergence
rates. The proposed effort will furnish new classes of first and second order
primal-dual algorithms for nonsmooth composite optimization, lead to significant
advances in control-oriented and physically-viable modeling, and enable real-
time distributed control of large-scale networks of dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.