* 1809866
* Electronic Instabilities by Design: Defining Pathways for Diffusing Electrons and Ions in Vanadium Oxide Bronzes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Sarbajit Banerjee, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 995,027.00

PART 1:?? NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many aspects of modern
technology, spanning the range from computer chips to batteries, rely on moving
charge, either electrons or ions, across the length of solids. Precisely
controlling the flow of ions and electrons is of great importance for these
technologies, and it depends on the pathways defined by the structural
arrangement of atoms within the material as well the manner in which the atoms
are bonded together. The project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, explores the way
in which rearranging atoms and changing pathways within a versatile class of
compounds (built from atoms of vanadium, oxygen, and a variable third metal)
alters the flow of electrons and ions. By adjusting the distance between atoms
and the width of the conduits, the researchers can make a material insulating,
metallic, or bring it to a point where it can be switched between insulating and
metallic behavior when applying external stimuli. Such materials are of great
interest for designing new ways to process information. Alternately, tuning
conduits for storage and movement of ions holds promise for enabling the design
of new types of batteries. As such, the project advances national prosperity and
welfare by unravelling basic mechanisms and guiding the design of new materials
for electronics and energy storage. Understanding the specific manner in which
atoms need to be connected to realize effective paths for charge flow paves the
way to creating new precisely designed compounds exhibiting unprecedented
function in terms of tunable electrical conductance and the ability to store
ions. In order to further the objective of US global leadership in education,
the principal investigator engages a diverse group of students in his research
through summer internship programs and workshops, with an emphasis on students
transferring from community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;??&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:??
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;?&lt;br/&gt;As electrons and holes propagate across
extended solids, the velocity, energy, and effective mass of the charge carriers
are determined by the specific pathways that they traverse. The ability to
precisely and continuously tune orbital overlap and modulate bandwidths through
specific alterations of atomistic structure is a long-desired goal in the
chemistry and physics of solids, but it is exceedingly difficult to achieve in
practice given difficulties in independently controlling structure and
composition. The project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, seeks to precisely define
electronic and ionic conduction pathways using a versatile palette of compounds
with the formula MxV2O5 (where M denotes a cation and x its stoichiometry) by
alteration of composition, framework connectivity, and cation stoichiometry. The
project comprises two thrusts: the first thrust is focused on developing design
rules for tuning electronic conductivity based on modulation of structure,
composition, and stoichiometry with an emphasis on designing new materials that
are at the cusp of undergoing electronic transitions. The second thrust is
focused on designing intercalation hosts for Li-, Mg-, Ca-, and Al-ions based on
a systematic understanding of specific structural motifs that allow for
diffusion of each of the cations. Both thrusts bring together theory, synthesis,
characterization of average and local structure, measurements of electronic
structure, and the search for descriptors to design new electron correlated
materials and multivalent insertion cathodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.