* 1809208
* Exploring High-Quality and Culturally Responsive Math Afterschool Program Practices for Under-Represented Minority Youth
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Sandra Simpkins, Yu                      MarkVincent    B
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 01/31/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is supported by
SBE's Developmental Sciences program and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources' (EHR) Advancing Informal STEM Learning program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Sandra D.
Simpkins at the University of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist exploring high-quality and culturally
responsive, math afterschool program (ASP) practices for under-represented
minority (URM) youth. Mathematical proficiency is the foundation of youth's STEM
pursuits. Yet today, far too many youth do not pursue STEM based on a perception
that they are "not good at math". Students need to engage in contexts that spark
their interest and their continued mastery and growth. ASPs are settings for
such dynamic opportunities, particularly for URM students such as Latinos who
attend lower quality schools and do not feel supported. In college, URM students
often struggle with uninspiring and culturally incongruent STEM learning
environments. The intergenerational nature of university-based STEM ASPs,
whereby younger students are paired with undergraduate (UG) mentors, are
opportunities to support both K-12 and UG students' motivational beliefs in math
and STEM more broadly. This project will examine these intergenerational
developmental processes in the context of a math enrichment ASP located at a
Hispanic-Serving Institution. By studying how ASPs can serve as an important
lever for promoting URM students' access and success in STEM, this project seeks
to meaningfully inform efforts to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand
how participating in a math enrichment ASP supports both youth participants' and
UG mentors' motivational beliefs in math; to describe high-quality and
culturally responsive practices; and to understand how to support the
effectiveness of youth-staff relationships. To accomplish these research
objectives, data will be collected from both youth participants and UG mentors
through multiple methods including surveys, in-depth interviews, participant-
observations, and video observations of youth-staff interactions. This project
will add to our understanding of university-ASP partnerships. Further, the
knowledge gained from this study will impact the larger landscape of practice
and research on STEM ASPs by 1) addressing critical gaps in the current
literature on high-quality and culturally responsive STEM ASP practices and 2)
informing ASP staff development training. Overall, this mixed methods project
will provide critical and rich information on the ways that ASPs can effectively
deliver on its promise of promoting positive development for all youth,
especially URM youth who may need and benefit from these spaces the most. The
invaluable insight garnered from this study will be disseminated to traditional
academic audiences to advance knowledge, as well as to local, state, and
national organizations to inform the larger landscape of practice in STEM
ASPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.