* 1809639
* Investigating the HIV/AIDS Disparity with Cultural Geography and Public Health Methods
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Tonia Poteat, Scott                   Darius         D
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Tonia Poteat
at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist researching the cultural geography of
rural HIV/AIDS disparities. Not enough is yet known about spatial and cultural
identities in relation to health disparities beyond clinical descriptors. To
address this issue, leading HIV/AIDS disparity researchers call for work that
employs narrative and community-focused approaches. This project employs such
approaches to consider the ways HIV/AIDS disparities are negotiated in
communities. By focusing on narratives, this project investigates the contours
and functions of rural communities related to health inequity.

This project aims to provide critical insight into how oral histories
contextualize and mobilize spatial knowledge of HIV/AIDS' impact on the
community and social experiences in the United States. It uses (1) research
review, (2) oral history interviewing, and (3) field observation. Research
review involves weighing how previously published literature in the creative
writing and humanistic studies offer narratives similar to oral history that
relay personal and community responses to HIV/AIDS disparity. Such research
review is designed to inform public health methodology and improve
understandings of HIV/AIDS disparity in cultural terms. Fieldwork for the
project involves collecting a series of oral history interviews and conducting
field observations to weigh the pertinent potential of humanistic narratives as
primary data. In particular, interviews focus on how the impact of HIV/AIDS from
the 1980s to now has altered individual's relationships to their rural
communities as well as the ways collective social environments have formed. This
study will ultimately foster improved understandings of the social terrain of
HIV disparity from the points-of-views of those affected by it in order to
potentiate more catered, place-specific interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.