* 1809127
* Multidimensional Spectromicroscopy of Molecular Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The exchange coupling is a fundamental property of the
electron spins. The magnitude and sign of exchange coupling define the strength
and direction of the interaction between spins, essential for the understanding
of a variety of magnetic and spintronic phenomena. But so far the spatial
dependence of exchange coupling has not been measured. This project uses
homemade instruments and advanced calculations to probe in unprecedented details
the exchange interactions among magnetic atoms and molecules. These activities
provide fertile grounds for the training of researchers. Results from this
research are transferred into the classroom for the teaching of quantum
mechanics to undergraduate students in physics and engineering. In addition, the
goal is to increase impact by transfer of selected results to the textbooks,
similarly to previous results from the scanning tunneling microscope obtained by
the investigators. Results may be applied in future magnetic technologies.
Extensive commitments are made in the training of undergraduate students as
summer interns and outreaching activities with the Hispanic middle school
students in Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The
Hamiltonian for a quantized spin system formed by interacting magnetic atoms and
molecules adsorbed on a solid surface yields an energy spectrum (E) that depends
on the exchange interaction J and the magnetic anisotropy (A). This project
probes J and A between magnetic entities in four dimensions (E,x,y,z) with a
homemade ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling microscope (STM) at 600 mK and up
to 9 Tesla magnetic field. The study of the continuous interactions between two
spin entities is achieved by attaching a magnetic molecule to the STM tip to
sense different magnetic entities on the surface, from an isolated magnetic atom
or molecule (such as metallocenes, porphyrins, and phthalocyanines) to nanoscale
assemblies. The E-spectra at different tip locations, perpendicular and parallel
to the surface, give the spatial dependence of J and A, and their visualization
through spectromicroscopy. This project combines a joint experimental and
theoretical effort to measure and understand the new information contained in
the spin-spin coupling in four dimensions. The well-defined conditions of the
probed systems enable rigorous comparison between experiment and theory to
effectively understand spin-spin coupling at the most fundamental level. This
effort has been impeded in the past due to unavailability of reliable,
quantitative data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.