* 1809815
* Probing Chiral Fermion Dynamics in Topological Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Nuh Gedik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 523,067.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological semimetals have recently
emerged as an important frontier of condensed matter physics. In these
materials, the crossing points of electronic energy levels are topologically
protected. It has been predicted that the electrons around these crossing points
should display fascinating unconventional behavior in response to external
perturbations such as passing an electrical current or shining light. The goal
of this project is to experimentally investigate optical properties of
topological semimetals. The realization of novel optical and optoelectronic
phenomena in topological semimetals may lead to useful technological
applications. Students and postdocs with expertise both in topological physics
and time resolved optical techniques will be trained as the next generation of
scientists in these fields. A crucial part of the educational component of this
program is to contribute to improving the quality of K-12 math and science
education especially in socio-economically impacted
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weyl
semimetal is a new topological phase of matter predicted to display fascinating
properties. While the electronic band structure and transport have been
systematically studied using angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy, scanning
tunneling microscopy and electrical transport, optical properties of these
materials remain largely unexplored despite predictions of many unconventional
optical behaviors. The goal of this research program is to investigate the novel
optical properties of chiral Weyl fermions in topological semimetals. In
particular, it has been predicted that, in the presence of parallel electric and
magnetic fields, Weyl fermions with different chiralities should intermix and
give rise to a magnetic field dependent conductivity. It has been difficult to
conclusively observe this phenomenon, known as the chiral anomaly, solely based
on transport measurements. In this project, time-resolved photocurrent
microscopy, transient grating spectroscopy and terahertz spectroscopy will be
used to optically detect signatures of the chiral anomaly in Weyl semimetals.
Additionally, photocurrent response of a Weyl semimetal will be used to map out
the quantum geometry of its electronic wavefunction. This will allow detection
of the Berry curvature monopoles and dipoles that arise from a Weyl node. The
realization of the novel optical and optoelectronic phenomena in topological
semimetals may allow us to control the Weyl fermions and their associated
quantum anomalies by optical means, leading to useful optical and optoelectronic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.