* 1809011
* Singularities and Smoothness in Geometric Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Aaron Naber, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 226,000.00

The scientific goal of this project is to study various geometrically motivated
equations and their applications. One area of investigation is energy-minimizing
mappings between curved spaces (known as nonlinear harmonic maps) and their
singular sets, i.e., points where the mapping ceases to be smooth. Another area
of investigation is the structure of the spaces that arise as limits of smooth
spaces with bounded curvature, and a third area is the regularity of solutions
to the Yang-Mills equations which arise particle physics. The research project
also touches on other mathematical subjects such as Reifenberg analysis,
spectral analysis, stochastic analysis and metric-measure spaces. In each area,
open problems which are at the forefront of the topic are being pursued. These
are topics which have broad applications to many areas of mathematics and
physics, and solutions to these problems would open doors to tackling the next
generation of problems. Many parts of this project also involve the training of
early-career researchers, as several lines of investigation involve
collaboration with senior graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this overall project is
concerned with the energy identity and the W2,1-conjecture for nonlinear
harmonic maps. Roughly, the energy identity is a conjectural picture which gives
an explicit formula for the blow-up behavior of sequences of nonlinear harmonic
maps. The W2,1-conjecture is the easily stated conjecture that stationary
harmonic maps have a priori L1 estimates for their hessians. Valtorta and the PI
have solved these conjectures for stationary Yang-Mills, but the methods do not
work for harmonic maps, and the PI will solve the problems by other means. In
another line of investigation, joint with Yu Wang, the PI will answer some open
questions by Hardt and Lin on nonlinear harmonic maps. Roughly, the goal is show
one can solve for stable harmonic maps in the class of strongly H1-mappings. The
second part of the proposal would address issues involving the regularity of
spaces with lower and bounded Ricci curvature. Together with Wenshuai Jiang the
first project of this part would study the energy identity for limits of
manifolds with bounded Ricci curvature. Though similar in spirit, the problem
itself is actually very different from the harmonic map case. To begin with, the
energy in this context is the L2 curvature form, and it has only been very
recently that one even knows this is a bounded measure. Secondly, the predicted
form of the defect measure in this context can be computed by the singularity
behavior in the limit. Additionally, with Bob Haslhofer, the PI will study
connections between bounded Ricci curvature and the analysis on path space. The
PI will prove differential Harnack estimates for martingales on spaces with two
sided Ricci curvature bounds. The solution to each of these problems involve the
development of new techniques and ideas, which themselves one would expect to be
even more interesting than the problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.