* 1809520
* Novel phase change materials with tunable transition properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Haiyan Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 417,497.00

Non-technical Description: Oxide-based phase change materials represent an
interesting family of materials with ability to dramatically change their
physical properties during phase transition processes. Vanadium dioxide (VO2),
as one of the representatives, is of particular interest because of its phase
transition could occur close to room temperature. The project seeks to tune the
phase transition properties (e.g., phase transition temperature) through a novel
two-phase nanocomposite design approach. By combining VO2 with a metal as a
secondary metal phase in the nanocomposite thin films, the phase transition
properties are tuned in a wide range. Such tunable transition properties are
critical for various applications, including thermal actuators, electrical
switching devices and smart windows. In addition to scientific and technological
impacts, this research provides training to graduate and undergraduate students
in the multidisciplinary research area of phase change materials, thin film
growth and materials characterizations. The research findings are disseminated
through in-class teaching modules related to phase change materials, summer
research for undergraduates and high school students, and various outreach
activities sponsored by Purdue Women in Engineering Program and Birck Nanoday
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project focuses on a
fundamental material exploration of novel two -phase metal-VO2 nanocomposite
designs, their phase change properties and the fundamental switching mechanisms
as functions of the metal selections and the nanoparticle dimensions, density
and geometries. As one of the Mott insulating oxide materials, VO2 exhibits an
ultrafast and reversible phase transition from a semiconductor phase to a
metallic phase at about 68 ?C during heating process. To enable its practical
applications, tunable transition properties (e.g., phase transition temperature
tuning over a broad temperature range) are very much desired. Specifically, the
project focuses on synthesizing the two-phase metal-VO2 nanocomposites in an
epitaxial thin film form, tuning the transition temperature and phase transition
properties via selection of metals, as well as understanding the fundamental
phase transition mechanisms via tailoring the two-phase morphology, e.g., the
metal phase geometry, density, dimension, etc. The phase change properties are
measured by a set of electrical transport and optical measurements, coupled with
a detailed microstructural characterization, including high resolution
transmission electron microscopy, atomic scale elemental mapping and strain
mapping. The two-phase nanocomposite design and the fundamental understanding on
the phase transition mechanisms can be applied to other Mott insulating oxide
systems for tunable phase change properties beyond
VO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.