* 1809682
* Beta-Gallium Oxide Transistors for High Frequency Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Siddharth Rajan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of the proposed work is to design and demonstrate high frequency
Beta-Gallium Oxide based transistors. Silicon based electronics is ubiquitous
and provides excellent performance for many applications, but there still remain
certain critical technology areas where other semiconductor materials,
particularly wide band gap semiconductors, have properties that make them
superior to silicon. Gallium Oxide is one such semiconductor whose intrinsic
properties make it potentially superior for applications such as high frequency
communications. However, to harness these properties for better performance, new
device engineering (design and fabrication) techniques need to be developed. The
proposed research project focuses on engineering of transistors based on this
material that could enable high frequency electronics in a range that is higher
than the typical wireless communication technology used currently. With the
proliferation of networked intelligent devices and sensors throughout our
environment, the need for high data rate communication is increasing at an
unprecedented rate. Therefore, there is a significant need for high power
density mm-wave amplifiers with high gain and efficiency. The development of
Gallium Oxide-based high power mm-wave transistors proposed here could enable a
new generation of such high data rate systems based on mm-wave and THz
communications. A new course focused on wide band gap semiconductor devices will
also be developed, whose course content will be offered free online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to determine the
frequency and power limits for Gallium Oxide transistors in the mm-wave
frequency range, and to design and demonstrate transistors with state-of-art
device performance. While Gallium Oxide has higher breakdown field than other
wide band gap semiconductors such as Gallium Nitride and Silicon Carbide, it has
lower carrier mobility. In addition, the high field transport characteristics
are relatively unknown. This project will lead to a vertically integrated
investigation of the design, growth, fabrication, and characterization of highly
scaled Gallium Oxide transistors. The project will lead to a better
understanding of critical aspects of device engineering for Gallium Oxide
devices, including epitaxial designs such as delta-doped transistors and
heterostructures to enable scaled transistors with short gate lengths,
understanding of low and high field electron transport in such scaled channels,
control of dispersion caused by surface as well as buffer traps, and field
management techniques (such as field plates and passivation) necessary to
control field distributions in these transistors. The proposed project will
therefore lay the foundation for a new generation of scaled transistors based on
Gallium Oxide, and the scientific findings will impact not just high frequency
transistors, but also other technologies such as power switching
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.