* 1809700
* One-Dimensional Functional Nanocrystals with Non-Precious-Metal Cores and Precious-Metal Shells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sen Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,751.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Developing efficient and green energy
conversion technologies is of strategic importance for the United States energy
and environmental sustainability. Compared with conventional fossil fuel
combustion devices, proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) hold great
potentials for both transportation and stationary grid applications since they
are cleaner, more affordable, and more reliable; they run with renewable
hydrogen fuel; and they demonstrate high efficiency with minimized carbon
emission. This project aims to develop an emerging class of nanostructured
materials with one-dimensional architecture and core/shell structure which can
maximize the benefit of PEMFCs. The rational design and precise preparation of
such nanomaterials can significantly advance the understanding of both materials
design and synthesis for efficient and cost-effective PEMFCs and many other
applications, including batteries, electrolyzers, and electrochemical sensors.
The outcome of this project can accelerate the large-scale application of
PEMFCs, potentially transform the United States energy portfolio, and establish
an eco-benign energy society. An education plan is designed to be integrated
with research activities to promote teaching, training and learning at several
levels, covering K-12, undergraduate and graduate students. Parts of the
activities include educational outreach involving underrepresented minorities.
The project can attract, build and retain a high-quality next-generation
workforce in catalysis, energy technology and other science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), based on
renewable hydrogen sources, play a critical role in establishing a sustainable
and clean hydrogen energy economy to reduce our society's dependency on
conventional fossil fuels and the related combustion technologies. Advanced
PEMFCs suitable for large-scale transportation and stationary grid powers demand
a nanostructured material that can be used to accelerate the cathodic oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR) with a high activity over a sufficiently long period of
time and with minimized platinum group metal usage. The objective of this
project is to design and synthesize one-dimensional core-shell nanocrystals with
non-precious-metal cores, by precisely controlling their core-shell material
compositions and physical parameters (e.g. lengths of one-dimensional nanorods,
core-shell interfaces, and shell profiles), to fundamentally understand the
correlation of atomic level nanocrystal architecture to the favorable
electrocatalytic properties. The Principle Investigator leverages the expertise
in nanomaterials synthesis, structural characterization, electrochemistry and
theoretical calculation, to primarily focus on four tasks: (1) Rationally
designing and synthesizing cobalt phosphide-platinum core-shell nanorods with
controlled lengths and shell profiles; (2) Tuning the core-shell interface and
structural arrangements; (3) Optimizing the efficiency of nanocrystals by using
transition metal doped cobalt phosphide nanorod cores; and (4) Understanding the
design rules for optimized ORR conversion through a combination of
electrochemical, spectroscopic, and computational approaches. The generated
knowledge accelerates the development of new forms of nanomaterials by
exploiting the mechanism controls of synthesis at the atomic level and uncovers
how to correlate and control their functional activity and structural
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.