* 1809076
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Collaborative Research: Foundations of secure multi-agent networked systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mohamed-Ali Belabbas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

The goal of this research project is to develop a new framework for the design
of secure multi-agent systems along with the tools necessary for their analysis.
The rapid pace of innovation in the areas of control theory, computation, and
communication is leading the way for a new class of networked systems
characterized by their complex interconnections, diversity of components, and
interactions with the physical world. The potential benefits of these networked
systems from environmental, economic, and social perspectives are however
limited by the ability to secure them. There are currently many efforts under
way to address the underlying security issues by ways of developing secure
communication protocols and procedures. The PIs take a different point of view
here: instead of developing methods to secure existing systems, they develop
methods to design systems that are inherently secure and embedded with breach
detection mechanisms. The PIs thus expand the secure-by-design philosophy
popular in software engineering to the design of networked dynamical systems. In
terms of applications, the proposed research program will significantly push
forward the frontiers of secure design of cyber-physical systems, furthering
their use across many domains including critical infrastructures such as
transportation networks, power generation and distribution networks, water and
gas distribution networks. The PIs will also contribute to educational outreach
by developing new interactive modules, focusing on security issues of CPS for
high school students, and mentoring graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program is built upon three
overarching principles: (i) control the information given to the agents, (ii)
embed the agents with hidden security measures, and (iii) make the dynamics
robust and resilient. More specifically, for the first principle, the PIs
propose to establish a theoretical framework with novel design methodologies
that can localize and encode both information and objectives for the agents. For
the second principle, the PIs propose to embed the networked system with
security measures that allow to detect easily tampering with large signals and
its effect on the agents. These security measures can be certain functions that
are designed to maintain invariant values over time and are locally computable
by the agents. For the third principle, the PIs propose to leverage robust
control theory for dealing with small attack injections, and moreover, introduce
a novel controllability notion with provable guarantees on state attack
recovery. In terms of intellectual merit, the proposed program will unify and
exploit research in mathematics, namely integrating the study of symmetries in
dynamical systems, completely integrable systems, and Hamiltonian dynamics, with
engineering tools to develop methods to detect and foil attacks on a system. As
such, it will establish new and deepen existing connections between mathematics,
especially geometry and dynamical systems, and the study of cyber-physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.