* 1809017
* Mechanistic and Device Studies of the New Observation of Non-Volatile Resistance Switching in Atomic Sheets
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Deji Akinwande, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Memory devices are among the most important electronic components and the main
driver for modern mobile systems in terms of information storage and energy-
efficient computation and communication. A general requirement for future
generation memory devices is size reduction, which can increase the memory
density and capacity, a beneficial feature for virtually all applications
provided the switching voltage is reasonably low. In recent research, we
discovered memory effect in atomically-thin materials sandwiched between metal
electrodes, an unexpected discovery in a standard vertical device structure.
This represents the thinnest memory devices and can enable advancements in
various applications including brain-inspired computing, information storage,
and radio-frequency switches. For any use case scenarios, it is important to
understand the basic mechanism behind a phenomenon. All the more important for
memory devices in order to engineer the atomically-thin devices for a number of
performance parameters such as the energy consumption and information retention.
This research effort focuses primarily on this basic question of fundamental
mechanism(s), which successfully accomplished can advance the field of memory
technology, and exemplar applications, specifically radio-frequency switches.
The effort will employ a variety of advanced experimental tools to elucidate the
underlying physics responsible for this new memory phenomenon. Furthermore,
successful achievement of the research objective will pave the path towards
commercial development to benefit society in mobile
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomically-thin materials such as
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have drawn great interest due to its
diverse prospects in electronics and optoelectronics. Non-volatile resistance
switching has been observed in various solution-processed multi-layer TMDs,
including functionalized materials and composites, and TMD-based hybrids, where
the resistance can be modulated between a high-resistance state and a low-
resistance state, and subsequently retained absent any power supply. Recently,
we discovered non-volatile resistance switching behavior in monolayer chemical
vapor deposited TMDs in a standard vertical metal-insulator-metal device
structure with stable operation under ambient condition at room temperature with
low transition voltage, high on/off ratio, low ON resistance and good
reliability. This discovery inspires new research on electron and ion transport
in two-dimensional semiconductors and insulators for device applications in non-
volatile memory, neuromorphic computing, and radio-frequency switches. However,
the basic mechanism responsible for the phenomenon is not well understood. As
such, this proposal effort focuses in one part to research a variety of
experiments using advanced tools to elucidate the underlying physics. The tools
to be employed include scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, conductive-atomic force microscopy, and
temperature dependent transport studies. The other part of the research effort
is to design the atomically-thin memory device for high-performance radio-
frequency switch applications that will exceed the contemporary metrics for
phase-change non-volatile switches. The successfully accomplishment of the
research objectives will significantly further the science and applications of
TMDs by shedding light on the dynamics and energetics of defects, atoms and
ions, and the required conditions that result in reliable memory
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.