* 1809591
* LSAMP BD: University of Arizona, Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Karl Flessa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans,Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and competitiveness of STEM graduate students from
historically underrepresented minority populations, with emphasis on STEM
doctoral matriculation and completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018-2020
Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO) LSAMP BD program will
recruit twelve (12) alumni from LSAMP institutions nationwide for STEM
postbaccalaureate studies at the University of Arizona (UA). Student support in
the form of stipends and cost of education are provided for two years for each
student. The institution commits to assisting the students financially through
research and teaching assistantships as well as through competitive
institutional fellowship opportunities to complete the STEM doctoral degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation consists of formative and summative
approaches and incorporates the graduate education self-efficacy scale (GESES)
instrument which quantifies self-efficacy for academic, research and social
skills. Outcomes will be disseminated broadly through the institution's website,
scholarly journals, and presentations at STEM professional conferences. The
project findings from the research and evaluative activities increases scholarly
knowledge on broadening participation in STEM disciplines at the graduate and
post-graduate level while contributing to the diversity of the nation's STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.