* 1809497
* Material Properties of Complex Macromolecules Containing Synthetic Polyamino Acids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Yao Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 510,604.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties and performance of
many biological materials rely on the structures and shapes of their constituent
molecules, which could be in the form of helices or sheets. Some of the protein
materials are even made from predominantly one type of such structure, showing
that high material performance can be achieved by relatively simple structural
motifs. This project aims to elucidate how a class of synthetic polymers, which
possess both a relatively complex molecular architecture and well-defined
secondary structural motifs, may allow for the development of new materials with
predictable physical properties. The different ways of intermolecular and
intramolecular interactions in these complex polymer molecules may turn out to
be the primary factor that determines the macroscopic properties. Successful
completion of this research may enable the generation of polymeric systems that
will approach the level of sophistication and versatility found in some of
nature's biomaterials and the properties of these materials may be tailored for
a variety of applications. This research project entails the design and
preparation of such complex molecules and their supramolecular assemblies, as
well as the study of their properties. It also provides a model system of
complex macromolecules, enabling comparison of the multiscale assembly and the
material properties with predictions from computer simulations and modeling.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in this area and acquire
skills in polymer synthesis, material characterization, and computer
simulations. The program will integrate the research with the development of
interdisciplinary courses on bioinspired polymeric materials, provide vibrant
research experiences to undergraduates and high-school students, and promote
polymer research and its impact on society through lectures and workshops for
the public. Emphasis is given to involving underrepresented students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using living polymerizations and other strategies,
polymers with complex architectures and controlled molecular structures can be
synthesized for new materials. One central question that arises is how to
control the organization of these complex polymers at different scales to
achieve targeted material properties. This research puts a particular emphasis
on the secondary structures of complex synthetic polymers, and the connection
between the different organizations of the structural motifs and the performance
of resulting materials. The model system used in this research is the comb-like
macromolecules containing polyamino acids (PAAs) as the side chains. Synthetic
PAAs are polypeptide model systems that can form alpha-helix or beta-sheet
structures, and that can be made on a large scale. Current studies mainly focus
on the linear PAAs and their various copolymers. However, incorporating PAAs
into complex macromolecular architectures (e.g., comb-like or brush-like) has
profound effects on the association and physical properties of the polymers. The
research aims to elucidate the relationship between the structural configuration
and the material properties of the PAA-grafted comb macromolecules. The
investigation begins with the use of water-soluble PAAs that form intermolecular
beta-sheets, to guide the association of the comb macromolecules into fibril-
based thin films. The mechanical properties of the polymer films will be
compared with those made from proteins or linear PAAs. The study will then
continue on the hydrophobic PAAs that form alpha-helices, and determine how
different structural configurations of the helices may dictate the morphology
and mechanical properties of the PAA-grafted comb macromolecules. At the end of
the project, the stress-induced transformation of alpha-helix to beta-sheet in
the PAA-grafted comb macromolecules will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.