* 1809894
* Creating dynamic poling of ferroelectric thin films for chip-scale reconfigurable optical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ronald Reano, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2022
* USD 274,080.00

The integrated photonics concept is the application of thin-film technology to
optical circuits and devices for the purpose of achieving efficient, high-
performance, and economical optical systems. One can view the field as the
optical equivalent of microelectronics for integrated circuits. The interest in
integrated photonics is driven by the need for miniature, portable, and
efficient optical communications, computing, and sensing platforms that are not
limited by large scale bulk optics, discrete components, and long distance
optical fiber. Applications include the generation of light of different colors
for precision measurements, the control of short optical pulses for high speed
signal processing, and the modification of light color for low noise secure
communications. To create functional optical devices in thin films, voltages in
the kilovolt range are required for a process referred to as poling.
Consequently, devices are static once fabricated by an external high voltage
power supply. The research program aims to reduce the required voltage to only a
few volts. Due to the low voltage requirements, static devices can become
dynamic. Optical systems once thought of as fixed and inflexible become
reconfigurable and programmable. Dynamic functionalities enable the realization
of systems that utilize the properties of light to overcome the physical
limitations imposed by electrons, impacting information technology,
telecommunications, health care, the life sciences, and national defense. The
integrated educational plan responds to the challenge of linking science and
engineering to problems of public interest by developing a classical and modern
optics seminar series, creating new classroom modules for integrated optics
curriculum that engenders integrative research thinking, and involving graduate
and undergraduate students, underrepresented groups, and minorities in the
research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive research program is
proposed involving theory, design, modeling, fabrication, and test to create
dynamic poling of ferroelectric thin films for reconfigurable optical systems on
a chip for the first time. The objectives are to create microscale planar
optical waveguides in wafer scale thin films of magnesium oxide doped lithium
niobate with optically transparent poling electrodes and low coercive field,
allowing for on-chip poling and programming of the spontaneous polarization
waveform. The design and modeling approach is based on numerical solutions to
nonlinear coupled amplitude equations based on Maxwell's equations. The chip
will be fabricated at Ohio State University using nanoscale fabrication
techniques. A host of nonlinear optical phenomena with tunable center frequency
and tunable bandwidth will be demonstrated. New broadband and compact optical
system architectures involving the convergence of photonics with electronics in
integrated circuits are envisioned. The research addresses the lack of second
order susceptibility in silicon which is a major obstacle to achieving chip-
scale nonlinear optics. The program exploits the low coercive field of sub-
micrometer thin films of magnesium oxide doped lithium niobate, strip loaded
optical waveguides with micrometer scale mode field diameter, transparent
optical electrodes, and on-chip heaters to reduce the voltage required for
poling to less than five volts. New horizons immediately become apparent when
exploiting the capability of dynamic poling of the ferroelectric domains
directly on-chip. Instead of being static, the poling period becomes tunable and
poling electrodes can now be considered as programmable. Tuning the poling
period results in the dynamic variation of the phase matching frequency.
Programming the poling into a linear chirp produces dynamic control of the phase
matching bandwidth. These concepts provide a new method of attack to achieve
dynamically tunable nonlinear optical systems on a
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.