* 1809112
* Collaborative Research: Silver-Based Colloidal Quantum Dot Devices for Ubiquitous Mid-Wavelength Infrared Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Dong-Kyun Ko, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 07/31/2022
* USD 232,560.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;Unlike visible or near-infrared night vision cameras,
photodetectors operating in the mid-wavelength infrared (MWIR) can image through
fog, mist, and other obscurants and do not require an external source of
illumination as they can capture images solely by sensing the radiation that
objects emit. These MWIR photodetectors that have been traditionally used for
military surveillance are finding growing number of applications ranging from
night driving assist, search-and-rescue, biomedical imaging, to environmental
monitoring of hazardous chemicals. However, existing MWIR technologies are
prohibitively expensive and ill-suited for these applications as they require
cryogenic cooling to achieve high sensitivity, making the detector bulky, heavy,
and consume large power. The proposed research aims to enable a disruptive
photodetector technology based on newly discovered infrared colloidal quantum
dots (CQDs) that will allow high temperature operation thereby removing the
size, weight, and power consumption barriers to wide-scale adoption.
Furthermore, the processing of CQD devices is highly compatible with mature
silicon technology that will allow monolithic fabrication of photodetectors at
the wafer scale leading to dramatic reduction in cost. The highly
interdisciplinary nature of this project will also create unique educational
opportunities for various levels of students that will help increase the pool of
underrepresented minorities entering science and engineering programs at
colleges and strengthen our STEM work force in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2:&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to gain a comprehensive
understanding of device physics of photodiodes based on silver chalcogenide CQDs
to demonstrate high temperature, high sensitivity MWIR photodiodes. Films
composed of close-packed, strongly-coupled silver chalcogenide CQDs have the
promising potential to enable high temperature operation of photodetectors
through Auger suppression. However, the major challenges in realizing high
performance CQD-based photodiodes lies in the unavailability of material
combinations with suitable band alignment and the lack of understanding of
device operation in photodiode structures. This research, though a progressive
device study, will investigate a new method of forming heterojunctions based on
two types of CQDs which will enable fine tuning of energy levels needed for
achieving high device performance. Based on this approach, this project will
generate fundamental understanding of Auger suppression and dark current arising
from thermally generated carriers as well as carrier transport, recombination,
and trapping of optically generated carriers in photodiodes. The outcomes of
this project could potentially enable a low-cost, high performance MWIR sensing
technology that will be ubiquitously utilized in a broad range of applications.
Moreover, this MWIR CQD research, combined with existing visible, near-, and
short-wavelength infrared CQDs, will directly contribute to the development of
multispectral imaging focal plane arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.