* 1809739
* Cyber-Physical Systems Security through Robust Adaptive Possibilitistic Algorithms: a Cross Layered Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Janise McNair, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a cross-layer cyber-physical security
framework for the smart grid. The proposed research will improve the quality of
real-time monitoring of the smart grid through anomaly analysis. This will lead
to more reliable data for control, situation awareness to first responders and
other improved applications to smart grids. The proposed research will improve
the resilience of smart grids to cyber-attacks in meters, parameters, topology
and communication infrastructure and large physical disturbances by developing
new techniques for distributed control of large complex systems that guarantees
secure and reliable performance. The project will foster education through
enhancement to curriculum by building bridges among communications, machine
learning, power and control systems. The PIs plan to teach short courses on
smart grid security at conferences. In addition, they plan to engage under-
represented minority students in their project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims at developing a distributed nonlinear controller for transient
stability enhancement. The new control layer will actuate on distributed energy
storage systems, be robust to uncertainties in modelling and capable of
compensating input time-delay while independent of operating conditions.
Furthermore, the robust controller will not require exact knowledge of the
system dynamics. Second, bad data analytics based on the innovation approach and
cross-layered information provided by distributed software-defined network will
be developed. The bad data analytics will consider the inherent
interdependencies of the physical processes while providing a countermeasure.
Third, an adaptive distributed robust machine learning approach will be
developed. The overwhelming majority of supervised machine learning methods
require large amounts of carefully labeled training data that is representative
of the data distribution to be seen under test. However, in security
applications, novel threats and malicious attacks are continuously being
developed and attempted. Thus, approaches that rely on prior training data are
unlikely to be robust in the case of behaviors never seen before, as would be
the case in a rapidly changing threat environment. The novel distributed machine
intelligence method that will be developed will be focused on being rapidly
adaptive to identifying and distinguishing novel threats given even only one
example of an anomalous novel threat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.