* 1809680
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Auger Recombination in Two-Dimensional Quantum Confined Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Xiaoyang Zhu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Oder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 498,621.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research probes one of the most
fundamental processes in nanoscale semiconductors, a process known to be
detrimental to optoelectronic technologies. Understanding this fundamental
mechanism may greatly aid the search for semiconductor materials and
nanostructures to minimize Auger recombination, thus increasing the efficiency
of optoelectronics, such as light emitting diodes and lasers used in all aspects
of modern life today. Examples of these applications include, among others,
communication, information technology, consumer electronics, and lighting.
Despite decades of research from both materials/device and theoretical
perspectives, little is known about the microscopic mechanisms of Auger
recombination that determine fundamental limits of optoelectronics. To fill this
critical knowledge gap and formulate rational strategies to increase the
efficiency of optoelectronics, the PI and collaborator will take advantage of
their complementary expertise and carry out a joint research program to
quantitatively probe Auger recombination. The collaboration between two premier
research institutions in the US and Israel provides an excellent opportunity for
young scientists to experience international collaboration. The PI has had a
strong track record of extending the impact of research to undergraduate and
secondary school levels and will expand his role in the Science Research Program
at Ossining High School. With the help of the co-PI during a proposed sabbatical
visit, the PI will further develop "Research Philosophy and Ethics" to a full
course at the graduate and undergraduate level at
Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Auger recombination
is a many-body process in which the non-radiative recombination of an electron-
hole pair occurs efficiently by transferring the released energy/momentum to a
third charge carrier or an exciton. This process is detrimental to
optoelectronic technologies, ranging from conventional light emitting diodes
(LEDs) and lasers to quantum devices of exciton or exciton-polariton
condensates. The PI and collaborator will quantitatively probe Auger
recombination using two model systems: two dimensional (2D) monolayer transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) and heterojunctions; and 2D hybrid organic-
inorganic lead halide perovskites (LHPs). The objective of the proposed research
is to experimentally probe how Auger recombination depends on the band
structure, electron-phonon coupling, and spatial confinement, and to
quantitatively understand the microscopic mechanisms underlying the Auger
scattering process. Whenever possible, the PIs will implement the most direct
experimental probes, e.g., using femtosecond photoemission spectroscopy to
directly detect Auger electrons as they scatter into particular energy and
momentum spaces, absorption/emission spectroscopies to determine Auger
recombination rates as functions of spatial confinement and momentum
engineering, and magneto-optical spectroscopies to identify and quantify charged
products (polarons, trions, and trapped charges) from Auger recombination and
how spin polarization can influence Auger recombination rates. The PIs choose
the two model systems because their electronic structures can be controlled in
real and momentum spaces in TMDCs. Their band structures are sensitive to
dielectric screening, to orientation alignment in heterojunctions, and to
external magnetic field. The LHPs, demonstrated as one of the most attractive
material systems for optoelectronics, can be grown into 2D nanostructured,
allowing easy control of quantum confinement by the number of lead halide
layers. Moreover, the proposed Rashba effect due to strong spin-orbital-coupling
(SOC) and breaking of local inversion of symmetry may allow the control of band
structure by external electric or magnetic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.