* 1809060
* Development of Non-Toxic Carbon Dots as Bone-Specific Carrier for Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Roger Leblanc, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 410,439.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances our
understanding of Carbon dots (C-dots) physical and chemical properties for their
application in biological systems. Size, morphology, surface chemistry and
method of preparation govern how C-dots interact with biological tissues. C-dots
derived from carbon powder are unique in that they bind to mineralized bones
with high affinity and specificity. By characterizing the physical and chemical
properties that confer these C-dots their unique bone-binding properties, this
project will advance our understanding of the interactions between C-dots and
mineralized tissues. This is an essential step towards developing C-dots as
tools for bone imaging and diagnostic tools, and for the treatment and repair of
bone fractures and degenerative diseases (e.g., osteoporosis) that would impact
US health. Additionally, this work will support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, fostering inquiry-based research and scientific
collaboration essential to develop the skills needed in a thriving US scientific
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this work is to understand the physical and chemical properties of
Carbon nanoparticles (C-dots) for their development as bone-specific drug
carriers. C-dots are a new emerging class of nanomaterials whose biological
applications in imaging, diagnostics and therapeutics critically depend on their
size, molecular structure and material of origin. One particular class of C-dots
synthesized from carbon powder have the unique property of binding to
mineralized bones in vivo. To advance our understanding of the interactions
between C-dots and mineralized tissues this project will (1) determine the
intrinsic chemical and physical properties of C-dots that are related to their
high affinity and specificity towards mineralized bones, (2) determine how
different surface functionalities influence the interactions between C-dots and
mineralized bones, and (3) functionally test the ability of C-dots to deliver
drugs to bones. By characterizing C-dots' unique bone binding properties, this
work will not only uncover the physicochemical principles that allow C-dots
binding to bones, but will also discern the molecular principles need to target
new nanomaterials to mineralized tissue at the exclusion of other tissues. Thus,
the findings of this work will have broad intellectual implications for
nanomaterial chemistry and engineering, as well as advancing the development of
bone imaging and diagnostic tools for the repair and treatment of bone fractures
and degenerative diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.