* 1809573
* Local Atomic-level Thermodynamic Probe for Nanoscience of 2D Membranes: Synthesis, NMR and Nanocalorimetry Study
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Leslie Allen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 428,035.00

1. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, funded by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
the PI develops a new characterization method for the nanoscience community.
This new method is especially useful for research in ultra-thin membrane
material and therefore might serve national interests in terms of health
(understanding biological membranes) as well as by its usefulness for the
nanoelectronics industry, which uses material (e.g. silicon and graphene) at
extremely small nanometer size in both conventional as well as advanced devices.
Currently, these devices are used in both national defense components as well as
commercial devices such as next generation cell phones. The new technique is
called "Local Atomic-Level Thermodynamic Probe" and it uses nuclear magnetic
resonance, a technique which is similar in nature to the popular MRI medical
instrument often used in hospitals to diagnose features within the human body,
and combines it with nanocalorimetry, a rather novel technique that can measure
materials properties such as melting temperatures of membrane layers that are
only a few atoms thick. Most prominent among the Broader Impacts activities of
this project is the aim to increase the Native American participation in
education and research within the scientific community. To achieve this,
outreach efforts focus on offering two-day sessions of a Summer Science Camp at
the local community college in Browning, MT, the home of the Native American
Blackfeet tribe. The theme of the camp uses hands-on experiments focusing on
energy related projects. Activities will include (1) the use of voltmeter for
electrical measurements; (2) assembly of Wind Turbine for LED lighting; (3)
assembling kits that utilize solar energy; (4) hands-on calorimetry/solar/meter
setup for heating water from solar energy. The camp will educate 60 high/middle
school students. Another Broader Impact of this project is the enhancement of
National Instrumentation Infrastructure with the invention of the
nanocalorimetry technique which helps sustain the country's leadership role in
the field of nanoscale thermal analysis by addressing a current gap in the
breadth of advanced analytical techniques in the field of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, the PI develops a new characterization method for the
Nanoscience Community. This tool is a local atomic-level thermodynamic probe and
consists of combining NMR and nanocalorimetry with new modeling methods
(phenomenological thermodynamic models, DFT, MD and Monte Carlo). The project
requires the synthesis of a special set of AgSCn-X 2D membranes, which act as
the base material system for the development of the new technique. Two-
dimensional (2D) membrane materials exhibit extraordinary properties that are
universal in nature. They occur in living cells as well as in nanoelectronics.
For example, graphene has remarkably high electron mobility and zero band gap
while biological membranes form the outer layer structures of all living cells.
Extraordinary changes in physical properties occur as the thickness of the
membrane approaches the critical nanometer size range, e.g. size has a huge
effect on the melting of lipid membranes in biological cell systems. Even
changes of few degrees in temperature are critical in human body where the
survival temperatures span over a very narrow range. Measuring the thermodynamic
melting properties of single-layer membranes (~2 nm) and obtaining values for
their melting point and enthalpy were only recently accomplished with the use of
new nanocalorimetry technology. The latest discovery focuses on ultra-thin
membranes with less than 7 carbons in the alkyl chains. Here the Gibbs-Thompson
size-dependent model breaks down at a critical chain length at the transition
between bulk and discrete sizes. In this small size regime, the shortcomings of
nanocalorimetry and thermoanalysis become apparent when the thickness of
membranes approaches their ultimate limit. At this small chain length, the
melting point soars by 50 K and the melting enthalpy increases by ~400%.
Nanocalorimetry has no depth perception; it only yields average thermodynamic
values. NMR, on the other hand, can distinguish one atom from another. NMR has
the unique capability to measure the local chemical environment of individual
(type) atoms by monitoring the chemical shift. Combining these two techniques
produces a powerful tool for Nanoscience
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.