* 1809710
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Acoustic Manipulation of Single Cells with Integrated MEMS based Phased Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jun Zou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Cells are fundamental building blocks of life. The ability to manipulate single
cells individually in a liquid environment with high precision will enable many
fundamental biological studies on cell-to-cell and cell-to-environment
interactions that could not be achieved before. Such discoveries will provide
key insights into the effect of the environment on cellular structure, function,
and signaling, and would have wide applications across multiple disciplines in
life sciences, agriculture and medicine. Due to their small size and also soft
nature, it is extremely difficult to handle single cells with a physical device,
such as mechanical tweezers, without causing damage to the delicate subcellular
structures. Alternatively, focused electrical fields, laser beams, and
ultrasound waves can be utilized to generate microscale forces at the focal
point, serving as virtual tweezers for single cell manipulation. Among them, the
'acoustic tweezers' are the most compatible with the cells due to cell's higher
tolerance of sound pressure over electrical field and laser illumination.
However, unlike the laser beams that can be easily focused and steered with a
glass lens and a rotating mirror, agile focusing and steering of ultrasound
waves requires complex and expensive transducer arrays and control electronics.
This situation has prevented the wide use of 'acoustic tweezers' in single cell
manipulation. The proposed work is to develop an acoustic phased array to enable
acoustic steering and focusing of ultrasound beams for their applications in
high-resolution acoustic manipulation of single
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among all existing single cell manipulation
techniques, the ultrasound phased array has the greatest potential due to its
unique ability to achieve electronic beam forming (without physically scanning
the transducer(s)). Using this unique beam forming technique to focus ultrasonic
radiation at precise locations presents unprecedented manipulation capabilities
compared with other methods. However, in current ultrasound phased array
systems, multiple channels of ultrasound signals are first converted into
electronic ones with an array of transducer elements. The phase shift is then
accomplished in the electronic domain. As the operation frequency and the number
of the channels increases, the phased array system becomes increasingly complex,
bulky, power-consuming and costly. Therefore, current acoustic phased arrays are
not suitable for on-chip microfluidic platforms for single cell manipulation. To
address this issue, this research aims to develop a new micromachined ultrasound
phased array. It will consist of an array of micromachined silicon acoustic
delay lines with tunable delay lengths to create the desired phase shift for
multiple ultrasound signals without the need for electronic conversion. This
enables ultrasound beam forming with a single-element transducer and a single-
channel ultrasound transceiver. With advanced micromachining processes, it can
be readily fabricated and even integrated together with microfluidic components
onto the same substrate for single-chip operation. To achieve the research
objective, the following three research tasks will be accomplished: 1) Conduct
acoustic and electromechanical design and optimization of the acoustic phase
shifter; 2) Develop an on-chip microfabrication process to achieve multi-channel
integration; and 3) Demonstrate dexterous acoustic manipulation and positioning
of single cells using the ultrasound phased array. This multidisciplinary
research is expected to provide unique learning and training opportunities for
both graduate/undergraduate students. Students in grades 7-12 will be involved
through Engineering Summer Camps and Open House activities. Research results
will be incorporated into the PI's course development at all levels. They will
also be disseminated through publications, outreach activities, invited talks,
and a project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.