* 1809122
* GOALI: Multiprobe Investigations of Electron Transport in 2D Electronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Frances Ross, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 365,227.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project brings
together academic leadership of Columbia University with the technical
capabilities of the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center. Two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors are materials just a single atomic layer thick. These materials
are of great interest to the electronics community for potential applications in
a whole range of logic, memory and sensor applications. In the past few years,
new techniques have emerged by which these materials can be grown over several
inches, making them easily usable in standard semiconductor processes. However,
the quality of these grown materials is at present far inferior to the classic
semiconductors used by the electronics industry such as silicon. In this
project, the research team will use a four-probe scanning tunneling microscope
to characterize the electronic quality of 2D films at the atomic scale. The team
will identify the major barriers to electron flow in these materials by directly
flowing electron currents through the materials at the nanoscale while
simultaneously imaging the regions of high resistance. During the project,
specialized laboratory modules for teaching advanced electronics concepts at the
undergraduate level will be developed, and undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained in the laboratory techniques of direct relevance to the
electronics industry. The proposal has significant interactions between the
faculty and students from Columbia University and the IBM partner where the
academic partners will gain significant experience in an industrial setting.
Finally, the industrial partner, IBM, will benefit from the fundamental nature
of the academic research joining their perspective and integrative skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves interdisciplinary university-
industry teams that will conduct the collaborative research in transition-metal
dichalcogenides(TMD_-based materials, in which the industry research participant
(IBM) provides critical research expertise that is crucial for the success of
the project. The large-area growth of 2D materials have made them attractive for
industrial applications in a variety of optoelectronic devices, but a key issue
is understanding and controlling the transport and contact properties of wafer-
scale materials. In this project, scanning tunneling potentiometry will be used
to directly measure the nanoscale electronic transport properties of 2D
materials including semiconducting TMD and graphene. First, scanning tunneling
potentiometry (STP) will be used to measure transport on wafer-scale TMD
materials. These measurements will quantify the scattering processes associated
with point and line defects in these materials. Second, STP will be used to
measure the microscopic band diagram in TMD field effect transistors. These
measurements will elucidate the physics of electrical contact to 2D
semiconductors. Third, STP will be used to measure current flow patterns in
graphene. These measurements will investigate the possibility of viscous
hydrodynamic flow in graphene and measure quantitatively the electron viscosity
in this regime. Finally, graphene films on silicon carbide substrates will be
used to grow single crystal metal films. The quality of these films will be
investigated by STP and traditional transport. The use of these films in surface
polariton plasmon applications will then be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.