* 1809114
* Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits for Scalable Control of Quantum Processors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Chen Wang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 406,000.00

Over the past decade, intense research has focused on the development of a
universal quantum computer. Such a device promises to enable the solution of
large-scale problems that cannot be addressed using other techniques.
Applications include factoring large numbers (useful for cryptography),
searching large databases, and simulating physical systems at the quantum
mechanical level (e.g., for drug design). A quantum computer exploits quantum
mechanical phenomena to perform calculations. Its fundamental building block is
the qubit, or quantum bit. The power in a quantum computer lies in its ability
to operate in a parallel manner; with every additional qubit added, the
computational power doubles. Because of this property, a quantum computer with
just 300 ideal qubits could manipulate a data set that has more elements than
there are electrons in the universe! However, the best available qubits are
currently far from ideal and projections indicate that a quantum processor built
with these imperfect devices will require millions of qubits to achieve the
level of performance described above. One of the major challenges associated
with scaling contemporary systems to this level lies in the complexity
associated with the interface between the quantum processor and a standard
computer. The central goal of this project is to explore the use of silicon
integrated circuit technology to redesign this interface in such a way that it
is amenable to scaling. The ability to scale the number of qubits from 100
qubits to millions of qubits is expected to make a significant impact in science
and engineering. In addition to the technical goals of this project, a number of
educational goals are being pursued. These items include curriculum development,
undergraduate and graduate student research opportunities, trips to scientific
research centers, and outreach to K-12 educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the control and readout of superconducting transmon qubits.
Such superconducting artificial atoms are a particularly attractive choice for
use in a large-scale quantum computer due to the fact that they can be
engineered at the circuit level and constructed using the standard lithographic
techniques. However, it is necessary to protect these devices from environmental
noise by cooling them below 0.05 Kelvin. Today, control and readout is carried
out using racks of room temperature equipment, connected to the quantum
processor through bulky coaxial cables. To enable scaling from systems with less
than 100 qubits to the million-qubit level, the classical/quantum interface must
be integrated in the refrigerator and in close proximity to the quantum
processor. To prevent heating of the cryogenic system, the power consumption of
the control and readout electronics must be pushed towards the fundamental
limits. The objective of the proposed project is to demonstrate the scalability
and efficacy of a prototype quantum control and measurement system that is of
low enough energy consumption that it may be placed near the quantum processor.
The project consists of three inter-related efforts. First, waveform generators
appropriate for controlling transmon qubits will be investigated. These devices
will be optimized for energy consumption and gate fidelity. Second, an
integrated circuit receiver appropriate for qubit readout will be developed.
Both the readout and control circuits will be implemented in SiGe BiCMOS
technology, owing to its cryogenic low noise and low power capabilities.
Finally, these two devices will be tested with qubits and the gate/readout
fidelity will be reported. Integrated cryogenic electronics are believed to be
essential to enable the manipulation and readout of future fault-tolerant
quantum processors; as such, the development of this new technology is expected
to greatly advance the field of quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.