* 1809846
* Enabling Breakthroughs with Large Moment Magnetic Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yves Idzerda, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,945.00

Non-technical Summary. Magnetic materials continue to make significant advances
in information processing, computation, and data storage. One of the most
important characteristics of magnetic materials, and often a major limiting
factor preventing further improvements, is the size of the magnetic moment. Any
significant increase is recognized as an important achievement for magnetic
applications that are ubiquitous in information technologies. Unfortunately, for
nearly a century the maximum magnetic moment that can be achieved has only risen
by a small amount. With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF's Division of Materials Research, Prof. Idzerda and his
research group explore a recently discovered group of magnetic alloys that show
a remarkable 30% increase in the value of the maximum magnetic moment. Only by
growing these magnetic alloys as a thin film of a specific crystal structure can
these large moments be realized. Intriguingly, these alloys with these crystal
structures are unstable in the bulk, explaining why these large magnetic moments
were not observed until now. The increased depth of understanding of magnetism
in thin films resulting from these studies is relevant to almost any
technological applications that incorporate ultrathin magnetic films or
multilayer hierarchies for magnetic recording, spin generation, spin
manipulation and/or spin detection. The understanding of how growth of thin
films that are not stable in the bulk, and the processes created during this
project to generate these stable structures, can have an impact in other fields
that rely on thin film structures. Examples include higher performance and
better efficiencies in solar cells, the components leading to new battery
breakthroughs, and advances in energy generation and storage materials. This
project also provides training of undergraduate and graduate students in
advanced vacuum deposition technology, film deposition methods, X-ray
techniques, and electronic/magnetic characterization techniques, which have
already been demonstrated to be excellent training for productive scientific
careers in industrial, laboratory, and academic settings. Several Native
American high school students from one of the seven Montana reservations are
involved in this research through Prof. Idzerda's involvement in the Montana
Apprenticeship Program (MAP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary. The
establishment of high moment alloy films typically includes the incorporation of
transition metal elements that have large moments. This project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF's Division of Materials
Research, characterizes the magnetic properties of bcc FeCo-based ternary alloys
(FeCoMn and FeCoCr) to establish thin films with average magnetic moments
significantly larger (&gt;30%) than the Slater-Pauling limit value of 2.45
muB/atom. The magnetic moments and magnetic anisotropy are determined by
vibrating-sample magnetometry, ferromagnetic resonance, and magnetic circular
dichroism. The film compositions are determined from energy integrated X-ray
absorption spectroscopy. An average atomic moment for an Fe10Co60Mn30 film with
a moment of 3.25 muB/atom (as determined by XMCD) in a sparse sample data set of
the compositional space for moment mapping has been observed previously, and
this research builds on this exciting finding. In addition, the PI and his group
investigate the mechanism for the observed Mn moment collapse with composition
variation. Large magnetic moment materials are particularly important in high-
density memory applications, spin torque hierarchies, BH-energy product device
structures, control of spinor applications in nanoscale non-collinear magnets,
and establishing enhanced electron spin-polarizations. Increasing the average
atomic moment of these films can significantly improve their performance. In
addition, epitaxial ultrathin films offer opportunities in spin-transport
performance control through the modification of magnetic properties due to the
reduced dimensionality and structural distortions created by film/lattice
mismatches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.