* 1809802
* Tuning the Electronic and Topological Properties of Twisted van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Pablo Jarillo-Herrero, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,023,504.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Over the past few years, the intensive research effort in
layered 2-dimensional (2D) materials has led to an extraordinary discoveries. Of
particular interest are phenomena that arise because of the particular geometry,
electronic structure and dimensionality of these systems. Moreover, a new degree
of freedom, namely the relative twist angle between the crystalline lattices in
heterostructures formed from these 2D systems, enables the fabrication of an
effectively infinite class of new materials, most of which are waiting to be
investigated. The research objective of this project is to explore the quantum
electronic properties of these so-called twisted van der Waals heterostructures,
with especial emphasis on elucidating how tuning the twist-angle influences
their properties, and build upon this understanding to engineer novel quantum
devices. We plan to achieve the proposed research objective through the
nanofabrication, transport and spectroscopic measurements of one of the
simplest, yet most intriguing, vdW heterostructures: that made by stacking two
graphene sheets, or twisted bilayer graphene (TwBLG). This research activity is
part of a broadly integrated program aimed at building a collaborative and open
scientific community, mentoring the next-generation of scientists, and
communicating physics to industry leaders and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Van der Waals heterostructures
constitute ideal platforms to explore a variety of new electronic, correlated,
and topological phenomena, due to the vast range of layered materials currently
available and the extensive freedom in choosing the stacking order and
rotational alignments. We plan to investigate quantum spin Hall physics and
correlated superconductivity in TwBLG via quantum electronic transport
measurements at low temperatures and variable magnetic fields. This research
activity advances our knowledge of the effects of interlayer coupling and many-
body correlations on the resultant electronic and topological behavior of
graphene-based vdW heterostructures, a subject with ramifications in all areas
of condensed matter physics. Moreover, this research has impacts well beyond
two-dimensional materials and condensed matter physics research: the interplay
between interactions, superconductivity, and topology in systems described by
the Dirac equation (e.g. in TwBLG) is of keen interest to other physics
disciplines, such as the physics of ultra-cold atoms and high energy physics.
This research may also result in novel quantum circuits of interest for
topologically-protected quantum computing, and is of importance in assessing the
potential of vdW materials as key components of future nanoelectronics and
quantum information technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.