* 1809439
* Collaborative Research: Two-Dimensional Substrates to Study and Control the Atomic-Scale Structure of Metal Nanoclusters
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Reza Shahbazian-Yassar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 343,464.00

Non Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale clusters (NCs) containing
a finite number of metal atoms and attached to the surfaces of support materials
play a pivotal role for applications in energy technologies. Two-dimensional
substrates offer a unique platform to study NCs owing to their large and well-
defined surfaces with no dangling bonds, and minimal scattering of electrons,
which allows for imaging of NCs with atomic resolution. The goal of this
research is to employ a self-consistent, combined theoretical and experimental
approach to study supported metal NCs, and how these adapt by substrate
variations. The theoretical calculations are based on classical and quantum
theories in conjunction with evolutionary algorithms, while as the experimental
approach relies on electron microscopy to determine the structure at the
nanoscale. Educationally, the proposed research will serve as an
interdisciplinary platform for graduate and undergraduate students to learn
about materials discovery at the nanoscale. Given the significant impact that
novel materials will have on much of daily life and the national economy, this
work will strengthen materials education at the University of Pittsburgh and the
University of Illinois at Chicago via developing new course components and novel
education modules, as well as conducting outreach activities for pre-college and
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atomic structure of supported sub-nanometer clusters
on two-dimensional (2D) substrates is a scientifically challenging and largely
unexplored field of study. Upon completion, this work will determine how
variations in 2D substrates can impact the atomic structure of supported NCs.
The atomic structures are predicted using a genetic algorithm utilizing
atomistic force fields and density functional theory, which are then validated
using aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy.
Significantly, correlating experimental results with theoretical predictions
will lead to advances in the fundamental understanding of supported metals on 2D
substrates that could be the basis for using such substrates as a means to
control the structure of the metal clusters at the atomic scale. The proposed
research efforts will be further integrated with educational efforts where
graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in multidisciplinary
research. Dedicated effort and resources will be used to recruit and support
underrepresented students (women, African-Americans, Hispanics, and first-
generation) in the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.