* 1809649
* Novel Hydrogen-rich Materials at High Pressures: Possible Route to Room Temperature Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ranga Dias, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 484,937.00

Non-technical Abstract: Superconductors, which conduct electricity without
resistance, are among the most fascinating materials in condensed matter
physics. Achieving a state of superconductivity at room temperature or near room
temperature will revolutionize our energy production and transportation system
and will enhance economic growth and quality of life. Pressure has been proven
to be the most versatile tuning parameter in making novel materials with exotic
properties such as superconductivity. Solid metallic hydrogen, the high pressure
phase of hydrogen, is predicted to have room temperature superconductivity.
However, it requires extreme pressure. Hydrogen-rich materials, mimicking the
elusive solid metallic phase of hydrogen, may lead to high-Tc superconductivity
at much lower pressures. The primary goal of this project is to synthesize novel
hydrogen-rich superconducting materials at high pressure temperature conditions
and explore their possible room temperature superconductivity. Progress on this
project can provide greater clarity regarding superconducting mechanisms. In
turn, it may allow us to obtain insight into designing new superconducting
materials in large quantities at ambient pressure. Through a comprehensive
outreach approach, the principal investigator will recruit and mentor high
school students to provide experiences to foster their scientific inquiry and
communication skills. A goal of the outreach is to reach students who are
underrepresented in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. The principal investigator works with the University of Rochester's
McNair program, whose mission is to increase the numbers of low-income, first
generation, and underrepresented minority undergraduates who pursue PhD
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Superconductivity has been one
of the most arcane quantum phases in condensed matter physics. Solid metallic
hydrogen is theorized to have the high Debye temperature and strong electron-
phonon coupling that are necessary for high-Tc phonon-mediated
superconductivity. However, it requires extreme pressure. As an alternative,
hydrogen-rich materials, mimicking the elusive solid metallic phase of hydrogen,
can be metalized at much lower pressures, providing large hydrogen-derived
electronic density of states at the Fermi level and large modifications of the
electronic structure in response to the motion of hydrogen atoms (electron-
phonon coupling). The primary goal of this research is to synthesize novel
hydrogen rich superconducting materials that are either known or likely to
exhibit high Tc superconductivity. State-of-the-art high pressure and high
temperature techniques, laser spectroscopy, and low temperature techniques in
conjunction with novel transport measurements are used to synthesize and probe
high temperature superconductivity. Success on this project elucidates greater
clarity in superconducting mechanisms. In turn, it may allow the research team
to obtain insight into designing new superconducting materials in large
quantities at ambient pressure. The project also provides graduate students
hands-on experience with cutting-edge nano-fabrication technologies and large
user facilities, such as synchrotron and neutron facilities. In addition, the
project offers summer internships to local high school students, and the
principal investigator works with the University of Rochester's McNair program,
whose mission is to increase the numbers of low-income, first generation, and
underrepresented minority undergraduates who pursue PhD degrees, to recruit and
mentor students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.