* 1809571
* A High-Throughput Computational and Experimental Approach to the Design of Multi-Principal Element Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Katharine Flores, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 496,077.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the design requirements of the next
generation of high performance transportation and energy systems requires the
discovery and development of new metallic materials with optimal combinations of
properties. Historically, the development of metallic alloys has focused on
modifying alloys with one dominant element, such as aluminum or titanium, by
adding small percentages of other elements. This strategy neglects the vast
design space represented by alloys consisting of several elements in roughly
equal fractions. Because many millions of combinations exist within this design
space, identifying specific compositions of interest using conventional trial-
and-error approaches to alloy development would be very time-consuming and
expensive. A rapid and inexpensive method for efficiently screening the possible
candidate compositions is required. This project uses computer simulations to
identify combinations of elements with the potential for improved properties,
and then manufactures only the most promising combinations for further
consideration. To further reduce costs, an advanced 3D printing-based synthesis
method is used to construct compact material libraries consisting of
approximately 100 distinct compositions. The alloy library construction is
accomplished in minutes, using only a few grams of material. The libraries are
screened to identify the specific compositions with the best combinations of
strength, density, cost, or other properties. This 'high-throughput' approach to
metal alloy design will dramatically increase efficiency and reduce the cost
required to discover and optimize new high performance metallic materials.
Furthermore, the project will contribute to development of a science and
engineering workforce trained in computational and efficient manufacturing
methods, as well as impact K-12 science and engineering education through
workshops targeting middle and high school teachers from diverse school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the design
requirements of the next generation of high performance transportation systems,
power generators, and energy storage devices requires the discovery and
development of new structural alloys with enhanced properties. Multi-principal
element alloys (MPEAs), consisting of several constituent elements but no
dominant solvent species, represent a vast yet under-explored design space due
to the time-consuming nature of traditional alloy design methods. The objective
of this collaborative project is to investigate the role of chemical composition
on the phase-stability and mechanical properties of MPEAs having a dominant BCC
phase using a high-throughput approach. The project integrates first-principles
density-functional theory (DFT) calculations and state-of-the-art laser
deposition-based synthesis to rapidly discover MPEAs with desirable combinations
of strength, density, melting temperature, and cost. The local structure is
characterized using aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron
microscope imaging and spectroscopy, which are combined with DFT calculations to
elucidate the roles of configurational entropy, mixing enthalpy, lattice strains
and other factors on phase stability. Variations in the mechanical properties
with composition are characterized using nanoindentation and other
micromechanical methods and correlated with the structure in order to develop
appropriate structure-property models. Alloys with the most promising microscale
properties will be prepared in bulk for further analysis and model validation.
By enabling rapid evaluation over the full breadth of the multicomponent design
space, the project has the potential to deepen the scientific community's
understanding of these complex alloys and identify new materials with vastly
improved and unexpected combinations of properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.