* 1809917
* CMOS THz Molecular Clock With Enhanced Stability And Energy Efficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ruonan Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

High performance clock, which provides a stable output reference frequency, is
critical in electronic systems for navigation, security, wireless broadcasting,
telecommunication network synchronization, and various sensing applications
(e.g. magnetometer). Although a high-precision timing signal can be obtained
from Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites, it is unavailable in many
scenarios (e.g., underwater, underground, and certain indoor conditions). GPS
timing is also susceptible to electromagnetic interference, especially at
wartime. It is therefore of great importance to have innovative high-stability
time-keeping devices local to the electronic systems. Since many of the
electronic systems are mobile, their internal clocks should also be small and
energy efficient. At present, the widely used clock devices, such as the crystal
oscillators and the microelectromechanical system (MEMS) oscillators, can only
achieve stability in the range of 0.01 ppm to 100 ppm, which is inadequate for
many of the above applications. Achieving much better stability, the high-end
oscillators used for precision timing would also consume much higher power of
several watts. On the other hand, the atomic clocks, with their outputs locked
to certain physical constants, offer excellent stability. This, however, comes
at the expense of exceedingly large form factor and cost. This project proposed
a novel terahertz (THz) molecular clock to address the above challenges. The
proposed new solution will achieve stability in the range of parts per trillion,
which will be several orders better than the current state-of-the-arts. The
results will advance the THz science and engineering, and have significant
potential impacts on billions of electronic systems. The research will be
tightly integrated with the undergraduate and graduate education at MIT to
cultivate the future engineering leaders with interdisciplinary training and
vision. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, new approaches, which link an
electronic output frequency with invariant physical constant but use a physical
mechanism alternative to conventional atomic physics, will be investigated. The
rotational-mode transitions of polar molecules under the probing of THz waves
will be utilized as time bases. The generation, detection, and control of the
THz waves will be implemented using standard complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuit technology. The research, therefore, is
expected to lead to high-stability clocks with very small size, very little
power, and very low cost. Specifically, multi-resonance of molecules will be
utilized to enhance the long-term stability of the molecular clock. New
packaging technology will also be applied in order to miniaturize the clock
size. At the system level, the clock will also operate in a low duty-cycled
manner to obtain milliwatt-level power consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.