* 1809931
* Impact of Nanoscale Structure on Properties of Multiferroic Complex Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Trevor Tyson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 559,701.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Society is entering the era of "big data" where
new materials are needed to enable high-density storage. Hexagonal rare earth
oxides are examples of such materials which may revolutionize the storage
industry. This research aims at enabling the use of these oxides in device
applications. In particular, the researchers are determining the atomic
structures of the oxides, essential to rational designs of new materials with
atomic structures that can support useful functionalities. Graduate and
undergraduate students are involved in all levels of this work including sample
preparation, laboratory and synchrotron-based measurements, modeling, software
development and data analysis. A seven-week summer research and teaching program
on transition metal oxide preparation and characterization, designed for Newark
area high school students is being continued and includes a one-week workshop
for high school teachers to enable them to implement components of the program
into their laboratory experiments. Overall integration of the broader impacts
and assessment of the project is coordinated by the Collaborative for
Leadership, Education, and Assessment Research at NJIT. The proposed research
and education is a collaboration between the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Rutgers University, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the SEED program for high school students
(American Chemical Society). The project is training students in detailed sample
preparation, analysis, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Materials that can significantly increase the density of
random access memory have the potential to revolutionize the storage industry.
Complex oxides of hexagonal RMnO3 (R=Rare earth, Y, Sc or In) are good
candidates for such materials as they exhibit stable polarization vortex
domains. The cubic (perovskite) phase of this system shows strong coupling of
magnetization and electric polarization possibly enabling writing of
polarization bits with magnetic fields. This research has two objectives aimed
at potentially enabling use of these oxides in device applications. The aim of
the first objective is to determine the atomic structure of RMnO3 oxides across
vortex domains. It is hypothesized that nontrivial spatial variations in atomic
structure in these materials are related to changes in polarization across
vortex domains. Currently, the atomic structures within individual domains are
unknown. In the second objective, we will study effects of pressure on the
structure of perovskite RMnO3. These materials exhibit spin-driven electric
polarization which may be enhanced by pressure. Graduate and undergraduate
students are involved in all levels of this work including sample preparation,
laboratory and synchrotron-based measurements, modeling, software development
and data analysis. A seven-week summer research and teaching program on
transition metal oxide preparation and characterization, designed for Newark
area high school students, is being extended to include a one-week workshop for
high school teachers to enable them to implement components of the program into
their laboratory experiments. Overall integration of the broader impacts and
assessment of the project is coordinated by the Collaborative for Leadership,
Education, and Assessment Research (CLEAR) at NJIT. External assessment and
follow-on studies will be conducted by the Center for Research and Evaluation on
Education and Human Services (CREEHS) at Montclair State University. The
research is a collaboration between the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
Rutgers University, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the SEED program for high school students
(American Chemical Society).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.