* 1809695
* PIC: Hybrid Integration of Electro-Optic and Semiconductor Photonic Devices and Circuits with the AIM Photonics Institute
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Dennis Prather, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,674.00

Considering that today's electronic chips contain tens of billions of devices,
and, hence, represent extremely complicated systems, they are rendered
economically feasible due to the ever developing and expanding electronics
manufacturing infrastructure that provides enormous leverage via economy-of-
scale. In comparison, the photonics industry lacks suitable infrastructure to
provide the same leverage. As a result, the American Institute for Manufacturing
Integrated Photonics (AIM Photonics) is a new public-private partnership to
address this challenge. While the main focus of AIM Photonics is to leverage the
silicon (Si) CMOS manufacturing infrastructure to make photonic devices, other
material systems, such as Lithium Niobate (LiNbO3) may be better suited for some
applications. Therefore, the focus of this effort is to work closely with the
AIM Photonics Institute to develop new heterogeneous manufacturing processes
that enable the direct integration of LiNbO3 with Si CMOS for advanced and
economically feasible photonic devices and chip-scale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a hybrid integration and packaging process for thin-film lithium niobate
(LiNbO3) on silicon, to realize high performance RF-photonic devices, e.g.,
modulators, using low-loss chip-scale routing in silicon nitride (Si3N4) as an
initial production level capability. This will be accomplished by leveraging the
maturity of established silicon-electronic processing, integration, and
packaging technologies and extend them to silicon-based photonic integrated
circuits, through the AIM Photonics Institute. The key enabling capability will
be to wafer-bond thin-film LiNbO3 directly to foundry scale silicon wafers to
realize advanced heterogeneous RF-photonic circuits that are manufacturable
within current industrial foundries while maintaining 3 sigma yields. The
targeted design goals include: (1) ultra-high frequency modulators (&gt; 100
GHz) for data networks, (2) highly efficient, non-blocking chip-scale routers
for high-end data centers, and (3) high-power phased array antenna photonic feed
networks compatible with legacy and future generation wireless communications.
Thus, upon successful completion of the proposed project, significant
contributions will be made to not only develop manufacturable heterogeneous
integration processes but also to address pressing applications that span many
sectors of the commercial market and touch nearly every aspect of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.