* 1809532
* RUI: Solution and Thin Film Properties of Dually Stimuli-Responsive Molecular Brush Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Elizabeth Glogowski, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 217,330.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fundamental
relationships between a polymer's molecular structure and its observed
properties allows customizing of the properties for possible applications. A
polymer known to dramatically change properties, like the ability to dissolve in
water, in response to a small change in an external stimulus, such as
temperature and pH, has been selected for detailed investigation. By changing
the structure of this polymer to create comb-like of bottlebrush-like molecular
architectures from this core polymer and to add chemically distinct segments, it
is expected that new polymeric materials will be generated with unique
properties both in solution and in thin films. The properties of these polymeric
materials can be tailored for potential applications with benefit to society
such as polymers for water purification and better targeted and customized drug
delivery. These materials will be prepared using a more environmentally benign
synthetic approach. New knowledge generated from this work will be shared with a
broad scientific audience through publications, presentations, and incorporation
into the undergraduate curriculum, and to more general audiences through
community and K-12 outreach presentations. This project will provide full-time
immersive research experiences for undergraduate students, particularly for
women in materials science and engineering. This will encourage more women to
pursue advanced degrees and research careers in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to determine the effect of combining block and branched
copolymer architectures with stimuli-responsive properties for the self-assembly
of copolymers in solution and in thin films. The stimuli-responsive
functionality results in dramatic changes in properties, such as solubility,
viscosity, viscoelasticity, interfacial activity, and self-assembly, with a
small change in external stimuli. Branched and block copolymer structures affect
polymer properties including polymer conformation, chain entanglement behavior,
self-assembly, and rheological responses. Stimuli-responsive copolymers with
block and branched architectures will be synthesized using the more
environmentally benign activator regenerated by electron transfer atom transfer
radical polymerization (ARGET ATRP). The pH- and thermo-responsive
poly((2-dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) has been selected as the
primary stimuli-responsive polymer under investigation because it changes
solubility and conformation in response to changes in both temperature and pH.
The stimuli-responsive functionality of PDMAEMA will be combined with block and
branched copolymer architectures in order to generate new materials with
expected unique solution and thin film properties. These materials have
potential applications in photonics, drug delivery, and viscosity modifiers,
including applications that have benefit to society such as polymer membranes
for water purification and more tailored drug delivery systems. Undergraduate
student research collaborators will fully participate in this immersive high
impact experience of undergraduate research. This is expected to increase the
retention of undergraduate women in materials science and engineering at the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire and to encourage more women to pursue
advanced degrees and research careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.