* 1809800
* Objective-first sorting and time resolved diamond magnetic microscopy of superparamagnetic nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Victor Acosta, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Oder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 395,999.00

Nontechnical abstract: Magnetic nanoparticle research has seen a flurry of
activity in recent years, owing to potential applications in biomedical imaging
and nanotechnology. However there is presently a lack of tools for quantitative
magnetic measurements of individual nanoparticles. The goal of this research is
to develop new strategies for high throughput, high spatio-temporal resolution
characterization of individual magnetic nanoparticles. The magnetic properties
of thousands of individual nanoparticles are simultaneously characterized using
a new type of magnetic microscope based on synthetic diamond chips. Unlike
existing techniques, the diamond-chip platform works at room temperature and
offers high throughput (greater than 1000 individual particles per 10 min). The
project aims to correlate magnetic measurements for each individual nanoparticle
with its composition, size, shape, and structure. Finally, the proposed research
also aims to educate and train diverse groups of high school students,
undergraduates, and graduate students, including under-represented groups.

Technical abstract. The goal of this research is to develop alternative
strategies for high-sensitivity, parallel characterization of individual
magnetic nanoparticles. The research project aims to study the magnetic dynamics
of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with 15-25 nm diameter, with a
goal of improving their applicability in nanoscience applications. The magnetic
properties of thousands of individual nanoparticles are simultaneously
characterized using a magnetic microscope based on color centers doped near the
surface of a diamond chip. Correlative transmission electron microscopy and
magnetic images of numerous individual nanoparticles is used to elucidate the
relationship between nanoparticle size, shape, magnetization relaxation, and
hysteresis curve properties. A second aim of this research project is to study
the correlation of composition, morphology, and magnetic dynamics of small
transition metallic magnetic nanoparticles with a size range (2-10 nm) and
establish a fundamental understanding of the effect of size, surface structure,
and inter-particle dipolar interactions on their magnetic properties. The target
magnetic sensitivity of 10 nT in 1 second integration time for a 400 nm x 400 nm
pixel is sufficient to characterize particles down to 2 nm in diameter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.