* 1809234
* Deep Learning for Passive RF Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Birsen Yazici, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Deep Learning for Passive Radio Frequency Imaging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep
Learning has enjoyed a spectacular success in wide range of machine learning
applications in recent years. However, its potential as a mathematical tool in
imaging is yet to be explored. This project develops a Deep Learning based
theory, methods and algorithms for passive Radio Frequency (RF) imaging in
complex environments using illuminators of opportunity. With the proliferation
of wireless communications and broadcasting signals, passive RF imaging has
emerged as a potential alternative to active imaging with several advantages.
Passive imaging does not require spectrum allocation. It is environmentally
friendly and capable of stealth operations. Passive RF systems are lightweight,
small, inexpensive, and easy to build and operate, making them suitable for
deployment on small uninhabited aerial vehicles (UAVs). These attributes make
passive synthetic aperture radar (SAR) technology suitable for a vast array of
everyday civilian applications ranging from agriculture to infrastructure
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;While UAV-based passive SAR has the potential to
revolutionize imaging across many domains of applications, one of the
fundamental bottlenecks in the deployment of these systems is the challenges in
image formation. Unlike active imaging, passive SAR image reconstruction
involves many unknowns and uncertainties including transmitter locations,
transmitted waveforms, multiply scattering and dynamically changing wave
propagation environments and limited communication and computational resources.
These challenges rule out the use of existing methods such as the usual Fourier
transform based or iterative ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a
radically different approach to imaging and interprets physics-based modeling
and image reconstruction as machine learning tasks. Deep Learning excels in
extracting features from data automatically bypassing hand-crafting process of
modeling and feature engineering. Conventional approach to imaging involves
physics based and statistical modeling, estimation, tomography and optimization.
Central to this project is to remove this separation between different domains
of expertise and learn and refine models and perform optimization within Deep
Learning framework from training data. This takes advantage of Deep Learning's
ability to generate complex, non-linear functions to jointly learn wave
propagation and prior models and hyperparameters to improve accuracy and
robustness. The network designs range from entirely data-driven model-free
approaches to ones that are guided by Bayesian inference and optimization
theory. The resulting image reconstruction methods are expected to be more
robust and accurate with respect to uncertain and dynamically changing
environments and unknown imaging parameters and computationally more efficient
than state-of-the-art alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.