* 1809805
* RUI: A New Approach for the Synthesis of Heteroatom-Doped Graphene and Lateral Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Li Gao, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 187,295.00

Nontechnical Description: Graphene is the first discovered two-dimensional
material with many exotic properties, however, its flexibility and practical
applications remain restrained by some of its specific characteristics.
Substitutional doping of graphene with heteroatoms (atoms from chemical elements
different from the host material atoms) is one of the most fascinating
strategies for tuning graphene's properties and hence expanding its
applications. This project investigates the synthesis of heteroatom-doped
graphene and related lateral junctions using heteroatom-containing source
materials, which is a novel synthesis approach and enhances the capabilities for
controlling the doping. This research also provides an atomic-scale
understanding of the structural and electronic properties, as well as their
interrelations. The realization of controlled synthesis of heteroatom-doped
graphene and atomic-scale insights into their properties promote the development
of graphene-based devices for electronics, energy storage, and catalysis. This
project strengthens the materials science research at California State
University Northridge, which is a minority serving institution, and provides
collaborative research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. In
addition, K-12 students from local schools receive exposure to cutting-edge
research activities and advanced scientific facilities via summer
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Precisely controlling
the doping properties is pivotal toward practical applications of graphene.
Doping properties strongly depend on synthesis approaches, heteroatom sources,
and synthesis parameters. It is an urgent task to explore new synthesis
approaches and new heteroatom sources in order to achieve enhanced control over
the doping strategies. In addition, two-dimensional graphene p-n heterojunctions
are the key components for graphene-based electronics, which further motivates
the development of bottom-up growth approaches for these heterojunctions. The
objectives of this research are to develop optimized synthesis strategies for
heteroatom-doped graphene and related lateral heterojunctions from heteroatom-
containing sole precursors, which is a novel and effective synthesis approach,
as well as to gain atomic-scale insights into the correlations between doping
alternatives and electronic properties. To accomplish these goals, the main
research activities include: (1) optimize the synthesis by employing a series of
precursor/metal systems under varied synthesis conditions and identify the
dependence of structural and doping properties (concentration, spatial
distribution, and configuration) on precursors, substrates, and synthesis
parameters; (2) explore electronic properties (band structure, charge carrier
density, work function) by combining scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy measurements; (3) improve the synthesis of graphene lateral p-n
heterojunctions using sole precursors, and characterize the atomic structure and
band alignments at the interfaces of lateral heterojunctions by using STM
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.