* 1809891
* Novel microcantilever sensor using plasmonically enhanced nonlinearity
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Goutam Koley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 11/30/2023
* USD 487,000.00

There is an ever increasing demand for microscale sensors with high sensitivity
and selectivity due to their numerous applications spanning across industrial,
civilian and military domains. Although rapid advancement in microscale sensor
development, especially for chemical and biological sensing applications, has
been achieved in the past decades, further enhancement in their sensitivity and
selectivity is still very much desired for targeted applications. In this
project, the principles of acoustic wave generation, using wavelength dependent
pulsed light absorption in target materials, and detection, using a highly
sensitive microcantilever, will be utilized to perform analyte sensing. Signal
amplification using plasmonic effects, and non-linear region operation of the
microcantilever, will be utilized to enhance the detection sensitivity by orders
of magnitude compared to existing microscale sensors. Successful completion of
the proposed research is anticipated to lead to the development of a novel and
miniaturized sensor system with wide applicability in detecting a large variety
of chemical and biological analytes. The sensors developed can have potentially
transformative impacts on the state-of-the-art applications in a multitude of
areas including defense, homeland security, environmental monitoring, public
health drug discovery, disease diagnosis and prognosis. In addition to the
scientific and societal impacts, the project is expected to have strong
educational impacts as well. As a part of the educational and outreach
activities, the PI would train graduate students, as well as involve
undergraduate and high school students to work on this project, focusing
particularly on recruitment from minority and underrepresented groups, by
leveraging relevant existing programs at Clemson University. The project will
also lead to enrichment of graduate courses, build strong international
collaboration, and enable sharing of important scientific findings through
journal articles, conference presentations, and relevant research
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposed research is
to develop an ultrasensitive resonant microcantilever sensor using non-linear
operation and plasmonic effects. This novel sensor will combine the advantages
of photoacoustic detection, plasmonic signal enhancement, and non-linear region
operation, utilizing a III-Nitride piezotransistor as the deflection transducer,
to simultaneously offer very high sensitivity and selectivity in analyte
detection. Piezotransistive GaN microcantilever, will be fabricated with
integrated AlGaN/GaN HFET deflection transducer and plasmonic effects will be
utilized to perform sensing, which can result in much higher deflection
sensitivity based on their unique piezoelectric properties, compared to the Si
based piezoresistive ones. The theoretical model to be developed as part of this
project will also significantly enhance our understanding of non-linear
cantilever excitation using plasmonically enhanced photoacoustic effects. If
successful, the project can result in a paradigm shift in microcantilever based
sensors leading to the development of a novel, high-performance and versatile
sensor with much superior characteristics compared to the state-of-the-art
sensing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.