* 1809000
* EAGER: Collaborative: Towards Understanding the Attack Vector of Privacy Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 11/10/2017,08/31/2019
* David Mohaisen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 102,193.00

Advances in privacy-enhancing technologies, including cryptographic mechanisms,
standardized security protocols, and infrastructure, significantly improved
privacy and had a significant impact on society by protecting users. At the same
time, the success of such infrastructure has attracted abuse from illegal
activities, including sophisticated botnets and ransomware, and has become a
marketplace for drugs and contraband; botnets rose to be a major tool for
cybercrime and their developers proved to be highly resourceful. It is contended
that the next waves of botnets will extensively attempt to subvert privacy
infrastructure and cryptographic mechanisms, which has the potential of both
undermining their legal basis and future performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop the theoretical and experimental foundations for analyzing,
monitoring and mitigating the next generation of botnets that subvert privacy-
enhancing technologies. Towards that goal, the project will develop tools for:
1) Analytical framework: the project develops a concrete strategy for
approaching the detection, characterization, and mitigation of abuse of privacy
infrastructure by crystallizing an analytical framework for reasoning about such
botnets. This includes the identification&amp;#8232;and formalization of their
key properties (e.g., traceback and tomography resiliency, stealthy
monetization), enabling mechanisms (e.g., IP address de-coupling, control/data
traffic indistinguishability), fundamental limitations, and evaluation metrics.
The project will explore analogous scenarios of abuse in future Internet
architectures where anonymity is facilitated by design. 2) Monitoring and
analysis: the project develops an experimental framework to track activities of
the next generation of botnets for scalable and effective mitigation. Such
framework will exploit their ideal design and behavioral properties, and draws
on various preliminary measurement results in related contexts. 3) Mitigation:
The project has the ultimate&amp;#8232;goal of proactively developing an arsenal
of mitigation techniques grounded in a sound theoretical foundation, analyzed
within the theoretical framework, and evaluated within the experimental
framework. The mitigation techniques span the gamut of increasing the cost of
operating such botnets, to actively containing&amp;#8232;and neutralizing bots,
to proposing modifications to the privacy-enhancing protocols. The results of
this project will be communicated with the concerned communities for having a
direct and immediate impact on existing and future privacy infrastructure. The
project will also develop educational material to train students in the
foundations and systems for enabling privacy enhancing technologies.