* 1809410
* RUI: Optical Excitation of Nonradiating Nanosphere for Lossless Device
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Uttam Manna, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 135,550.00

The ability of metal nanoparticles to confine light to a very small volume (down
to a few tens of nanometer) has been developed into novel miniaturized optical
and electronic devices. However, the high level of losses associated with the
noble metals and heating have always been a challenge limiting the efficiency of
optical devices. In this regard, there is a "new kid on the block", namely
electrodynamic "anapole" mode (i.e. "without poles" in Greek), that can overcome
these issues by minimizing the radiative loss. This proposal plans to explore
anapole mode associated with high-index dielectric nanosphere (Silicon
nanoparticles) that can act as a radiationless source and confine energy
efficiently by minimizing the radiative loss. The knowledge gained from our
research can potentially be translated into prototypes that can be developed
into novel optical and photonic devices, such as nano-lasers, broadband photo-
detectors, sensors, etc. Our research will also enhance the undergraduate
education by providing undergraduate participation in cutting-edge experimental
research, integration of research into the curriculum, and networking
opportunities with external collaborators and scientists, which will help
motivate our students to choose a STEM career path, including students from
under-represented community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resonant optical
excitation of dielectric particles offers unique opportunities for future
optical and nanophotonic devices because of their reduced dissipative losses and
large resonant enhancement of both electric and magnetic near-fields. In this
regard, the discovery of the electrodynamic "anapole mode" as a non-radiating
source in high index dielectric materials provides a unique playground to
realize new nanophotonic devices. Under specific conditions, the superposition
of internal modes (magnetic and toroidal) of high-index dielectric
nanostructures can generate non-radiating states, called "anapoles", that are
free from radiative loss. Even though the study of non-radiating objects has
been part of fundamental physics for a long time, the dynamic anapole
corresponding to the time-varying oscillating charge-current distributions in
the optical frequencies was only experimentally demonstrated in 2015. Since
spherical geometry is not suitable for excitation of the anapole mode under
plane wave illumination, excitation of anapole mode in the demonstrated
structure relied on the design of a highly specialized structure (Si nanodisk).
However, in spite of constructing the nanodisk for the specific anapole
condition, the nanodisk was unable to produce an "ideal" anapole
mode.&lt;br/&gt;Here, instead of specifically designed structures, we propose to
excite the anapole mode in isotropic nanosphere. Since plane wave illumination
is not suitable for anapole mode excitation in a nanosphere, we will exploit the
polarization symmetry of cylindrical vector beam to excite "ideal" anapole mode
in isotropic nanosphere. More specifically, we will use the radial electric
field distribution and absence of magnetic field in the focal plane of the
radially polarized cylindrical vector beam to excite the ideal anapole mode.
Since the nature of the excitation would be responsible for generating the
anapole mode, our approach would provide a simple, straightforward alternate
path to excite anapole mode that has been predicted to give rise to enhanced
nonlinear effects, nanolasers, ideal magnetic scattering, as well as extremely
high Q-factor and near-field enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.