* 1809381
* Dissipation in the mechanics of soft molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Giovanni Zocchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 03/31/2023
* USD 512,992.00

Nontechnical. &lt;br/&gt;Dissipation, or friction, relates to the Second Law of
thermodynamics, thus the arrow of time, and everything living. A world without
friction is a world of Kepler orbits and pendulums, time reversible, and
unconscious. But matter is made of atoms, and individual atoms are non-
dissipative systems. At what scale, then, does "the arrow of time" start to
form? Previous NSF funded research in the PI's group opened a new experimental
window on dissipative processes occurring in the deformation of big molecules.
Building on this expertise, the PI and his group characterize the dissipation
involved in the working of enzymes. They measure friction at the scale of
molecules and look for new phenomena such as light emission from the dissipative
dynamics discovered in their system. A small group of young people, comprising
two graduate students and two undergrads, is thus set on a path of scientific
discovery, while acquiring state-of-the-art technical skills in the field of
nanoscience. The primary goal of this project is the creation of knowledge. More
specifically, this research focuses on developing a new materials science of
biomolecules, introduced in the PI's forthcoming book "Molecular Machines".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical. &lt;br/&gt;Microscopic mechanisms of friction,
the relation between dissipation and nonlinearity, non-equilibrium processes in
nanoscale systems, are all incompletely understood, fundamental, interconnected
problems in nanoscience. These topics appear with experimental immediacy when
probing enzyme mechanics by nano-rheology. Using the unique capability of
measuring directly dissipation occurring in the driven deformation of folded
enzyme molecules, the PI and his group investigate the origin of this molecular
scale friction, specifically the contribution of the surface of the molecule,
which includes the hydration layer. Hydration layer dynamics, explored by nano-
rheology, is also the starting point of a new, dynamic understanding of
kosmotropic (order inducing) and chaotropic agents, a physical chemistry topic
which this research develops. Finally, the project explores the possibility of
light emission from dynamically stressed molecules, with the aim of developing a
new spectroscopy to characterize dissipation at the molecular scale. Nano-
rheology, invented in the PI's lab, allows the measurement of the stress -
strain relations for a folded, native enzyme with sub-Angstrom resolution and at
different frequencies. Through recent improvements, the method now allows
accurate measurements of the phase of the mechanical response, as well as the
amplitude, and thus gives direct access to the dissipation. This project focuses
on the dissipative part of the dynamics, which is the nonlinear (but reversible)
mechanical regime of large amplitude deformations for these
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.