* 1809429
* NSF/DMR-BSF: The Effects of Configurational Disorder on Polaron Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 580,384.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Oxides are well known as materials with low electronic
conductivity. But upon closer examination, there is a great deal of variability
in their ability to conduct charge, and much of this is unexplained. For
instance, in cobalt manganese oxides the conductivity can increase up to 10
times depending on the cobalt to manganese ratio. The existing theories are
accurate when there are only two components, for instance, just cobalt and
oxygen, but when a third component is included, the theories break down. In this
project, the team is investigating a fundamental question of oxides: how does
atomic disorder affect conductivity in oxides. By elucidating these mechanisms,
the team is opening up new avenues to tailor the conductivity in oxides,
important for applications that rely on the insulating properties of oxides, as
in semiconductor transistors, or for applications that could benefit from
increased conductivity, as in batteries and fuel cells. To disseminate and
promote science to the public the team is creating a website with on-line
training videos to strengthen international science outreach and the US-Israel
partnership using science for peaceful purposes, and the team is designing a
module on electronic conductivity in oxides for Lending Library Experiments. The
kit aligns with specific Next Generation Science Standards and uses exploratory
hands-on activities to help experiential
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The purpose of this work is
to investigate a fundamental question in ternary oxides: how do charge carriers
move through a spinel crystal lattice when there is more than one type of
cation. It is known that the most prominent mechanism of charge transport in
oxides is through hopping that follows the polaron models. But the polaron
hopping models are too crude to account for the configurational differences that
occur in ternary transition metal spinels, where the two different cation types
can exhibit large degrees of disorder between the two cation lattice sites and
possess a variety of oxidation states. As a consequence, the effects of cation
disorder and cation oxidation states on electronic conductivity has not been
well-described in multinary spinels. To investigate this question the team is
synthesizing ternary oxide spinels, characterizing the cation disorder, and
correlating the disorder with the electronic transport. The team is using x-ray
emission spectroscopy, high-angle annular dark-field imaging, and electron
energy loss spectroscopy to determine site occupancy, oxidation states, and
local atomic segregation. The experimental results are coupled with theory to
understand the mechanisms and outline a global model for transport. The team is
using DFT-type calculations with periodic and non-periodic boundary conditions,
and is analyzing charge transport characteristics related to hopping mechanisms
in oxide materials to determine if the charge carriers lie on delocalized
(overlapping) or localized states for specific cation distributions and
concentrations. Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of polarons is a grand
challenge for fields including molecular architectures, and electrical energy
storage, where details of charge transport in poor electron-conductor materials
could have a large impact. Understanding the relationship between cation
configurational disorder and polaron hopping could lead to designer oxides with
tailored properties. The team is promoting science to the public by creating a
website with on-line training videos for international science outreach and to
strengthen the US-Israel partnership using science for peaceful purposes, and
designing an experiment on electronic conductivity in oxides for Lending Library
Experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.