* 1809155
* Experimental investigation of topological excitations in magnetic tunneling junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Hong-Wen Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 509,999.00

Nontechnical Abstract: In recent years, it has been discovered that properties
hidden inside certain materials can be excited electrically or magnetically, to
design the next generation of electronics. Skyrmion, a nanoscale whirling
magnetic pattern, is an example of such topological excitations in magnetic
materials. The magnetic tunnel junction is arguably the most promising
spintronics device, developed in the recent years, for data storage, sensing,
and logic computation. Generally, in such applications two opposite
ferromagnetic states are used to store binary data in the magnetic tunneling
junctions. This experimental research develops new ways to create, probe, and
manipulate the magnetic skyrmion states in the magnetic tunnel junctions. The
skyrmion-based magnetic tunnel junctions are expected to consume less energy,
operate at a higher speed, and be more robust against material disorder,
providing a platform for significant technological advances. The project
prepares graduate students for skilled research in both spintronics and
microwave electronics, technical areas that are of great economic importance to
our society, and well-trained physicists in these areas are in high demand. The
development of a graduate level course on nano-magnetics and spintronics
effectively integrates the proposed research into a teaching topic in demand, to
fulfill the needs of students from multidisciplinary areas such as Physics,
Electrical Engineering, Material Sciences, and
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The objective of this
research is to study individual and interacting magnetic skyrmions in magnetic
tunnel junctions. Current-driven spin-transfer torque, voltage controlled
magnetic anisotropy, and applied magnetic field vector are used as a means to
control the interplay between the Heisenberg exchange interaction, responsible
for ferromagnetism, and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, which gives rise
to stable skyrmions. A phase diagram for competing magnetic excitations is
mapped out experimentally. Sub-nanosecond electrical voltage pulses are used to
deterministically create and annihilate individual skyrmions. A resonant
spectroscopy technique is developed to use the breathing mode of skyrmions to
carry out characterizations, including energy dispersion, core size, etc.
Interacting skyrmions in larger devices, as in the case of a skyrmion crystal,
are studied. The implications of disorder, particularly for edge imperfection,
are investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.