* 1809566
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the emergent collective biophysical behavior of platelets in blood clotting
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Wilbur Lam, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,990.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Blood clotting is a natural process that
prevents blood loss from damaged vessels and restores normal blood circulation
in the body. Upon injury, a chain of events culminates in the formation of a
plug of cells and polymeric biomaterial that attaches to the wound edges.
Platelets, the small disk-shaped cells in circulation, become activated and
apply contractile forces to shrink the overall size of the clot and mechanically
stabilize the repair to allow it to withstand forces applied by flowing blood
and physical movements. Unhealthy changes to the blood clotting process are a
leading cause of death and disability worldwide and are associated with a range
of severe medical conditions such as hemophilia, stroke, and heart attack. This
project seeks to investigate the complex dynamic behavior of platelets within
blood clots using state of the art experimental and computational methods. As
platelet biophysical properties, such as size, force, and activity can vary
widely among species, the properties of platelets from humans, mice, dogs, cows,
and chickens will be compared to pinpoint their influence on blood clotting. The
results of this project will facilitate the development of new treatments and
medical diagnostics to mitigate adverse effects of unhealthy clotting. In
addition, the project will train graduate and undergraduate students in solving
cross-disciplinary engineering and biomedical problems. The project will advance
HealthReach, an education program aiming to engage in STEM learning K-12
students with chronic illnesses, who are often educationally disadvantaged due
to frequent treatments, school absences, and other medially related issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
investigate the fundamental biophysical behaviors and interactions of platelets
within a blood clot that is an actively contracting material. During blood clot
formation, contracting platelets pull on a nascent polymeric fibrin mesh, yet
the mechanics and dynamics of this active process remain poorly understood,
despite links to bleeding and clotting disorders. This is in part due to our
limited understanding of platelet properties and function, especially their
emerging cooperativity as they collectively apply forces to the clot fibrin
network. This interdisciplinary project will integrate experiments and
computational modeling to investigate clot contraction in different species
including human, mouse, dog, cow, and chicken platelets that exhibit diverse
physiological properties. The experiments will characterize platelet activity
and interactions within the fibrin network. This information will be used to
develop a mesoscale model of clot contraction that will take into account
micromechanics and dynamics of platelets and will provide insight into the clot
structural changes due to platelet activity and contraction. The project will
focus on understanding the role of platelet heterogeneity, cooperation,
activation patterns, and clot contraction mechanics to reveal the connection
between the behavior of a single platelet, the collective platelet behavior, and
the properties of bulk clots. By providing fundamental insights into the effects
of platelet heterogeneity on the clot dynamics, the project will develop new
strategies for designing novel bio-inspired active materials. Furthermore, the
project will provide important insights into animal models used for bleeding and
clotting research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.