* 1809054
* Quantum Interfaces of Dissimilar Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Shui-Qing Yu, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 393,687.00

Nontechnical description: This project is focused on investigating new quantum
material properties that are provoked when two materials with dissimilar
properties, such as, semiconductor and ferroelectric materials, are coupled
together. One may expect to find the resulting material properties to be the sum
of the properties of each material. However, this situation changes when the
layers of each material are only a few atoms thick, creating a quantum interface
material. For example, whereas short-range bonding between atoms dominates the
material properties of semiconductors, in ferroelectrics the bonding between
atoms is predominantly long-range. Combining the two materials at one interface
creates a hybrid bonding that forms exciting new quantum material
functionalities. The polarization in the ferroelectric oxide allows tuning and
controlling the semiconductor electronic and optical properties for smaller and
faster electronics. Likewise, mobile charges in the semiconductor is exploited
to affect the polarization in the ferroelectric, creating the opportunity for
smaller and faster memory storage devices. Basically, the interface is a "new
quantum material" that creates new intriguing possibilities to investigate
quantum effects, such as the fractional quantum Hall effect, as well as the
manipulation of electrons, control of electrical current flow, electron spin,
and the material interaction with light. These are the fundamental ingredients
for novel scientific and technological opportunities for new discoveries and
exciting new products in electronics and photonics. This research provides
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students who bring their excitement
to regional middle school classrooms and public places, i.e. Arkansas Shopping
Mall, to stimulate inquiry into science education. Recognizing the need for
women and minorities in science, recruitment for students is at the annual
National Black and Hispanic National meeting and Materials Research Society
(MRS) meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The project is
investigating the properties of semiconductor-transition metal oxide quantum
interfaces at the monolayer scale. The challenge arises mostly because of the
difficulty of epitaxial growth with the disparity of structural properties and
lattice parameters. This challenge, however, has proven to be very much ideal
for the progress made in layer-by-layer growth by molecular beam epitaxy, with
in-situ characterization capability for atomic-scale scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy, and piezoelectric force microscopy, and is the
approach taken in this proposal. For example, the research team is growing
monolayers of: GaAs (001), InGaAs (001) and GaAsP (001) on BaTiO3 (110) and
BiFeO3 (110) grown on SrTiO3 (110), to produce transition metal-semiconductor
quantum interfaces. For analysis, the team is using scanning tunneling and
piezoelectric force microscopy for morphology and spectroscopy to provide real-
time data, by providing interactive feedback, needed to understand the interface
from single monolayers to 10-20 nm thicknesses. For the interface between
dissimilar materials, the team is evaluating the effects of the local density of
states, polarization screening, surface reconstruction, electric and magnetic
field coupling, bonding between sp-electrons and d-electrons, fractional quantum
Hall effect, localization of charge, and lattice match, mismatch and strain on
the interface electronic and photonic properties. As a more high-risk exciting
opportunity the team is using high quality semiconductor/transition metal oxide
and transition metal oxide/semiconductor interfaces, to stack interfaces, to
form a superlattice of quantum interfaces with novel
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.