* 1809837
* Surface science studies of the photo physics of copper oxides: toward sustainable CO2 recycling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jay Gupta, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,001.00

Solar conversion of CO2 and water to useful chemicals and fuels can provide a
pathway to a sustainable carbon cycle, while maintaining existing infrastructure
in the chemical and transport industries. Efficient use of solar energy to break
the stable CO2 bonds is the first step in this process and requires tailoring
the photophysical properties of the catalysts used for that reaction. In this
project, Profs. Gupta and Asthagiri of Ohio State University are working to
understand the relationship between catalyst surface structure and solar energy
transfer into the CO2 molecule. The goal is to understand the factors that
promote this energy transfer and promote CO2 conversion. As part of this
project, the PIs are training graduate students to combine experiment and theory
to tackle important energy generation and conversion problems. In addition, the
PIs are engaging students from the K-12 and undergraduate level as part of an
outreach effort to diversify student participation in STEM careers. Graduate
students, as part of Ohio State's TEK8 program, are developing modules to engage
K-12 students interest in STEM careers. In addition, underrepresented
undergraduate students are being recruited for summer research as part of Ohio
State's Summer Research Opportunities Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the NSF Chemical Catalysis
program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Gupta and Asthagiri from The Ohio State
University are developing a program that combines experiment and theory aimed to
gain a fundamental understanding of the relationship between local surface
structure of Cu oxides and the photoexcitation of CO2 molecules. Cu oxide thin
films are grown in a controlled fashion in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) that allows
for the introduction of various defects (e.g. vacancies, variation in Cu oxide
film stoichiometry, and dopants). Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) with local
photoillumination provide direct images of the surface before and after
illumination. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations are assisting in
interpreting both the images and spectroscopy from STM to link the relationship
between the electronic states of the local Cu oxide site and the resulting CO2
photochemistry. In addition, DFT is being used to explore modifications to the
Cu oxide films that enhance CO2 photoactivation; these predictions are being
tested experimentally with the goal to establish a predictive model for optimal
Cu oxide nanostructures for CO2 photoreduction. As part of this project, the PIs
are actively engaged in the recruitment of underrepresented groups in graduate
and undergraduate research and developing modules to foster the interest in STEM
careers of K-12 students through Ohio State's TEK8
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.