* 1809318
* Shear Driven Flow of Granular and Soft-Matter Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Stephen Teitel, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 393,850.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education in granular and soft-matter materials. Granular and soft-
matter materials are ubiquitous in nature and every day life. One such class of
materials is dry granular materials, which includes powders, seeds, grains,
sand, and gravel. Another class are classified among soft-matter materials, and
generally consist of particles suspended in fluids. These include: emulsions
consisting of droplets of one fluid suspended in a second fluid, such as
mayonnaise, vinaigrettes, and homogenized milk; foams consisting of bubbles of
gas suspended in a fluid, such as shaving cream, soap bubbles, and whipped
cream; and suspensions consisting of solid particles suspended in a fluid, such
as ketchup, mustard, and paint. These materials are important for a wide variety
of technologies and industrial processes, from the processing of pharmaceuticals
and foods, to transportation of seeds and grains, to materials fabrication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the simplest level of abstraction, one may think of
these materials as consisting of large particles, for which thermal fluctuations
are negligible, that interact only when they come into contact with each other,
in which case they repel. Yet despite this seeming simplicity, surprisingly
complex behavior may emerge, in particular a transition from a flowing liquid-
like state to a rigid but disordered solid state, as either the particle packing
density or applied stress is varied. This is known as the "jamming transition."
In this project, computer simulations will be used to investigate the nature of
this jamming transition, along with more general behavior of such materials that
emerges under shear driven flow where adjacent granular layers move parallel to
each other with different relative speed. Different mechanisms for energy
dissipation, and the effects of different particle shapes will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also promote the teaching,
training, and engagement in science and research, of a wide range of students
across multiple institutions. Undergraduate students will gain experience in
both scientific research and scientific communication by presenting work at
local and national research conferences. Graduate students will be trained in
the methods of modern theory and high-performance computing and experience
research with direct interaction between theory and experiment. In this way,
they become prepared for future high-tech careers in academia or industry. The
infrastructure for research and education will be enhanced by the formation of a
network of collaborations with domestic and international colleagues engaged in
complementary experimental and computational research in this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education in granular
and soft-matter materials. Computer simulations will be carried out to study
different aspects of the behavior of granular and soft-matter materials near the
jamming transition that marks the abrupt change from a flowing liquid-like state
to a rigid but disordered solid state, as the particle packing is increased.
Materials of interest include dry granular matter, dense granular particles in a
slurry, emulsions, foams, non-Brownian suspensions, and colloids. Specific
problems will be investigated, with the objective of increasing understanding
about the flowing liquid and disordered solid phases of such materials, and the
transitions between them. These include: (i) the physical mechanisms behind
shear banding of shear flowing materials in homogeneous environments; (ii) the
relation between discontinuous shear thickening, the rapid jump in shear stress
upon increasing the strain rate, and microscopic inter-particle elastic
friction; (iii) the differences between isotropic compressional jamming and
shear jamming, in systems of frictional particles; (iv) the effect of
orientational ordering and particle tumbling on the shear flow of materials
consisting of aspherical particles; (v) the criticality of the shear-driven
jamming transition for aspherical particles; (vi) the effect of particle surface
concavity on shearing rheology. Collaborations with experimental groups working
in these areas will help inform and guide theoretical
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.