* 1809370
* Consequences of Implicit Bias Framing on Accountability for Discrimination
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Ivuoma Onyeador, Onyeador                Ivuoma         N
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jennifer
Richeson at Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how attributing discrimination to implicit
bias rather than explicit bias affects responses to acts of discrimination.
Implicit biases are negative attitudes that can affect behavior outside of
conscious awareness and explicit biases are negative attitudes that can affect
behavior under full conscious awareness. Implicit bias is argued to be one
explanation for the persistence of disparities despite the drop in explicitly
negative attitudes toward many societal groups. As a result, a herculean effort
has been exerted to raise awareness about implicit bias and claim it as the
source of discriminatory outcomes across a variety of contexts. However,
preliminary research suggests that attributing discrimination to implicit bias
might undermine concerned responses to it. Understanding the consequences of
attributing discrimination to implicit bias will be particularly useful for
improving interventions designed to addressed societal
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research offers a multi-method
approach to the study of the effects of implicit bias attribution on responses
to discrimination. The overarching aim is to integrate insights from moral and
intergroup psychology to examine the consequences of attributing group-based
discrimination to implicit bias rather than to explicit bias and identify
whether the consequences differ based on group membership. Specifically, this
research (1) compares the effect of implicit bias attribution to explicit bias
framing on dominant and subordinate group members' responses to discrimination
that has already occurred; (2) extends the examination to vigilance for bias in
recorded interactions, that is, as alleged discrimination unfolds, using eye-
tracking; and (3) tests a potential intervention for the implicit bias
attribution effect. The results of this research will add to our understanding
of how people incorporate information about social psychological phenomena into
the situations they encounter every day. In addition, the findings highlight the
imperative to examine the way scientific findings are understood by the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.