* 1809160
* Design and Characterization of Novel Superconducting Topological Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Guang Bian, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 444,163.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Solids can be classified as insulators, semimetals, or
metals. Recently, topological semimetals have emerged as a new frontier in the
research field of electronic materials. Novel phenomena they exhibit are not
only of fundamental interest, but may hold great potential for technological
applications. For example, superconducting topological semimetals can
potentially host a new type of electronic state, Majorana bound state, which is
believed to be the key ingredient for fault-tolerant quantum computation.
However, it is challenging to synthesize such complicated quantum materials in
the laboratory. This project uses advanced atomic-scale techniques to fabricate
and characterize superconducting topological semimetals. The goal of this
project is to achieve a thorough understanding of the growth mechanism and
electronic character of topological semimetals and to provide a rich materials
base for practical device applications in quantum computation. The proposed
research also aims to involve a wide range of students, including middle school,
high school, undergraduate and graduate students, and offer them ample
opportunities to engage in vibrant lab activities. Finally, this project is
fully committed to broadening participation of under-represented groups in
education and research of advanced materials science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Since the discovery of the first Weyl semimetal
in TaAs, a significant research interest emerged in realizing topological
semimetallic phases. The topological semimetals extend the territory of
topological materials beyond the insulating phases such as topological
insulators and topological crystalline insulators. Many extraordinary properties
have been found and realized in topological semimetals, including massless Weyl
fermions, chiral anomalies, Fermi arc surface states, and nonlocal
electrodynamics. Those findings are not only of fundamental scientific
importance, but also hold promise for practical device applications. Introducing
superconductivity to topological semimetals opens the door to many novel
phenomena that are unavailable in conventional superconductors. The pairing of
the topological bulk and surface states in topological semimetals can
potentially generate non-s-wave superconductivity, which is the key ingredient
for realizing new types of quasiparticles such as Majorana bound states.
However, up to date, superconducting topological semimetals are still very rare.
This project uses a combination of molecular beam epitaxy, angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy, and scanning tunneling microscopy to synthesize and
explore novel topological semimetals that intrinsically host superconductivity.
Specifically, the project aims to create new superconducting topological
semimetals such as PbTaSe2, TlTaSe2, MoC, NbC, Mg2Pb(Sn), and Mg3Bi2 under the
guidance of first-principles simulations. The superconducting materials are
grown by the method of molecular beam epitaxy at controlled doping levels and
characterized through photoemission and scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy. The goal of this project is to identify exotic
superconducting topological semimetals and to form a solid foundation for
studying rich physics from the interplay of topological nodal fermions and
superconductivity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.