* 1809784
* Guiding the Evolution of Microresonator Frequency Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2022
* USD 365,631.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical frequency combs are a revolutionary
form of broadband light consisting of a large number of colors that are
precisely spaced in frequency. Since their development in the early part of the
new century, optical combs have enabled remarkable advances in precision
measurement of time and frequency, which are critical to position and inertial
guidance, and in high-speed spectroscopy useful for applications such as
environmental sensing and breath analysis. However, these combs are generated
from specialized lasers, which are rather bulky, which still hinders their
deployment for many real world applications. Furthermore, the pulses they emit
are limited to relatively low repetition rates. Substantially higher repetition
rates are needed for other promising applications, such as optical
communications, photonics-based radio-frequency signal processing, and
calibration of certain astronomical instruments. More recently, a new choice for
generating optical frequency combs has emerged, based on the interaction of
light with tiny "microresonator" structures on integrated photonic chips. These
microresonator-based comb generators are fundamentally very small, which offers
new opportunities for low cost deployment, and provide much higher repetition
rate, which offers compatibility with new applications. Research at Purdue
University will explore methods to overcome challenges in guiding the optical
combs generated from microresonators into stable and repeatable low-noise states
desirable for applications and will provide advanced training to students at the
graduate and undergraduate level relevant to careers in high technology and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous-wave
pumping of a high quality factor microresonator can give rise to formation of
combs of optical frequencies spaced by tens to hundreds of GHz. Such combs arise
due to nonlinear wave mixing mediated by the optical Kerr effect and are
frequently termed Kerr combs. In a particularly interesting state, the comb
comprises cavity solitons (more formally called dissipative Kerr solitons),
ultrashort pulses of light that propagate in the microresonator with remarkable
stability, thanks to a double balance between loss and parametric gain and
between dispersion and nonlinearity. However, controlling the nonlinear dynamics
to achieve the desired stable states of operation is complex. One complication
is that the comb evolves through a chaotic regime before it potentially switches
into a stable cavity soliton state; the passage through chaos leads to strong
indeterminacy in the state generated. Competition with thermo-optic
nonlinearities that are exacerbated by power transients that occur upon
transition into the soliton state cause further challenges. Although progress
has been made, control strategies to deal with these issues are particularly
challenging for desirable chip-scale microresonator devices. This project
proposes to explore two new approaches to guiding the evolution of the comb to
desired states, including single soliton states, within the rich, nonlinear
dynamical phase space. One approach investigates the idea of a so-called chaos-
avoiding trajectory involving coordinated manipulation of pump laser power and
frequency to reach stable soliton states without passing through the chaotic
operating regime usually encountered. A second complementary approach will
explore a recently proposed passive scheme toward obtaining single solitons
based on mode interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.