* 1809696
* Collaborative Research: In situ Diffraction and Cohesive-Zone Studies of the Fatigue-Crack-Growth Behavior in Mg Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Huck Beng Chew, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: The accelerated adoption of magnesium alloys as
structural components in the automobile and aerospace industry is driven by
their unique properties of low density, high strength-to-weight ratio, and high
specific stiffness. However, the fatigue properties of magnesium alloys and
associated failure mechanisms have not been well-characterized, which severely
limits the technological viability of these lightweight alloys. This award
supports the fundamental research to provide the microstructural-level
understanding of the failure processes, which ultimately govern the fatigue life
of magnesium alloys. The research will pave the way towards the intelligent
design of advanced, lightweight structural alloys with the improved fatigue
life. In the broader sense, this research will impact the aerospace and
automotive industries and would help U.S. improve its manufacturing
competitiveness. The unique experimental and modeling tools will help enrich the
current course curriculum on mechanics and materials at both the University of
Tennessee and University of Illinois. A demonstrative toolkit will expose high
school students at both universities to concepts of fracture and failure, and
how crack stopping mechanisms can be introduced to improve fatigue life.

Technical Abstract:

The goal of this research is to couple fatigue-crack-growth studies of magnesium
alloys, with in situ nondestructive measurements and micromechanical modeling
investigations, which will establish the connection between microscopic failure
processes and macroscopic fatigue-crack-growth properties. The primary objective
is to identify the roles of the surrounding plasticity and crack-tip process
zones in the resistance to fatigue-crack growth of magnesium alloys. Within the
surrounding plastic zone, in situ neutron-diffraction measurements and high-
energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction techniques will provide the unprecedented
information on plastic anisotropy, twin polarity, flow non-normality, and
texture evolution in magnesium alloys under the arbitrary stress multiaxiality.
Within the process zone, which is inaccessible to experimental measurements, a
novel nonlinear field projection scheme will be used to inversely reconstruct
the cohesive zone laws for fatigue-crack growth uniquely from the surrounding
deformation fields that are measured by the diffraction experiments. By linking
top-down stress analyses with bottom-up failure mechanisms at inter- and intra-
granular scales, this fundamental research can lead to predictive models based
on microstructural understanding with which materials scientists can utilize to
improve the fatigue life of advanced structural alloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.