* 1809306
* Transition-Metal-Free Boride Cathodes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Viktor Poltavets, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 156,934.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High cost of rechargeable batteries
is a problem for the widespread adoption of electrical vehicles and grid-scale
energy storage systems. The type of electrodes currently used, intercalation
cathodes, are expensive and have low energy densities. This leads to the high
price of batteries. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, explores a new
strategy for the design of transition-metal-free intercalation cathodes with
high energy density by utilizing redox active anions charge compensation
mechanism. A crystal structure type with covalent anion framework allows
designing new cathodes for Na-ion, and Mg-ion battery chemistries. Additionally,
the project includes comprehensive training of graduate and undergraduate
students in the areas of inorganic materials synthesis and characterization; the
High School Science Teachers Club for the teachers from the Greater New Orleans
area has been formed. The Teachers Club is designed to involve teachers in
sharing effective teaching strategies and to educate the teachers on current
research topics. With the goal of improving the science education, an
Educational Equipment Lending Library has also been established, and now enables
demonstrations which reach many high school students and to increase their
interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Design of
cathode materials with a redox active anions (RAA) charge compensation mechanism
is a new and attractive possibility for increasing cathode energy density. The
researchers at the University of New Orleans study transition metal and oxygen-
free compounds with covalent anionic networks as candidates for cathodes with
RAA. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research at NSF, provides new and important
fundamental insights into possible redox active anions cathodes through
experimental proof-of-concept of RAA cathodes with extended covalent anionic
networks. The strong covalent boron-boron bonds in the selected borides preserve
a covalent boron framework during electrochemical cycling. Density functional
theory (DFT) calculations indicate high energy density and ionic conductivity
for the Mg-ion cathode material studied. The research focuses on syntheses,
structural and electrochemical properties investigations of several borides,
which are potential Na-ion, and Mg-ion cathodes. Utilization of soft chemistry
approaches extends the accessible compositions to new compounds. DFT
determination of average voltages and volume changes on cation deintercalation
as well as activation energies of the cation diffusion and ionic conductivities
are performed. Additionally, the project includes comprehensive training of
graduate and undergraduate students in the areas of inorganic materials
synthesis and characterization; the High School Science Teachers Club for the
teachers from the Greater New Orleans area has been formed. The Teachers Club is
designed to involve teachers in sharing effective teaching strategies and to
educate the teachers on current research topics. With the goal of improving the
science education, an Educational Equipment Lending Library has also been
established, and now enables demonstrations which reach many high school
students and to increase their interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.