* 1809635
* The 13th Brauer Group Meeting
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Daniel Krashen, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,200.00

This award supports participation in the 13th Brauer Group Meeting which will be
held Monday - Friday, June 18 - 22, 2018 at the Mountain Campus of Colorado
State University. The purpose of the meeting is to gather mathematicians whose
research focuses on the Brauer Group and related areas. The conference will
include talks given by both senior and junior researchers as well as time and
space for collaboration. The organizers will do their best to ensure that the
conference participants represent a diverse spectrum from across the mathematics
community. Funds for this meeting will be used to pay for conference facilities
and travel for junior participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brauer Group is a
"group" in the mathematical sense and researchers from many areas of
mathematics, including algebra, number theory, algebraic geometry and topology
have related interests in understanding the objects that this group
parametrizes. Low dimensional geometers study the existence of Brauer classes on
components of so-called character varieties and their ramification patterns to
discern attributes of knot complements. Classical algebraists study the Brauer
group in its role as a directory of division algebras over a field. There are
many open and difficult questions in this classic view of the Brauer Group; are
all division algebras of prime degree cyclic? Do there exist non-crossed product
division algebras of prime exponent? Is the n-torsion subgroup generated by the
classes of cyclic algebras of degree dividing n? Algebraic geometers study the
Brauer group as an important invariant of a scheme arising from étale
cohomology. This point of view goes back to the 1960's and Grothendieck, who
suggested problems that are still actively being investigated. The primary goal
of the 13th Brauer Group Meeting is to bring these perspectives together so that
colleagues may share insights on problems of interest involving the Brauer group
in its many forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.