* 1809024
* RUI: Quantum Enhanced Thermoelectric Response of Molecule-based Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Justin Bergfield, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 91,444.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education aimed
to understand the influence of quantum mechanical interference effects and
strong interactions between electrons on the thermoelectric effect in molecule-
based materials. The thermoelectric effect reflects the coupling between heat
and charge, which makes it possible to directly convert heat into electrical
energy in a device which has no moving parts and no operational carbon
footprint. In addition to energy harvesting applications, the thermoelectric
effect is also of fundamental interest since it can be strongly influenced by
molecular structure, the quantum mechanical nature of the electron, and
interactions among electrons. The overarching goal of this project is to advance
the understanding of how these aspects combine to influence the thermoelectric
effect in molecule-based materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
research focused on the exploration and design of novel molecule-based
thermoelectric systems with applications in clean energy, spintronics, and the
management of heat on the nanoscale, for example in nanoscale electronic
devices. Because of the small size of a molecule, the charge, heat, and magnetic
currents flowing through it are highly dependent on one another. The PI aims to
advance understanding of the physics underlying the interrelationships among
these currents and their macroscopic consequences, including the thermoelectric
effect. On small length scales where quantum mechanics dominates, studies of
thermoelectric effects on the local temperature will help to advance
understanding of local thermodynamic properties in quantum mechanical systems
far from the familiar balanced state of equilibrium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students at Illinois State University will
be directly involved in all aspects of research and gain hands-on experience in
modern electronic structure and transport theories as they apply to
thermoelectricity, molecular materials, spintronics, and scanning probe
experiments. As a result, this project will contribute to the preparation of the
next generation of scientists required to maintain forward momentum in these
fields and national competitiveness in materials
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
research and education aimed to advance understanding of how quantum
interference effects and interactions influence the thermoelectric response of
molecule-based materials. The interplay between heat, charge, and spin currents
are manifest in the thermoelectric effect, where the spin-resolved thermopower
is a macroscopic observable related to the coupling strength among the
microscopic quantities. The PI aims to optimize molecular structure in
conjunction with quantum mechanical effects to enhance and control the transport
and conversion of energy. The PI will investigate nonequilibrium transport
effects. The overarching goal of this project is to advance the understanding of
how quantum mechanics, many-body correlations, and molecular structure influence
the spin-resolved thermoelectric response in molecule-based materials. The
ability to identify and harness novel aspects of heat, charge, and spin
transport in materials may help to circumvent certain longstanding challenges in
the energy conversion field as well as in the continued miniaturization of
electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on:
(1) determining the molecular structure-function relationships of the
thermoelectric response, including the use of thermoelectricity as a
spectroscopic method; (2) the nature of spin-thermoelectric response and
enhancement in molecule-based systems; and (3) temperature measurement at the
nanoscale. This project involves the development of state-of-the-art theoretical
and computational tools, including those based on non-equilibrium Green's
functions, combined with electronic structure theories. With these techniques
the PI aims to develop new insights into fundamental aspects of interacting
nonequilibrium quantum systems and will work to develop a material design
strategy rooted in quantum mechanical concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to contribute to the advance of the theory of molecular
thermoelectricity and temperature measurement. The proposed research into the
interplay between heat, charge, and spin in quantum-dominated molecular systems
may have impact on how thermoelectric materials and thermal management devices
are developed. The computational tools and theory developed in this proposal
will be shared with other researchers, and will also be integrated directly into
undergraduate classes. Undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of
this project, from initial theory and code development to the authoring of
papers and presenting results at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.