* 1809099
* NSF/ENG/ECCS-BSF: Collaborative Research: Random Channel Cryptography
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Hui Cao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Physical-Layer Key Distribution Using Multimode
Fibers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information security is of paramount importance in
today's connected world. Currently, information is secured through public-key
cryptography, which is based on the inability of the state-of-the-art computers
to solve certain mathematical problems such as prime number factorization in an
efficient manner. Therefore, these cryptographic methods are not secure against
advances in computing paradigms and computing power. As a result, quantum key
distribution (QKD) has received significant academic and commercial attention in
recent years. QKD is fundamentally secure by virtue of the quantum properties of
light including the no-cloning theorem and the uncertainty principle. However,
QKD cannot satisfy the increasing capacity (key rate and distance) demand of
commercial applications. In the meantime, even though classical key distribution
(CKD) can provide higher capacity, none of the optical CKD methods proposed so
far can guarantee security. Instead, existing optical CKD methods can only
provide deterrence to hacking by imposing hacking asymmetry: making equipment
for eavesdropping prohibitively more complicated than that for key distribution
between legitimate users. Given its importance in today's information-based
economy, physical-layer secure key generation and distribution represents a
technology gap that can only be addressed by transformative research. We propose
a physical-layer key distribution method using multimode fibers, which we call
Random Channel Cryptography (RCC), that offers the best of both worlds: capacity
and hacking asymmetry of CKD, and security of QKD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Random
Channel Cryptography is based on a central result in information-theoretic
security that the security of key distribution at the physical-layer is
guaranteed as long as the legitimate users have access to a common source of
randomness, through channels that are less noisy than the channel of the hacker.
We exploit communication channels such as a multimode optical fiber with
distributed mode coupling that is inherently random, but deterministically
symmetric as a result of reciprocity, for simultaneous key generation and
distribution. In RCC, both Alice and Bob send a continuous-wave single-mode
laser through an arbitrary degree of freedom in space into a random, spatially-,
spectrally- and temporally-varying multidimensional channel, such as a multimode
fiber, and both receive the time-varying intensities in the same degree of
freedom in space. A common key can be established between Alice and Bob from the
measured intensities, which are correlated with each other because the CW lights
traverse the reciprocal paths. Neither Alice nor Bob needs to generate a key.
Instead, the secure key is generated in a distributed fashion along the
multidimensional channel and becomes simultaneously available to Alice and Bob.
Security of RCC is enhanced as a consequence of hacking asymmetry. In RCC, Alice
and Bob only need to make a small number of measurements whereas, in order to
break the key, the eavesdropper must make M simultaneous measurements, where M
is the number of fiber modes, which could be on the order of several hundred.
Thus, if measurements performed by Alice and Bob represent the state-of-the-art,
measurements required of the eavesdropper will be several orders of magnitude
beyond the state-of-the-art. We believe that the key rate and distance of RCC
can be &gt;10Gb/s and &gt; 300 km, respectively, using off-the-shelf components.
We propose to conduct research to:&lt;br/&gt;- determine the performance limits
of RCC, &lt;br/&gt;- design methods to reach those limits, and further
&lt;br/&gt;- prove the security of RCC against general passive and active
attacks. &lt;br/&gt;In conclusion, RCC has the potential to become a secure,
high-capacity key-distribution method for commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.