* 1809399
* Topological Insulator Field Effect Transistors for Memory and Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Qiliang Li, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Relentless, Exponential progress on Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor
(CMOS) technology over the last four decades has made possible the design and
fabrication of the powerful silicon chips which are the engines of the
microelectronics revolution which changed contemporary society: Computers, Smart
Phones, Internet of things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and the list
goes on, there is no aspect of modern life that has not been touched by the
silicon chip. Progress on conventional CMOS technology has however slowed down
significantly, as miniaturization (according to Moore's Law) is reaching
fundamental, physics imposed limits. To make progress possible "beyond CMOS",
researchers around the world consider new approaches to use new materials (for
example, topological insulators), and invent new types of transistors and new
types of high-speed, high-density and low-power memory technology. Consequently,
the goal of the research in this proposal is to further exploit our
understanding of the properties of topological insulator nanowires and thin
films to build new-concept field effect transistors with operational principles
different than the conventional CMOS technology, while continuing to benefit
from the existing vast experience semiconductor industry has accumulated over
the years with this technology (CMOS). If successful, the outcomes of the
proposed research will also include new memory devices and sensors, made
possible by these topological insulator transistors. Graduate, undergraduates
and high-school students will have the opportunity to interact with
collaborators from Industry and Government Laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to design and
fabricate Topological- Insulator Field-Effect transistors platform to explore
and exploit the potential of gate-controlled topological surface state for
applications in new-concept nonvolatile memory and sensor devices. The specific
aims of this proposal are: (i) to design and fabricate topological insulator
transistors with large on-state current and near-zero off-state current; (ii) to
explore gate design and device geometry for achieving robust and efficient
control of the spin-polarized electron current; (iii) to exploit the spin-
polarized electron current for spin-based logic and nonvolatile memory devices
with low-power operation; and (iv) to exploit the resulting devices for
enhancing the topological photoelectronic effect for infrared sensors with high
sensitivity and selectivity. The research involves preparation of novel
topological insulator nanowires and thin films, nanoscale device integration,
and characterization, with a focus on achieving in the first instance high-
quality topological insulator transistors. The topological insulator nanowires
and thin films will be grown at wafer scale for in-situ device integration to
achieve clean device interfaces and metal contacts. The topological insulator
transistors will be fabricated with engineered gate/source/drain contacts and
ferromagnetic insulator/channel interface to achieve: high on/off current ratio,
large on-state current and sharp switching, with surface states efficiently
tuned by the gate-source electric field. This proposal presents a complete route
from materials preparation, to device integration and measurement, to
applications focusing on logic transistors, nonvolatile memory and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.