* 1809165
* Effect of Partial Melting on Elastic Properties of Rocks at Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 648,346.00

The temperature within the Earth is high enough to melt rocks as evidenced by
volcanoes and volcanic rocks. It is thereby probable that parts of the Earth's
crust and mantle are partially molten even though they are dominantly solid. The
goal of this proposal is to improve the understanding of the relationship
between the state of partial melting and changes in elastic properties of the
media. The focus will be the upper mantle of the Earth. Since elastic properties
quantitatively define the speed that seismic waves propagate through the media,
the results of this research will enable better associations between maps of
seismic speed variations and degrees of partial melting. The approach of this
program is to probe the physics and chemistry basics of melting and mechanics
yielding a deeper understanding of the underlying principles in order to provide
a robust model that can then be applied to a wide variety of environments. While
the focus of the proposal is the upper mantle region of the Earth, an improved
model will also be relevant to the crust. Indeed, the results could also have
applications in defining this relationship in industrial settings in detecting
incipient stages of melting of various materials. This program provides a
cutting-edge learning experience for students including graduate students in the
preparation of their PhD and undergraduate students in the focus of a summer
research project. The results will be used throughout the Earth sciences as
fundamental information on the behavior of the Earth's interior. The tools that
are developed will be made available to other researchers for studying strength
related properties of materials. These tools (software and hardware) will
immediately become part of the COMPRES-operated synchrotron facility and
available to all in the community that wish to use them. The tools developed
here will be useful for studying material properties under extreme environments
and will be useful to develop better industrial
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors have recently demonstrated that the
current models of the mechanical properties of solid/melt combinations are
inadequate and have proposed that the interaction between the solid and melt has
a significant effect on the elastic properties. The new model, "dynamic
melting," changes the predicted effect of melting on the relationship between
the bulk modulus and the shear modulus. In the dynamic melting model, the
kinetics of melting introduces a change in the frequency dependence of the
elastic properties. The current proposal is to carefully test the dynamic
melting model by studying a broader range of chemistry of the material and alter
the experimental conditions and protocols in order to compare the predicted
changes with the experimentally observed changes. The experiments are made
possible by new high pressure capabilities on multi-anvil high pressure
apparatus installed at synchrotron light sources. These systems enable the
generation of pressure and temperature of the upper mantle on samples that can
then be axially compressed, with the synchrotron yielding images of the sample
with very high precision measurements of length, and diffraction profiles that
yield state of stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.