* 1809740
* Synthesis and Applications of Functional Carbon Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 565,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;There is an increasing need for more cost-
effective, portable methods to measure and identify molecular species related to
the environment, health, and industrial processes. Traditional analytical
instruments often require a skilled operator and are expensive and bulky. This
research seeks to make advances in these measurement methods by creating new
electronic nanomaterials that enable the formation of highly specific chemical
sensors. Key to creating selectivity in such materials is the ability to tailor
the chemical environment so that they interact or react with the molecule of
interest. New chemical reactions will be developed to attach groups to carbon
nanotubes and create nanowires that will conduct more or less electrical current
in response to the presence of a target molecule. Sensors empowered by these new
nanomaterials can be lightweight, have very low power requirements, and can be
the basis of new generations of functional materials. Nanostructured materials
will be developed that detect toxic or biologically active chemicals that can be
encountered in the workplace or at home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new functional carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) and graphenes by developing/improving reactions that lead to the covalent
attachment of different groups to the graphene pi-surfaces. These methods will
expand the diversity of functional groups that can be attached and enable novel
material concepts and functional interfaces. New functionalization methods will
be developed using reactive intermediates such as fluorinated carbenes and
nitrenes. We will direct our efforts by determining the impact of
functionalization on the mobility of the carriers in the materials. It has been
theoretically predicted that the products from carbenes and nitrenes will result
in minimal perturbations to the extended electronic structure. In addition to
perfecting and extending the methods initiated previously, this program will
explore the covalent attachment of more complex molecular scaffolds that can
create binding sites for molecules of interest. The functional nature of the
target materials provides natural transitions to impactful, real-world
applications. These include transduction materials that enable wearable sensors
for workers who may be exposed to harmful chemicals in chemical/polymer
production and/or coating processes. Creating soluble forms of SWCNTs and
graphene opens a wide range of opportunities for fabrication of organic
electronics for the selective assembly at interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.