* 1809796
* Collaborative Research: InGaN/III-V hybrid integration for high-temperature solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Yuji Zhao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Solar cells are increasingly common in many parts of
the world, both on rooftops and in large scale solar power stations. Solar cells
provide cost-effective power without wires and so are useful for "off-grid"
applications. For example, solar cells power sensor networks and provide
portable power. They are also the primary power source for satellites, as well
as space vehicles used for planetary exploration. Traditional solar cells lose
efficiency as temperature increases. Consequently, any place where temperatures
exceed 300 degrees Fahrenheit has traditionally been considered off-limits. As a
result, innovative power generation schemes that could benefit from the ability
to use both heat energy and solar energy at the same time have never been
realized. In comparison to Mars, which has been extensively explored by solar-
powered robotic vehicles, we know surprisingly little about our very hot nearby
neighbors of Venus and Mercury. Solar-powered vehicles could change this. This
project aims to advance the burgeoning field of high-temperature solar cells by
demonstrating durable new designs that can achieve high efficiency at
temperatures above 800 degrees Fahrenheit. Solar cells based on nitrides of
Group III elements such as gallium and indium have shown an unusual increase in
efficiency with rising temperature. This opens up the possibility of efficient
solar cells that operate at high temperature. Beyond the applications above,
this project could also lead to sensors that operate efficiently and wirelessly
in demanding environments, such as engines. The two co-PIs will seek to
incorporate solar cell testing into teacher training programs at their
respective institutions. They will also incorporate research into graduate and
undergraduate classes and continue their commitment to recruiting under-
represented students into STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The PI's aims to combine the
unique strengths of III-V and III-N materials using wafer bonding to form multi-
junction devices optimized for high temperatures of 300-450C. High-temperature
solar cells are needed for inner solar system exploration and hybrid
photovoltaic-thermal energy systems. III-V solar cells exhibit the highest-known
efficiencies, but their performance decreases with increasing temperature. In
contrast, III-N solar cells have recently demonstrated the unusual
characteristic of increasing in efficiency with rising temperature. The two co-
PIs will take an interdisciplinary approach to demonstrate high-efficiency
photovoltaics at high temperature, combining epitaxial growth, materials
characterization, device fabrication, device testing, and modeling. This project
will advance understanding of optoelectronic device performance at high
operating temperatures. The impact of thermal energy on phenomena such as
thermionic emission and radiative recombination have widely been studied at
cryogenic temperatures, with less attention paid to elevated temperatures of
300-450C. The co-PIs hypothesize that optoelectronic devices can be redesigned
to account for and, in some cases, take advantage of such elevated
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.