* 1809334
* Micro-magnetic Stimulation of Auditory Neurons: a New Paradigm in Overcoming Hearing Loss
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Pamela Bhatti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2024
* USD 329,555.00

As estimated by the World Health Organization, over 5% of the world's population
(360 million individuals: 32 million children) experience disabling hearing
loss. Unattended hearing loss results in feelings of isolation, loneliness, and
extreme frustration. This is especially prevalent in older individuals. Not only
does hearing loss severely impair communication, it often leads to delays in
spoken language abilities in children. A host of strategies, with varying
degrees of success, can be used to reduce the detrimental effects of hearing
disability: these range from screening, protection, captioning, sign language,
to assistive devices such as hearing aids and cochlear implants (CI). CI devices
function by coding sound waves as electrical pulses. In turn, these pulses
determine the amount of electrical charge applied to neurons in the inner ear
(cochlea) thereby conveying a lost or diminished sensation of sound.
Approximately 324,000 CI have been implanted worldwide enabling some individuals
to perceive speech very well. However, outcomes are highly variable and
unpredictable. Everyday situations, such as understanding speech in noisy
settings, and appreciating music, present users with significant challenges. A
major contributor is the inability of CIs to precisely control the path of
electrical charge in the highly conductive intracochlear fluid. This work
pursues a promising and novel alternative to direct electrical stimulation -
micro-magnetic stimulation via electrically pulsed coils housed on a flexible
substrate and implanted in the cochlea. An intracochlear micro-coil array can
activate auditory neurons with greater specificity while also enabling longer-
term safety since the micro-coils are fully encapsulated. The applicability of
micro-magnetic coils can naturally be extended to overcome loss in balance,
sight, as well as to improve deep brain stimulation. To further enhance the
societal impact of the research, partnerships with the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, and Fernbank Science Center will enable and promote
hearing health awareness and education in Atlanta, GA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work is a necessary first-step toward advancing an understanding of how
locally induced fields may serve to excite neurons. In contrast with
transcranial magnetic stimulation requiring a bulky coil and consuming
considerable power, micro-coils implanted proximal to target neural tissue may
engage the nervous system more effectively. To pursue this research, direct
metal inkjet printing methods to build micro-coils on polymeric substrates will
be developed. The devices will be fully encapsulated with a medical grade
polymer and tested in solution to examine for impedance shifts and leakage
current. Ex-vivo testing will also be accomplished with organotypic spiral
ganglion neurons cultured on a 2D multichannel electrode array (MEA). The 2D-MEA
and associated software system will enable the unprecedented possibility of non-
invasive, closed-loop micro-magnetic stimulation and neural response recording.
From this, neural threshold and specificity will be assessed and compared with
conventional CI electrode-based stimulation. In a parallel and highly
collaborative fashion, array insertion studies in human cadaver cochleae to
assess insertion trauma, depth of insertion, and scalar wall distances will be
pursued. More broadly, the application of novel printing and additive
manufacturing, combined with flexible electronics, has the potential to
transform fabrication of neural interface technologies to processes outside of
the cleanroom, while enabling seamless integration with supporting drive
electronics and packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.