* 1809498
* Controlling and quantifying two-level systems, disorder and ideality in vapor deposited amorphous thin films
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Frances Hellman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 759,376.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Amorphous materials lack structural order,
making them difficult to describe and making it difficult to calculate and
predict their properties compared to crystalline materials which consist of
spatially repeated atoms. This lack of understanding, however, does not prevent
the important applications possible or the scientific impact of amorphous
materials; plastics, silicate glasses, and amorphous silicon photovoltaics are
examples that are pertinent to daily life, industry, and technologies. Amorphous
superconductors are a remarkable example of how a fundamental scientific
property transcends structural imperfection. The properties of an amorphous
material depend strongly on how it was produced, and there are some well-defined
known defects, but it is not clear how to describe the different amorphous
structures produced by different methods, even for a single element material,
nor what the nature of a defect is in a fully disordered material. Disorder
exists on different length and energy scales, ranging from local, atomic-sized
disorder to larger scales. Intriguingly, there exists the notion of an "ideal
glass", which while remaining thoroughly disordered, lacks imperfections in that
disorder and thus approaches the uniqueness of a crystal, including
reproducibility and predictability of its properties. The project will look at
two types of materials, one a classic semiconductor alloy and the other a
strongly bonded oxide, and determine the relationship between types of disorder
and defects produced by different preparation methods and for different atoms,
and the tunability of the "ideality" of disordered materials. The work will
create an enhanced understanding of what causes mechanical and dielectric losses
in technologically important amorphous materials and how to control these. More
broadly, it will yield improved understanding and control of amorphous materials
of technological and fundamental scientific significance. The project will also
educate and train students and help to increase diversity participation in
science; the PI and her research group actively engage in efforts to make
physics accessible to underrepresented STEM ethnic and socioeconomic minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project
will look at understanding order within a completely disordered (amorphous)
material, and will provide insight into how vapor deposition enables creation of
ultrastable glasses with low density of tunneling states (TLS), and for which
materials this process works. Recent experiments show that two extremely
different vapor deposited materials (indomethacin and silicon) form ultrastable
glasses with enthalpy near the corresponding crystal and with a low density of
tunneling states, strongly suggestive that these are close to ideal glasses. The
proposed work will use two classes of amorphous materials to test the hypothesis
that ultrastability is achieved by vapor deposition only when growth is done
near the Kauzmann temperature TK, at which the ideal glass is theoretically
produced, and only if there is sufficient surface atomic mobility. If true, this
would open the door to the creation of other near-ideal low loss glasses and
give insight on the nature of the elusive ideal glass state in different
materials. The hypothesis that ideal glasses inherently have strongly suppressed
TLS will also be tested. The many proposed characterization studies will give
insights about defects, TLS, and stability of amorphous materials, and will
hopefully point toward generalizable structural features that herald the
presence or absence of TLS. The proposed materials directly impact many aspects
of technology including dielectrics for tunnel barriers, phase change memories
(a-Ge and related alloys), ultra-fast time-of-flight radiation detection (a-Se),
and flash memories, catalysis, quantum computing, and high-k dielectrics in
transistors and superconducting qubits (a-Al2O3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.