* 1809541
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Understanding the protein-polysaccharide interactions of natural composite materials in one and two dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiao Hu, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 132,758.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological macromolecules are large
molecules which are fundamentally necessary for life such as proteins,
carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids. All organisms are composed of a
variety of these biomacromolecules, and as such, understanding their molecular
interactions is essential for predicting morphology, structure, and function of
biomaterials. The study of protein-polysaccharide interactions in biocomposite
materials carries implications for fields ranging from medicine to environmental
science and materials science. These materials are extremely versatile as shown
from a variety of biocomposites used in nature. However, to facilitate
deployment of new biocomposite materials in modern technology, the development
of new methodologies is required to tune the properties of these materials to
suit specific technological demands. The ability to manipulate molecules to form
hierarchical structures with precise control, size, spacing, and shape is a
central objective of this project in order to enable the rapid fabrication of
multi-level structures from single structures. In addition, this project will
provide research, training and educational opportunities to high school and
undergraduate students for a better understanding of biomaterials science and
molecular interactions of biological macromolecules. The proposed research will
be seamlessly associated with the needs of the South Jersey undergraduate and
K-12 STEM education programs, which will be particularly beneficial for students
of engineering, chemistry, physics, biology and computer science backgrounds who
are required to undertake research for graduation. Furthermore, this proposal
will enable other researchers to use the developed tools and roadmaps for the
regeneration of biocomposite materials with critical functionalities and
customizable options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#8195;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural biomacromolecules such as silk and keratin
represent structural proteins, while cellulose represents polysaccharides.
Understanding their molecular interactions is critical for unleashing a flora of
new materials, revolutionizing the way we fabricate multi-structural and multi-
functional systems. Knowledge to date is still lacking on how the morphology of
various biomacromolecules assemble nor do we understand how their interactions
dictate physicochemical properties. Linking morphology modification at the
inter- and intra-molecular levels will provide a basic understanding of how the
molecular self-assembly progresses and how spatiotemporal morphologies control
the structure and physicochemical properties. Achieving this level of
understanding and control will be crucial for progress leading to the ability to
fabricate robust multi-level structural biocomposites such as 2D films and 1D
fibers. It will also help to predict the relationship between protein secondary
structures and carbohydrate crystallinity, thus creating potential applications
for cellular mechanosensing, cellular regeneration, membrane separation, thermal
insulation and energy production. This project hypothesizes that the
physicochemical and morphological properties of protein-polysaccharide
biocomposites regenerated from ionic liquids are mainly regulated by the
formation and dimension of protein secondary structures, glucose-based
crystallites, and biomacromolecules backbone-to-backbone chain intercalations.
Two main objectives will be pursued to address this hypothesis, including, i)
the characterization of protein-polysaccharide materials as a function of
molecular structures and processing conditions; ii) understand the relationship
between protein secondary structure and cellulose crystallinity in relation to
chain intercalation, morphology, and mechanical stability of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.