* 1809518
* Manipulating light-matter interactions in bulk anisotropic metamaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Natalia Litchinitser, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 315,000.00

Nontechnical description: Light interacts with matter in many different ways
that can be observed in our everyday life. This includes scattering, reflection,
refraction, absorption or excitation of chemical processes in, for example,
retinal rods and cones of the human eye. The likelihood and strength of a
particular light-matter interaction is governed by so-called selection rules.
Many light-matter interaction processes are forbidden, or more precisely,
highly-improbable, therefore limiting fundamental studies and applications of
optical materials and processes. The ability to manipulate these improbable
interactions is likely to enhance fundamental knowledge in many fields,
including atomic, molecular and optical physics, photonics, chemistry, and
nanotechnology. This research focuses on developing new nanostructured optical
materials and structures, termed metamaterials, that help create specially
shaped light beams. These custom-made light beams enable accessing those
previously forbidden light-matter interactions. Beyond its fundamental science
significance, this research could enable applications in spectroscopy and
sensing devices, photovoltaic systems and quantum computing devices. This hands-
on experience, along with exposure to state-of-the-art scientific problems and
their investigations, helps thoroughly prepare participating students for future
science and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Spectroscopic transitions in atoms and molecules that are not allowed within the
electric-dipole approximation, but occur due to higher-order terms in the
interaction between matter and radiation, are called dipole-forbidden. Dipole-
forbidden optical transitions in atoms form the basis of next-generation atomic
clocks, and of high-fidelity qubits used in quantum information processors and
quantum simulators. However, dipole-forbidden transitions are very weak and
therefore exhibit narrow natural linewidths. Recently, it was realized that
orbital angular momentum, or vortex beams can make symmetry-forbidden
transitions possible in atoms, molecules, and artificial atoms or nanocrystals.
However, the transition rate depends on the beam size and increases when the
vortex beam size decreases. The goal of the proposed research is to investigate
and demonstrate the possibility of probing forbidden transitions in artificial
atoms using orbital angular momentum carrying beams that have been demagnified
to subwavelength scales using strongly anisotropic metamaterial structures.
Interactions of orbital angular momentum beams with atoms enable hollow-beam
traps, improve the spatial resolution of stimulated emission depletion
microscopy and facilitate quantum information processing. Graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this project gain hands-on experience in
spectroscopy, nanofabrication and optical characterization of novel
nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.