* 1809723
* Realization of One-Dimensional Dynamic Broadband Router
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sang-Hyun Oh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 374,931.00

This program seeks to demonstrate an engineered metamaterial-based router
capable of continuously tuning the angle of reflection via an externally applied
bias across the infrared spectrum. Such a dynamic broadband optical router, if
realized, would enable the far-field steering of beams, enabling new optical
system functionalities such as signal multiplexing and routing. Today, the
closest state-of-the-art solutions to the proposed system are ones based on MEMS
micro-mirrors and liquid crystal spatial light modulators. In comparison to
these known systems, the proposed device would be revolutionary in terms of
switching speed, compactness, and versatile reconfigurability with the benefit
of no moving parts. The physical and design principles, large-area manufacturing
technologies, and software developed in this program will prove invaluable for
future developments of the proposed dynamic achromatic optical router. All co-
investigators will supervise undergraduate students, including individuals
belonging to under-represented groups in sciences and engineering, building on
their extensive track record in this important area. Co-PIs will employ a
unified plan of action to incorporate nanophotonics into curricula, including
classes in nanophotonics and openly accessible lecture notes. Furthermore, co-
PIs will organize and establish a summer experience workshop for K-12 students
in their respective community e.g. in Science Museums and Science Fair, an
activity that will be closely coordinated with the institution and reported to
NSF annually. They will also organize summer school, with emphasis on minority
and under-represented participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional
approaches to the design of metasurfaces rely on subwavelength, near-resonance,
metallic or dielectric scatterers as building blocks. The major drawback of such
an approach is that the shaping of the wavefront can only be engineered for a
frequency, since the scattered phase for each resonator depends on frequency in
a highly nonlinear fashion. Indeed, the implementation of metasurfaces that
function achromatically across a broad range of frequencies remains a formidable
challenge. In conjunction, the electrical tunability of such anomalous
reflection would represent a truly revolutionary device concept which can
potentially employed in a variety of optical systems in a disruptive manner.
Here, co-PIs propose novel strategies to do just that. The anomalous reflections
required to achieve this tuning are induced by a phase gradient along a sub-
wavelength-scale nanostructured metasurface mediated by gap plasmons within ITO
based nanogap structures. Electrical tuning is achieved through ITO materials,
which modifies the phase velocity of the gap plasmons and exhibits true time
delay which allows for electro-optic control. This program will design the
above-mentioned one-dimensional dynamic achromatic optical router, fabricate the
device, evaluate its performance and fundamental limits, and perform
scatterometry measurement to corroborate with theory. The device will be
realized with a unique high-throughput nanomanufacturing method, atomic layer
lithography that allows us to realize ultrahigh-aspect-ratio metal trenches
needed for this work. If realized, the proposed device constitutes an
electrically controllable plasmonic optical router that can be employed in a
variety of optical systems, specifically where achromatic control of the light
path on a pixel-by-pixel basis is essential, and cannot otherwise be achieved
with current state-of-the-art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.