* 1809043
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: An Experimentally Validated Simulation Framework for Next-Generation Plastic Optical Fiber-based Systems on Airplanes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ioannis Roudas, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

GOALI: Collaborative Research: An Experimentally-Validated Simulation Framework
for Next-Generation Plastic Optical Fiber-based Systems on
Airplanes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to develop an
experimentally-validated simulation framework that will help investigate and
design Plastic Optical Fiber (POF)-based communication systems and networks for
airplanes. The main participants are The College of Staten Island (CSI/CUNY),
Montana State University-Bozeman (MSU), and The City College of New York
(CCNY/CUNY). It will also involve an international collaboration with the
University of Zaragoza (UZ), Spain, and a GOALI component with the world-leader
in avionics, The Boeing Co. Avionic communication systems are currently
undergoing a radical transformation in both the commercial and military sectors.
The former (commercial), the focus of this project, exhibits an increasing need
for high-speed communication due to emerging applications for the traveling
public, as well as higher operational needs for the ultra-modern aircraft that
are being deployed. In addition, aging aircraft wiring poses a significant
threat to aircrafts, as electrical wires have proven to be one of the major
factors leading to airplane failures. Therefore, there is an ongoing migration
of avionic data buses from copper to fiber-based networks, since the latter
exhibit high transmission capacity and high electromagnetic immunity. The
investigators have suggested POF as a suitable transmission medium for next-
generation avionic communication systems on commercial aircrafts due to its ease
of handling, light weight and high tolerance to vibration, among other benefits.
While experimental results have demonstrated the feasibility of high-speed data
transmission over different types of POFs, the modeling and simulation of POF-
based systems is lagging behind. Therefore, the investigators will develop a
comprehensive set of components and simulation techniques that empower engineers
to systematically explore different designs before settling on a final custom
solution for their particular system. They will also make a special effort to
involve women and underrepresented groups in the effort since they traditionally
are not exposed to avionic systems engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to study the use of POF in an airplane environment with an
emphasis on system performance and high bit rate transmissions. Glass fiber has
a number of problems when used as a transmission medium in short-reach networks
such as avionic networks. It is mechanically weak and generally lacks bending
ability. Also, the core diameter of single-mode glass optical fiber is small
(~10mm) and it requires very precise handling techniques. Plastic optical fiber
(POF), even with its high loss (~100-300 dB/km) and diffusion, can solve these
problems since it is easier to handle and has a bending radius of about 5 mm,
which can be a big benefit in avionics networks. Its larger core diameter (50 mm
to 1 mm) enables easy connections using inexpensive connectors. The increased
core diameter allows higher tolerance to vibrations and to dust particles that
can totally obstruct light propagation in glass fibers. The investigators will
cover three different types of POF: large-core (up to 1 mm) step-index plastic
optical fiber (SI-POF), multicore step-index plastic optical fiber (MC SI-POF),
and graded-index plastic optical fiber (GI-POF). There are existing simulation
models that capture all the guided modes in multimode fibers with detailed
spatial fields; however, they are not adequate for large-core fibers, where
there are millions of propagation modes. The project intends to develop
computationally-efficient models that circumvent the need for prohibitively long
simulation times and excessive computer memory. The model validation, a critical
component of the project, will be done via a combination of the state-of-the-art
device characterization laboratory at the University of Zaragoza and a testbed
at the College of Staten Island. Montana State University will primarily work on
advanced modulation formats and digital signal processing algorithms. Boeing Co.
will provide prototype devices and realistic system
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.