* 1809658
* Design and Synthesis of Robust Cationic Polymers for Stable and Efficient Anion-Exchange Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Tomasz Kowalewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 445,000.00

Professors Kevin Noonan and Tomasz Kowalewski of Carnegie-Mellon University are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
of the Division of Chemistry to design and prepare new charged polymers that
function as ion-exchange membranes. These membranes are sandwiched between the
negative and positive compartments of fuel cells and are considered a key
component of these energy conversion devices. A variety of consumer related
products rely on fuel cells for clean energy generation. New cationic
(positively charged) polymer membranes are synthesized using appropriate
controlled polymerization techniques. Their chemical, electrochemical, and
mechanical stability are assessed under fuel cell operating conditions. One of
the main objectives of this work is to make durable membranes which can
withstand the harsh chemical environments of a fuel cell device. If successful,
fuel cells with these newly synthesized polymer membranes will not rely on
precious metals for energy generation, which represents a significant economic
advantage. Students from diverse backgrounds are trained and involved in this
project. A "Fuel Cell Project" with educational material and demonstrations is
being developed. The project is made available on the web and used to educate
junior high school students about renewable energy life cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs are exploring the chemical and
electrochemical stability of cationic polymers in the presence of hydroxide
ions. The information obtained is used to build robust membranes for ion-
transport in fuel cells. While transport of protons under acidic conditions is
well established, hydroxide transport in solid polymer electrolytes under
thermal and electrochemical stress is still a significant challenge. The
development of next-generation robust, long-lasting and inert cationic materials
for shuttling these caustic anions requires a combination of synthesis and
characterization. Controlled polymerization techniques are critical for building
the polymer materials. A battery of characterization techniques is used to
evaluate their structure, stability and morphology. Specifically, X-ray
scattering, atomic force microscopy, transport/device measurements and
computational chemistry are used to probe the properties of these membranes.
Transport and mechanical properties are tailored by synthesizing well-defined
polymers and block copolymers. These materials are used to establish
relationships between ion transport and morphology of novel ionomers. This work
provides the basis for subsequent material design to optimize anion transport.
If successful, the project will result in stable and efficient anion exchange
membranes (AEMs) for alkaline fuel cells that do not need precious metals for
proper function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.