* 1809876
* Novel Ultra-high Polarity and High-frequency Axial Flux Electric Machines and Wide Band Gap Power Electronic Drives
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Aaron Cramer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2023
* USD 375,214.00

Electric motors account for more than 60% of the electricity consumed and
electric machines and associated power electronic drives represent a multi-
billion dollar industry. The research will develop fundamental knowledge and
innovative concepts for high-efficiency and high-performance electric machines
and drives through a synergetic combination of transformational designs,
multiphysics analysis, and the latest developments in power electronics,
including wide band gap devices. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate research students, lead to engineering teaching and training
curriculum development, publically disseminate the results, and support STEM
middle and high school outreach activities and increased efforts to attract
students, including women and minorities, to higher education in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raising the fundamental operating frequency
for electrical machines results, in principle, in increased power density,
provided that the typical challenges of higher losses, lower material
utilization, and more complicated constructions, which are specific to
conventional designs, can be overcome. The research will provide innovative
solutions in this respect and study two novel axial flux permanent magnet
machine topologies, which are best fitted for ultra-high number of poles and
operation with high fundamental frequency, ensured through controlled supply
from power electronics with wide band gap devices. One construction, suitable
for high-speed operation, employs a coreless stator with an innovative
continuous-wave phase winding arrangement in multiple layers. Another
construction, suitable for low-speed direct drive operation, employs special
rotors and innovative ferromagnetic-core stators with a winding pattern such
that the stator coils and teeth are one order of magnitude lower than the number
of rotor poles, a design feature that far exceeds the characteristics of known
topologies. This machine also incorporates a torque magnification effect, which
contributes to size reduction and efficiency increase for given power output.
For two-phase machine designs, innovative hybrid H-bridge inverters comprising
one leg with wide band gap devices and another leg with silicon devices are
proposed for control and system integration. Computational studies include
multi-physics analysis for electromagnetic, thermal, and mechanical stress, and
differential evolutionary algorithms for mathematical optimization, and
systematic comparison of thousands of candidate designs. Experimental studies
include building prototype demonstrators and laboratory testing. The outcomes
are ultra-high power density and efficient electric machine - drive
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.