* 1809847
* Exploration of Electronic and Catalytic Behavior in Epitaxial Complex Oxide Films and Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Byron Farnum, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 531,981.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Thin films of metal oxides have long been
studied for their various unique physical properties. It is only in the past few
years, however, that research exploring oxide thin films for practical
applications has emerged. Many of these materials exhibit excellent chemical
performance, rivaling that of expensive precious metals such as platinum and
iridium. This is particularly true for reactions that are relevant to fuel
cells: the oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction reactions, which are both
necessary for fuel cell technology. Various oxides have been shown to perform
well in one reaction or the other, but few, if any, individual materials match
the performance of platinum in both reactions. This project focuses on the
synthesis of a composite material that combines two distinct types of oxides
into a single surface so that their combined behavior can lead to catalytic
performance that matches or exceeds precious metals. The research is integrated
with outreach activities to encourage middle and high school students to pursue
careers in science, math, and technology through participation in the Auburn
University Summer Science Institute and Destination STEM. Through these
programs, the PIs will perform demonstrations and lead group activities for
students in rural and underserved areas of Alabama to broaden their exposure to
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Complex oxide thin
films have been studied for many years for their wide array of properties,
including ferromagnetism, ferroelectricity, and superconductivity. The
development of metal oxide materials for oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) electrocatalysis is directly relevant to fuel
cell technologies. In this project the investigators perform systematic
synthetic studies of transition metal oxides using molecular beam epitaxy to
generate epitaxial matrix-pillar nanocomposite thin films where the perovskite
oxide matrix phase is a strong OER catalyst and the spinel oxide pillar phase
targets ORR. The work is delineated into three tasks: synthesis of perovskite
and spinel powders, epitaxial thin films, and nanocomposites; spectroscopic and
electrochemical characterization of electronic structure and band alignment,
including ambient-pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy studies; and
preliminary electrocatalytic studies of uniform thin films and nanocomposites.
These studies address fundamental materials chemistry and surface science
questions as they relate to improving the performance and economic viability of
transition metal oxide hybrid bifunctional materials. The project also provides
educational experiences for undergraduate students to learn about materials
characterization and for graduate students to perform state-of-the-art
experiments at national user facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.