* 1809235
* Collaborative Research: Plasmonic lasing with two-dimensional heterostructures in the intrinsic regime
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Stefan Strauf, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 322,577.00

Nontechnical description: A new class of atomically thin materials, so called
two dimensional semiconductors, has gained considerable interest as a viable
material for optoelectronic devices such as lasers and light emitting diodes.
Previous research reports that these new materials suffer from detrimental
environmental interactions and material defects that result in low light
emission efficiencies, thereby impeding practical applications. This project
ultimately enables an efficiency and performance boost for nanoscale light
sources such as nanolasers as well as novel quantum light sources that are
required in upcoming technologies that use light instead of electrons to realize
densely integrated information processing directly on a semiconductor chip. The
research approach utilizes a promising crystal growth technique that leads to
very low defect densities in two dimensional materials. The research also
integrates these materials with optical devices that can focus the light into
extremely small spots, leading to drastically enhanced light emission efficiency
from these semiconductors. The educational activities include reaching out to
underrepresented groups as well as training the next generation of scientists
and engineers in materials growth, clean-room fabrication and optical
characterization, and through introducing new research-based educational
materials into the graduate curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides are semiconductor
materials that have gained considerable interest for optoelectronic and
valleytronic applications but are often found to suffer from environment
interactions and material defects that lead to low quantum efficiencies. This
project integrates two-dimensional heterostructures featuring ultralow-disorder
environments with low-group-velocity plasmonic band-edge modes in order to
investigate lasing and quantum coherence signatures of on-chip nanolasers with
highly-directional output. This project furthermore explores gate-tunable
exciton and trion gain and realizes deterministic positioned quantum emitters
coupled to plasmonic gap modes deeply in the Purcell regime. The research
approach combines material growth, 2D assembly, and nanofabrication to enable
transformative advances for the field of on-chip photonics and quantum
information science that aims to facilitate the outstanding optical properties
of "intrinsically-clean" 2D semiconductors. The integration with plasmonic
nanocavities offers exciting new inroads to directly tailor the light-matter
interaction in the Purcell and strong-coupling regime. Ultimately, this project
enables an efficiency and performance boost for on-chip nanolasers for the
integration in optical circuits, as well as for single-photon sources required
for quantum information science; these are all affected by the exciton
photophysics and significantly benefit by low-disorder environments, reduced
material defects in flux-grown material, and plasmonic coupling to directly
increase the quantum yield. The project also puts forth an outreach model that
focusses on building long-term relationships with the Columbia Secondary School
for Math, Science, and Engineering, a public, 6-12 school with a predominant
Hispanic and African-American student population. Outreach activities to under-
represented groups will leverage Stevens' institutional affiliations with
organizations such as the Women in Engineering Program and the National Action
Council for Minorities in Engineering (NACME).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.