* 1809086
* LSAMP BD:Howard University  Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Clarence Lee, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022
Strategic Plan, namely to foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation. The vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Howard University will be the host site for the
2018-2020 Washington Baltimore Hampton Road Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Bridge to the Doctorate Program. Drawing upon its historical
prowess of being the leading institution in the country that graduates African
Americans with advanced degrees, and the number one producer of minority
engineers and scientists. Howard University seeks to implement activities that
focus on mentoring, professional writing, and classroom teaching experiences,
which will support the development of competitive doctoral candidates
historically underrepresented in STEM. These activities will be enhanced by the
support of the Graduate School Office of Retention, and the Mentoring and
Support and Preparing Future Faculty programs. Additionally, relationships
between the extant Howard University NSF Alliances for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate project will be established and leveraged to further increase
the benefit to BD scholars. The BD project at Howard University will be an
important step in advancing the career awareness and preparation of
underrepresented minority students in STEM and their access to career
opportunities as they progress in their educational
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.