* 1809622
* GOALI: Design of chalcogenide glass fiber devices for mid-IR applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Shibin Jiang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2023
* USD 202,212.00

Many threatening aerosol particles have unique spectral fingerprints in the mid-
infrared (IR) region. Mid-IR sensors using this remarkable property are capable
of identification, classification, and localization of a wide class of
threatening, hazardous, and lethal particles, but methods for generating and
transmitting mid-IR light are expensive and inefficient. The emerging technology
of chalcogenide glass fiber devices promises to transform mid-IR sensor
technologies, with potential benefit for millions of Americans whose lives are
threatened by hazardous aerosol particles in their workplaces or from possible
chemical attacks by terrorists. Advances in generating and transmitting mid-IR
light have opened the possibility for inexpensive and efficient mid-IR sensors
that continuously monitor threatening aerosol particles and transmit alerts to
risk management and homeland security personnel in case of impending
emergencies. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project is to design chalcogenide fiber devices that will enable practical
realization of sensor technologies with a variety of important applications such
as biosensing, environmental monitoring, homeland security, and medical
diagnostics. This project will broaden collaborations between academic
researchers and the photonics industry. It will expand mentorship of
underrepresented students by the principal investigator. It will also help the
principal investigator to integrate research into university coursework and
improve outreach efforts to local K-12 school students to spark interest in
lasers/photonics and STEM fields. This project will help cultivate the research
environment at the Baylor Research and Innovation Collaborative (BRIC), which is
designed to foster interdisciplinary research between university faculty,
industry partners, and area organizations. The outcome of this project will be
disseminated through publications. The proposed research, undertaken in
collaboration with industry partners, will lead to further commercial
development of sensing components in the important mid-IR
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Our goal is to integrate
modeling and prototyping in collaboration with industrial partners to determine
the key factors that guide and support the development of reliable, cost-
effective, and energy-efficient mid-IR spectroscopy. The primary challenge is to
find the best fiber technology to generate and transmit mid-IR light sources in
terms of efficiency, cost, power consumption, bandwidth, bend resistance,
weight, and portability. To address this challenge, recent studies have
identified the need for increased understanding of generation of mid-IR laser
sources using chalcogenide glass fiber and delivery of high power mid-IR laser
sources using chalcogenide negative curvature fibers. The research team's unique
combination of expertise in optics and photonics, photonic crystal fibers,
chalcogenide glass fibers, and computer modeling will permit the researchers to
design efficient mid-IR chalcogenide glass fiber devices for a variety of
applications. This program will lead to the creation of new applications that
rely on high power lasers in the mid-IR region. The new negative curvature
fibers with a broad transmission window will also transform the hollow core
fibers to be used in devices with various potential applications. The comparison
between theoretical models and experimental data will identify limiting factors
in the devices and facilitate further improvements in experimental performance.
The expected intellectual significance of the proposed project will be to turn
the theory to practice for the devices in mid-IR applications including both
generation and delivery of mid-IR light sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.