* 1809762
* Structure, Response, and Flow of Dense Granular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Joshua Socolar, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2021
* USD 507,754.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand grain-scale
structures that form and evolve in granular materials as they are pushed or
pulled by applied strains such as shear or compression. Granular materials are
everywhere. They are used in a multitude of applications from handling ores,
coal and wheat to pellets used for forming many manufactured plastic products.
However, the basic understanding of the way that granular materials respond when
they are strained or when they flow is very limited. This lack of knowledge
causes significant problems for industry that must handle massive amounts of
granular materials. There are two reasons that make it difficult to understand
granular materials that are in dense fluid-like and solid-like states. The first
is the difficulty of looking inside these materials with tools that can probe
key quantities, such as the forces that act between grains. The second is that
particles carry forces in very unequal ways. Only a small subset of grains, the
so-called force chains, carry the majority of the forces that arise from applied
strains or stresses, and the rest are "spectators", bearing almost no force.
Understanding the formation and evolution of the force chains is the key
challenge for dense granular materials. This project addresses this challenge
through experiments using special photoelastic particles that allow precise
experimental determination of forces between particles, and hence throughout a
granular material. Photoelastic materials, including many plastics, transmit
polarized light differently when they are subject to forces. By making grains
from photoelastic materials, and placing everything between crossed polarizers,
the force chain particles become immediately obvious. With this technique, it is
possible to track how the force chains form and change, particularly when they
are sheared. Shear occurs when a layer of grains is pushed one way on its top,
and in the opposite way on the bottom. Shear is one of the most important ways
to change the state of a granular material, and creates long force chains. When
shear is continuous in time, the force chains form and break, leading to average
forces on the opposite sides of the sheared material. Recent work has shown that
the average forces for steady shear depend in a very predictable way on how fast
the shearing is carried out. The present project involves experiments to
understand how the evolution of the force chains, which change rapidly, lead to
the average forces reported earlier. The answers to how force chains form, and
how they respond to shear have the potential to answer fundamental questions
about the behavior of granular materials. The experimental work involves
students at all levels, from high school through Ph.D. candidates. Particular
care will be given to involve women and minorities in all aspects. The project
will involve outreach to industry, in terms of applications, and to elementary
and secondary school students through science demonstrations and visits. The PI
is also involved in a number of professional activities that benefit the field,
including being editor in chief of the journal Granular Matter, and organizing
parts of national and international meetings. All aspects of STEM, science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics are present in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two
key intertwined questions for dense granular materials through a series of novel
experiments. The experiments involve quasi-two dimensional photoelastic
particles, enabling powerful methods to measure forces and other quantities at
the particle scale. The key questions are: What are the microscopic processes
that lead to the evolution of granular force networks? and What are the physical
origins of stresses for steadily sheared granular materials, sometimes referred
to as rheology? Key question 1 concerns self-organization of grain scale
structures in response to applied protocols, for example stresses or strains.
Granular materials form complex networks, force chains, whose evolution,
starting at the microscale, is basic to the origin of jammed granular states and
granular dynamics in flowing systems. Collective granular response is both
surprising and poorly understood at microscopic scale. How can a stress-free
state become jammed under shear, with no change in area? What microscopic
processes enable memory effects under cyclic strains, or the Janssen effect?
What determines the lowest packing fraction for a random loose packing? Force
networks self-organize to create the observed responses, but little if anything
is known about the processes that generate the networks. Key question 2 is: What
are the physical origins of rheology? More precisely, what relates the effective
friction, which is the ratio of shear stress and pressure, to a dimensionless
shear rate, the inertial number, involving the pressure, density, and particle
size? Empirical "local" models describe relatively simple flows, but are
inadequate for more complex cases. Recent non-local models extend the local
ones. But, in the past, there are few experiments that probe inside materials,
determining local properties, to definitively test these models. Experiments in
this project use high speed imaging of photoelastic particles in several shear-
dominated flows to test these models to determine all properties of the shear
flow, including the full stress tensor. For both questions 1 and 2, the
experiments use a range of different quasi-2D photoelastic particles having
different friction, shape and stiffness. This project involves: 1) determining
local granular structures that self-organize in response to a range of
protocols, and 2) relating the evolution of these structures to large scale
response. The interconnection of macroscopic and specific collective microscopic
processes in dry granular materials, specifically to understand how force
networks form and evolve, has not been achieved previously to the principal
investigator's knowledge. This understanding has the potential to explain many
complex processes that are usually treated at a macroscopic phenomenological
level. For shear flows, this work provides experimental tests and comparisons to
recently proposed models of rheology. A key goal is understanding multi-scale
dynamical processes that underlie these models. This project involves continued
efforts to transfer knowledge derived from DMR- supported research to industrial
applications through connections to the International Fine Particle Research
Institute (IFPRI). In particular, flows in hoppers are an industrially relevant
flow involving rheology. The principal investigator and other project
participants regularly involve undergraduates and high school students in the
lab. The project involves outreach to students in elementary and secondary
schools through science activities, and demonstrations. The project involves lab
members at all stages of intellectual development, with special attention to the
recruitment of under-represented groups, in particular, women and minorities.
The PI is involved in a number of activities including editorship of Granular
Matter and conference organization that support research and foster
collaboration in the granular and complex fluids
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.