* 1809531
* Partition of Solute Atoms among Sublattices in Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Gary Collins, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 408,278.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many technological materials are
compounds with ordered crystal structures. Mechanical strength and other
properties have frequently been improved by dissolving solute atoms into the
compound. This project will explore how solute atoms partition between
sublattices of the host elements. The ways in which solutes partition may have
important and unrecognized influences over materials properties. However, the
partition, that is, the distribution of solute atoms on the two sublattices, has
been difficult to measure. An experimental hyperfine interaction method similar
to that used in magnetic resonance imaging will be employed that can measure the
distribution accurately. The principal goal is to determine how the precise
composition of the host compound, the amount of dissolved solute, and
temperature all affect the partition. Knowledge gained should help predict how
solutes partition for other combinations of host compounds and solutes and
thereby advance the general field of solutions in solids. Other impacts include
education and training of undergraduate and graduate students and dissemination
of research findings by all research participants to the broader public through
participation in scientific meetings, seminars, and publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to determine how solute atoms partition among different
sites in a compound. Considering an ordered binary compound AB2, do solute atoms
distribute on one or both sublattices? Investigations will be carried out to
determine how the partition varies with deviation from a stoichiometric A:B
composition ratio, with the mole fraction of solute, and with temperature. A
thematic hypothesis to be explored is that the sum of mole fractions of solutes
and antisite atoms is constrained by phase boundaries and the solubility. The
partition of solute atoms has heretofore been difficult to measure. Lattice
locations of In-probe atoms will be resolved using the nuclear method perturbed
angular correlation of gamma rays (PAC). Studies will focus on GdAl2. Phase
boundaries and solubility limits will be precisely measured. Solute partition
will also be studied in hosts for which the phase field extends to both sides of
the stoichiometric composition, leading to differing types of structural point
defects. Properties of many functional and structural materials are improved by
addition of 1 at.% of solute. The ways in which solutes are partitioned may have
important influences over material properties that have not been recognized up
until now. The project is expected to comprehensively advance understanding of
solute partition. Broader impacts include advanced education and training of
students in solid-state physics, nuclear laboratory methods, and data analysis.
Research findings are to be disseminated by all research participants to the
broader public through participation in local and national scientific meetings,
seminars, and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.