* 1809637
* Exploiting Luminescence Emissions of Solar Cells for Internet-of-Things Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Saeed Mohammadi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, a new type of electronic device that uses light and solar cells
to communicate wirelessly will be developed. An interesting fact about solar
cells is that the same physical principle that allows solar cells to absorb
photons also allows them to emit photons when excited by light or electricity.
This phenomenon is known as luminescence. For most solar cells, this
bidirectional process is not symmetric. That is, photon absorption is more
efficient than photon emission. This is the case for silicon solar cells. There
are other materials, however, such as Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) that are efficient
at both absorbing and emitting photons. In this project the light emitted by
GaAs solar cells will be modulated to transmit information wirelessly. Devices
that use this approach will be able to use their solar cells as optical antennas
that transmit and receive information optically while capturing energy from
their environment to power themselves. The proposed technology will provide a
new means of communication for devices connected to the Internet-of-Things
(IoT). The IoT extends the Internet to everyday objects in a seamless manner
with the goal of enhancing our lives. For instance, the proposed devices can be
used in smart labels to monitor the temperature of perishable goods as they move
through the supply chain. They can also be used in smart homes and smart
factories to connect appliances and tools to the IoT. Other applications include
environmental and agricultural monitoring. This project will advance the field
of electronics and communications by providing a new class of wireless devices.
This project will also enhance the education of American college and pre-college
students by involving them in research activities to stimulate their interests
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to take advantage
of the luminescence emissions of GaAs solar cells to create a new type of
wireless device that transmits information optically. Previously, photo-
luminescence and electro-luminescence emissions were employed to characterize
defects and materials parameters of solar cells. Here, luminescence emissions
are exploited for wireless communications by modulating their intensities.
Hence, this project has the potential to start a new area of research in optical
communications in which light is used to convey energy and information to and
from passive devices. Given that these devices will employ a new approach to the
transmission of information, the project will address several fundamental
questions and technical challenges to make the proposed concept viable. In
particular, this project will address the following questions: 1) how fast and
how far can information be transmitted using modulated luminescence emissions
from high-efficiency solar cells 2) what is the best scheme for luminescence
modulation 3) what circuit architectures and implementations will yield the
lowest power consumption These questions will be studied and answered through
the following research tasks: 1) characterizing solar cells as transmitters and
receivers of information; 2) selecting suitable modulation schemes; 3)
developing configurable hardware platform to validate selected luminescence
modulation schemes; 4) developing a low-power platform to demonstrate self-
powered operation of the proposed devices; 5) testing the hardware platforms.
The proposed research will result in a new wireless technology for IoT
applications. Advantages of this technology over radio-frequency wireless
devices include reduced electromagnetic interference and avoidance of heavily-
used and congested radio frequency spectrum. Other advantages include the
ability of precise transmitter localization using camera-based receivers and the
possibility to work underwater. As such, the proposed technology has the
potential for creating new commercial applications and business
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.