* 1809194
* Energy Efficiency in Computing Logical Operations: Fundamental Limits with and Without Feedback
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The exponential increase in the ability to compute and store massive amount of
data is fueling transformative changes in the human condition. It has led to a
highly connected world with information being accessible at remote parts of the
world. The current focus on interconnection of infrastructural systems such as
the, power grid, financial markets, health care systems, and the Internet of
Things (IoT), all bear a direct relationship to the advances in the integrated
chips, where the complexity and the number of components has doubled almost
every two years, following the Moore's law. Less known is the fact that the
energy dissipation per computation has outpaced Moore's law which is at the
heart of the mobile computation revolution, enabling, small form-factor devices
packed with high computational capabilities that include, light laptops,
tablets, and cell-phones. With such exponential increases, it is inevitable that
limits of current approaches and practices for computation and memory related
technologies are reached. This proposal addresses the basic operations of
computation and memory with respect to the fundamental limits on the energy
dissipation needed to perform the operations. It also studies the energy cost
associated with measurement and feedback actions for performing computing and
memory management operations. It provides proof of concept experiments and
methods to demonstrate realizability of the computational and memory related
operations with energetics tens of order smaller than the current practices. The
associated analysis of fundamental primitives of computational operations and
the proof of concept experiments will guide realizations of future energy
efficient computational platforms and will continue the remarkable increase in
speed and efficiencies with which computations are
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is on the
fundamental limits on the energetics of computations and memory. The project
investigates primitives of computational operations both analytically and
experimentally. It uses the abstraction of the state of a memory bit via the
position of a particle in a double well potential in a thermal bath. Transfer of
particle across the wells in a potential landscape is used to realize AND, NOT
and erasure operations. Under the project goals, bounds on the minimum
energetics of transferring the state of the particle in the double well
potential will be analytically derived. Here, key aspect of the approach is to
estimate the change in entropy from the initial to the final state, and,
relating the change in entropy to the energy associated with the transfer of
state. The transfer of state can be accomplished with or without measuring the
state of the particle in the double well potential; here, the effect of feedback
where the measurement guides the protocol for transferring the state will be
understood and analyzed. The theoretical foundations that link computations,
statistical mechanics, and feedback will be accompanied by a versatile
experimental platform. Double-well potentials will be realized by controlling
optical fields which have the scale of energetics suited for the study. The
experimental protocols will accommodate the need for different speeds of
transferring the state; important to emulate quasi-static processes. Accurate
and precise measurements of the position of the particle will be used for the
estimation of the energy required in moving the particle across wells. The
measurement protocols will be precisely characterized that will enable the study
of closed-loop strategies that alter the transfer protocol based on
measurements. The project will provide both analytics and proof-of-concept
experimental realizations of basic primitives of computations with orders in
magnitude smaller energy footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.