* 1809120
* Collaborative Research: Carrier Dispersion and Nontrivial Topological Phases in Ultra-Low Bandgap Metamorphic InAsSb Ordered Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Zhigang Jiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

Semiconductors suitable for the development of infrared opto-electronic devices
attract attention of physicists and engineers for many years. Metamorphic
molecular beam epitaxy, a novel technology for material development, produces
high quality compounds with precise control of their composition (indium,
arsenic, aluminum and antimony) over a wide range of atomic concentrations. This
ability allows deep studies of the "quantum" properties of important narrow-band
semiconductors that are protected against material imperfections. These
properties may have profound implication for the performance of a variety of
devices including quantum computers. In this project the interdisciplinary
research team from Stony Brook University and Georgia Institute of Technology
plans to use novel materials for experimental demonstration of intriguing
features of quantum physics. The efforts combine development of new materials
and study of their physical properties and energy spectra by a variety of
advanced experimental techniques. The project also provides for synergetic
training of graduate students in physics, material science, and engineering,
creating research opportunities for undergraduate students. The K-12 education
component aims at cultivating an early-stage awareness of using new materials
and technologies to improve the device performance without compromising the
quality of human life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to carry out
epitaxial growth of high-quality indium arsenide antimonide (InAsSb) alloys with
controllable nanoscale ordering and to investigate the manifestations of the new
topologically nontrivial phases in these materials. The material growth is based
on a recently developed virtual substrate approach, which lifts the constraint
from the substrate lattice constant. The physical properties of the InAsSb
ordered alloys can then be controlled to an exceptional degree, via varying the
lattice constant, the strain, the alloy composition, and the composition
modulation period. With these new materials, the research team intends to answer
the following fundamental questions. (1) Can nontrivial topological phases be
realized and observed in metamorphic InAsSb alloys with nanoscale ordering and
tunable bandgap? (2) Can the InAsSb ordered alloys be a new platform for
demonstration of Majorana zero mode? These topics are of great fundamental and
technological interest, particularly for the solid-state realization of
topological quantum computing. The technical approaches of the project include
band structure calculation, advanced epitaxial growth, and cutting-edge
characterization methods. The latter features transmission electron microscopy,
high-resolution x-ray diffraction, reciprocal space mapping, infrared
spectroscopy in high magnetic fields, and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in the project
have unique opportunities to master these methods and engage in all stages of
the material development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.