* 1809436
* Development of Flexible Microsystems for Bacterial Biofilm Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Bacterial biofilms, a major cause of infection and environmental biofouling, are
difficult to remove and contribute to the rapid increase in antibiotic-resistant
bacterial strains. They often induce catastrophic consequences in an array of
inaccessible environments with complex curved geometries, ultimately leading to
persistent infections, implant failure, and systemic contamination. There is
demand for viable methods to detect, prevent, and remove biofilms in locales
including urinary catheters, prosthetic implants, and water systems, where
currently effective methods do not exist to detect and eradicate biofilms.
Advances in flexible device technology yield opportunities for feedback-driven
biofilm management systems for operation in these vulnerable areas. The
objective is to develop a paradigm enabling dynamic flexible sensor microsystems
for detecting, monitoring, and inhibiting biofilms on multidimensional surfaces,
in particular the cylindrical environment of a urinary catheter. The surface
bacterial species, fluid conditions, and geometry are the basis for this
approach, creating a guide for identifying methods of biofilm detection and
prevention on demand. Successful monitoring and removal of biofilm will have a
dramatic impact, improving quality of life for people of all demographics. These
systems have the potential to reduce the spread of antibiotic-resistant and
healthcare-acquired infections, and are particularly attractive for addressing
these challenges in resource-poor regions. Moreover, the potential for low-cost
manufacturing of these devices will enable their inclusion by high school
teachers into laboratory-based STEM curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
systematically develop this methodology, the objective of this proposal is
divided into three tasks: 1) Optimization of microsystems for sensing and
inhibiting biofilms in complex, 3D environments: Thin film electrodes will be
selected as a simple and sensitive electrochemical impedance sensor, tested in a
microfluidic system as a sensor and biofilm inhibitor via the bioelectric
effect. Furthermore, the device will be optimized for biofilm detection via a
computational model. The model will examine changes in the electric field of the
sensor for the relevant geometry. 2) Manufacturing of integrated flexible
devices for biofilms: appropriate materials and fabrication processes are
determined by specific geometric and environmental requirements of each
application, notably flexible substrates, such as polyimide, with gold as an
inert electrode material. The flexible substrates will enable folding and
scaling of the device as required to interface with the vulnerable complex
curved surface. 3) Device testing using environmental model with data
transmission and feedback control: A urinary catheter will serve as a test case.
This will be developed considering the unique geometric, bacterial, and fluidic
conditions. 3D-printed structures precisely recreate geometry interactions with
biofilm, where sensor response and bioelectric treatment will be evaluated
simultaneously. A wireless controlled (using Bluetooth or Wifi) electronic
system will be developed to operate the impedance sensor and control the biofilm
removal using the electrodes will be developed. Feedback-driven dynamic biofilm
control will be developed, considering threshold impedance sensing values
corresponding to biofilm biomass. The system will introduce a bioelectric effect
treatment based on impedance sensor data indicating the formation of a biofilm
in real-time. This project addresses the challenge of preventing, identifying,
and removing biofilms on a complex surface. An interdisciplinary approach
combining applied microbiology and engineering disciplines is required to
overcome these problems. Complex interactions between flexible sensors,
bacterial biofilms, and bioelectric treatment will be explored. Electrical
reduction of biofilm enables remote programmability in vulnerable systems. The
impact on system design of key parameters including bacterial species, surface
geometry, and fluidic conditions will be clearly enumerated. The fundamental
methodology developed here will enable further research to address biofilm
monitoring and removal in areas of dire need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.