* 1809073
* Three-Dimensional Simulations of Core-Collapse Supernovae
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Adam Burrows, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2020
* USD 8,100.00

Core-collapse supernovae dramatically announce the death of massive stars and
the birth of neutron stars. These supernovae occur when the iron core of a
massive star collapses to a neutron star. Releasing its gravitational binding
energy in a violent explosion as neutrinos, the resulting neutron star, for a
few seconds, outshines the rest of the observable universe. Viewed as a nuclear
physics laboratory, core-collapse supernovae produce the highest densities of
matter and energy in the modern universe. However, the precise mechanism of this
explosion has not been unambiguously pinned down and this fifty-year old
conundrum is one of the central remaining unsolved problems in theoretical
astrophysics. Supernova theory is an amalgam of much of physics, and represents
one of the most complex computational problems of modern science.
Supercomputers, such as Blue Waters, are essential to make progress in
simulating and understanding the evolution of the supernova event and neutron
star birth. A solution to the core-collapse supernova problem would benefit
ongoing efforts of observers and instrument designers in the U.S. and around the
world engaged in projects to determine the origin of the elements, measure
gravitational waves (LIGO), and other important physics
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct three-dimensional
radiation/hydrodynamic simulations of core-collapse supernovae with the goal of
constraining, and ultimately determining, the mechanism of explosion. During
this explosion process, a combination of high-density nuclear physics, multi-
dimensional hydrodynamics, radiation transport, and neutrino physics determines
whether and how the star explodes. The project will use the newly developed and
tested code FORNAX incorporating state-of-the-art microphysics and
methodologies, with excellent scalability to beyond 100,000 cores per tasks.
Various observational diagnostics, such as neutrino and gravitational-wave
signatures and residual neutron star masses and kicks, will be derived for all
models calculated. Supernova explosions and their products are central to the
origin of the elements, the birth of pulsars and black holes, and the dynamics
of galaxies and the interstellar medium, and a fundamental theoretical
understanding of such explosions will inform the interpretation of data derived
from, among other platforms, NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory, the Hubble Space
Telescope, Swift, NuStar, and the upcoming James Webb Space
Telescope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.