* 1809319
* Ultra-Low Noise Mechanical Frequency-Divided MEMS-Based Oscillator
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Clark Nguyen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This research program aims to harness new capabilities in miniature mechanics
that enable portable personal radar with resolution commensurate with much
larger radars used on demanding platforms, such as planes, boats, and tracking
systems. Here, because the resolution of any radar depends heavily on the
stability of its interrogating signal, the quality of the internal oscillator
that generates this signal is among the most important determinants of radar
performance. It is for this reason that the most capable radars use frequency
signal generators based on 'Poseidon' oscillators that derive their stability
from bulky (and expensive) sapphire-loaded cavity resonators. However, the size
and cost of this approach restricts it to use in large non-portable
applications. The research herein breaks this paradigm by recognizing that an
oscillator referenced to an ensemble of tiny mechanically resonant structures
constructed in diamond material can potentially equal and perhaps outperform a
Poseidon oscillator, all in a substantially smaller form factor. Indeed, sizes
small enough to enable high-resolution personal radar might be within reach, and
this could enable a host of new personal capabilities, including ranging, remote
location services, and local area sensing to identify opportunities, e.g., sales
on interesting items, favorite foods, etc., as one walks past
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research specifically explores parametric
mechanical frequency division using micromechanical resonators and
sub-20-nanometer electrode-to-resonator gaps that together propel the short-term
stability and figure-of-merit of oscillators towards that of the best radar
oscillators, but in substantially smaller size. Here, tiny electrode-to-
resonator gaps enabled by advances in nanofabrication technology increase the
electromechanical coupling of capacitive-gap transduced micromechanical
resonators to ranges that support gigaHertz oscillators, all while retaining
their record-setting quality factors, both of which drive down phase noise and
power consumption. Sub-20-nanometer gaps also permit wider frequency tuning, as
well as the use of parametric excitation at higher resonance frequencies, which
in turn enables mechanical approaches to reducing phase noise further via a
combination of frequency division and close-to-carrier filtering, all with
nearly no power penalty. While gap reduction enables unprecedented
micromechanical resonator and oscillator performance, it also elucidates
fundamental physical limitations expected to manifest more prominently at the
nano-scale, including nonlinear noise multiplication, undue injection locking,
Casimir forces, enhanced (unwanted) acceleration sensitivity, and less
resilience against finite fabrication tolerances and stress. While possibly
detrimental to performance, these physical limitations open fertile ground for
scientific study. Indeed, lessons learned by modeling the influence of
nonlinearity on oscillator limiting and phase noise are likely key to propelling
micromechanical oscillators into the stated higher end
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.