* 1809890
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Stresses in Shear Thickening Suspensions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Urbach, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2023
* USD 496,141.00

Dense suspensions, comprised of a large quantity of solid particles suspended in
a fluid, exhibit a wide range of surprising mechanical behavior, including a
dramatic increase in viscosity under increasing flow rates. The viscosity can
increase by a factor of a hundred or more, an effect that has important
implications for a variety of industrial applications and natural processes, but
is still not well understood on a fundamental level. In this project the
researchers employ a new measurement technique to directly measure the forces at
the boundary of flowing suspensions during the thickening process. These
measurements are essential to identify the factors that control the thickening
transition, and to determine how to control the transition by modifying the
properties of the suspended particles. This work supports the development of
predictive models that can significantly advance materials design and process
engineering for a wide range of applications. The project also supports a pilot
activity to involve a materials science graduate student in an interdisciplinary
group project in science policy, and outreach to economically disadvantaged high
school students through hands-on soft materials modules for use in the
Georgetown University College Immersion Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mechanical response of dense suspensions exhibits a wide range of nonlinear
phenomena including a dramatic increase in the viscosity with increasing shear
stress or strain rate. The viscosity can increase by several orders of
magnitude, an effect that has important implications for a variety of industrial
applications and natural processes, but is still not well understood on a
fundamental level. This project employs a novel technique, Boundary Stress
Microscopy, developed by the PIs to directly measure with high spatial and
temporal resolution the stresses at the boundary of sheared suspensions, to
elucidate the nature of the shear thickening transition and its dependence on
material and system properties. Measurements of boundary stresses during shear
thickening have revealed that the thickening is due to dramatic, dynamic
heterogeneities indicating a localized discontinuous transition to a high
viscosity state. This project leverages those insights to (a) identify the
factors that control the nucleation, growth, evolution, and decay of the high
viscosity phase; (b) quantify the effect of the dynamic high boundary stresses
on the flow field of the suspension; (c) relate these results to direct
measurement of interparticle forces at the nanoscale; (d) employ oscillatory
shear to probe the strain amplitudes and timescales associated with the
transition to the high viscosity phase; (e) identify the mechanisms responsible
for determining the characteristic size of the heterogeneous stresses.
Collectively, these measurements support the development of continuum theories
that can connect particle and fluid interactions at the microscale to
macroscopic rheology by accurately describing the mesoscale spatiotemporal
dynamics, thereby significantly advancing materials design and process
engineering for a wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.