* 1809707
* Cavity-Electro-Optomechanical Circuits with Broken Time-Reversal Symmetry
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Kejie Fang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,114.00

Light generally travels in two-way streets - a forward propagating light is
accompanied by a backward propagating light if it undergoes reflection. To
eliminate the backward propagating cousin requires time-reversal symmetry
breaking of light. This is challenging because photons - the quanta of light- do
not carry charge and thus do not interact with magnetic fields which are the
force behind time-reversal symmetry breaking of charged particles, such as
electrons. Reflection-free light propagation is important to optical information
communications, in particular for stabilizing laser frequencies and mitigating
signal decay. In a miniaturized setting, today's integrated photonic microchips
use low-power and broadband optical elements to perform information processing
and communication unavailable with conventional electronic counterparts. Just
like an optical network, the proper functioning of the photonic microchips also
benefits from reflection-eliminating devices. The chip-scale realization of
these devices, so called optical isolators, remains an outstanding challenge. It
is known that time-reversal symmetry of light can be broken by inducing time-
modulation of media's refractive index. An effective means of such time-
modulation can be achieved by exciting acoustic waves in the optical media which
perturb local electric polarization density. In this context, this program will
explore time-reversal symmetry breaking induced by the interaction between light
and mechanical motion, and study non-reciprocal light propagation and associated
new physics in artificial optomechanical structures realized on microchips. The
potential broader impact of this work lies primarily in the development of new
devices and methodologies for integrated photonic technologies, in the education
of students in this important field through hands-on research and new courses,
and in the improvement of societal benefits with new generations of
optoelectronic products.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program aims at developing an
innovative family of integrated photonic circuits with broken time-reversal
symmetry, enabled by radiation pressure force in coupled electro-optomechanical
resonators. Cavity-optomechanical systems, involving the coupling of light
intensity to mechanical motion via radiation pressure at wavelength scale,
create the requisite large optical nonlinearities for explicitly time-reversal
symmetry breaking. The use of phase-correlated parametric optical pumps for
controlling individual cavities highlights the approach of programmable
synthetic fields, which leads to optical and acoustic nonreciprocity, and may
even reveal topological wave interference in large-scale optomechanical
structures. Piezoelectric driving of steady state mechanical motion, for
inducing photonic transition in multimode optomechanical cavities as another
means to break time-reversal symmetry, can be used to boost the bandwidth of
cavity-electro-optomechanical circuits beyond the mechanical damping rate. Most
prominent of this work will be studying nonreciprocal photon-phonon interactions
in electro-optomechanical circuits, and realizing important photonic device
applications including non-magnetic circulators and robust delay lines. New
physics bearing topological properties in optomechanical crystals driven by
mechanical motion will also be investigated. The intellectual merit of this
proposal lies primarily in the development of a new paradigm of nanophotonic
network architecture that will unlock new lines of research, from optical NEMS
to topological optomechanics, and enable transformative technologies for
microwave photonics, communications, and quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.