* 1809753
* Polymer Semiconductor Focal Volume Arrays for Advanced Multidimensional Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Escuti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 417,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Consumer digital cameras form an image using inorganic
materials like silicon. These materials are attractive as they are durable,
efficient, and low cost. However, they only detect light in a single layer.
Multi-layer structures offer significant advantages in terms of improved color
reproduction, but at increased cost and reduced image resolution. In this
project, we will investigate new multi-layer cameras that can offer improved
color reproduction without sacrificing image resolution. The multi-layer camera
concept will also be studied for capturing more than the three colors of a
typical camera (red, green, and blue). This will be done by using holographic
lenses and by manipulating the polarization of light as it passes through the
different layers. Finally, the multi-layer detector scheme will be used to
improve so called "light field" imaging, in which a single camera lens can be
made to capture depth information, enabling improved "digital refocusing"
capabilities. Both graduate and undergraduate student researchers will be
involved in this research. The project will also facilitate outreach activities
to local high school students and online tutorials will be disseminated to
encourage participation from avid hobbyists and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
the first three-dimensional (3D) volumetric imaging array by leveraging the
unique advantages offered by emerging organic photovoltaic detectors. These new
detector-based degrees of freedom will permit an extra dimension onto which
information can be modulated, enabling more compact, robust, and capable optical
imaging sensors and systems. Organic semiconductors are advantageous to realize
this concept due to their ability to tune spectral response, polarization
sensitivity, and transmittance, enabling detector placement arbitrarily within a
lens system's focal volume. These new degrees of freedom will be used to
investigate new detector capabilities, optical systems, and image processing
algorithms. The objectives of this proposal are to: (1) Establish an optical
model of both 2D and 3D polarization sensitive organic photodetector (P-OPD)
arrays; (2) Design and fabricate proof of concept 2D and 3D P-OPD arrays and
readout circuitry; (3) Create algorithms for image reconstruction and
calibration; (4) Leverage the model to optimize spectral- and polarimetric-
imaging array using birefringent filtering techniques; and (5) Incorporate
methods to create multi-layer volumetric 3D P-OPD arrays with liquid crystal
layers. Merit is found in (1) The optimization strategies and algorithms needed
to design 3D volumetric arrays; (2) Use of polarized light for detector-level
spectral sensitivity; (3) Establishing new calibration algorithms and image
reconstruction techniques; and (4) Quantifying the multiplexing trade space that
can be achieved with these 3D arrays, given conventional and emerging optical
devices and lens systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.