* 1809398
* Quantifying the Coarsening Kinetics of Supported Metal Nanoparticles Using Time-resolved Electron Microscopy, Data Analytics and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Eric Stach, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 532,587.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallic nanoparticles find
important applications in a variety of industries, most notably as catalysts in
the chemical industry where they are used for the creation of fuels and related
chemical byproducts. This is because their small size exposes many atoms on
their surface: these surface atoms are the ones that help to improve their
reactivity. However, their ability to function effectively for long periods is
related to their ability to maintain this small size, even when being exposed to
high temperatures and harsh environments that would normally lead to particle
growth. This study will clarify the fundamental processes by which unwanted
nanoparticle growth occurs by directly observing these processes using advanced
microscopies, measuring the changes that occur in both individual particles and
particle ensembles, and using computational modeling to clarify what processes
are most responsible for particle growth. The studies will provide fundamental
knowledge that can be used to increase the long-term performance of catalytic
materials, leading to reduced energy cost and greater industrial yields. The
project will include workforce preparation for the student involved via exposure
to forefront materials characterization efforts, a deep interaction between
experiment and theory, utilization of advanced data analytics approaches and
visits to leading laboratories at IBM T.J. Watson Research Center and Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL). The Summer Undergraduate Laboratory Internship (SULI)
program and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LS-AMP) at
BNL will bring in students from the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras to
participate in data analytics code development, as well the development of
software for microscope image analysis that will be disseminated to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of advanced transmission electron
microscopy methods will be used to investigate the role of surface stress and
interparticle diffusional interactions in nanoparticle coarsening, to quantify
the interplay between evaporation, coarsening and ripening in supported
nanoparticles systems, and to investigate the effects of substrate modification
and relative levels of nanoparticle oxidation and reduction on these phenomena.
The work will exploit high-frame rate image acquisition and semi-automated data
analysis routines to produce accurate quantitative data from images. This data
will be used in a self-consistent fashion to both provide inputs to and
corroborate outcomes from computational simulations. The resulting studies will
allow, quantitative understanding of how nanoscale processes affect coarsening
and ripening and will suggest strategies to mitigate these process in supported
metallic nanostructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.