* 1809756
* New forms of silicon with enhanced optoelectronic properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Timothy Strobel, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 350,059.00

Nontechnical description: Unlike metals that freely conduct electricity,
semiconductors require energy input to promote electrons into conducting states.
The minimum input energy, known as the band gap, is either direct or indirect
depending on the specific crystalline structure. Silicon, which is essential for
the vast majority of modern electronics and solar energy devices, possesses an
indirect band gap meaning that light absorption and emission are feeble
processes. In contrast, direct band gap materials are effective absorbers and
emitters of light. Recent theoretical calculations indicate energetic
feasibility for numerous forms of crystalline silicon with direct band gaps, but
experimental synthesis pathways are not available. This research team aims to
create entirely new forms of crystalline silicon that possess direct band gaps
in order to improve optoelectronic properties that impact a range of
technologies including solid-state detectors, optical communication and energy
conversion devices. Research is focused on novel synthetic pathways that combine
high- and low-pressure experiments in order to achieve access to kinetically-
stabilized states. More generally, the development of novel synthesis
methodologies broadly affects metastable materials beyond silicon. This research
project occurs within an educational environment that emphasizes the career
development of students and postdoctoral scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project utilizes a new
approach for metastable materials synthesis through a combined high-pressure /
ambient-pressure hybrid method. Numerous metastable silicon allotropes with
enhanced optoelectronic properties are predicted to exist within 30 kJ/mol of
the ground state, but effective synthesis pathways are lacking. By initiating
ambient-pressure chemical synthesis from precursors formed under high-pressure
conditions, entirely new synthesis pathways are possible due to the high-energy
state of the recovered precursor that is metastable at ambient conditions. This
effort explores the depth of realizable materials in silicon and probes the
relationships between metastable allotropes and optoelectronic properties in
order to create entirely new metastable crystalline allotropes that possess
direct or quasidirect band gaps. The research contributes to the longstanding
limitations associated with the indirect band gap of the cubic diamond
structure. Experiments are conducted at high-pressure conditions in order to
optimize single-crystalline growth and at low-pressure conditions to optimize
precursor transformations. The intrinsic optical and electronic transport
properties of novel silicon allotropes are established experimentally, and the
library of potential high-pressure precursor materials is supported by
calculations including density functional theory-based structure searching. The
overall goal of the project is to produce and characterize new silicon phases
exhibiting improved optical activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.