* 1809454
* Massively Scalable Computational Methods for Power System Scheduling
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Ali Davoudi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2023
* USD 325,000.00

This project develops optimization algorithms with unprecedented scalability for
longstanding and computationally-hard problems faced by power system operators
on a daily basis. We tackle the comprehensive problem of optimizing the schedule
of power generating units, power flows, and the topology of large-scale
transmission networks in the presence of uncertainties. This short-term planning
problem can be computationally prohibitive due to inherent power flow
nonlinearities and the presence of binary variables, representing the status of
each generating unit and transmission line. While commonly used off-the-shelf
solvers cannot approach this problem for power systems of significant size, our
proposed framework is capable of finding solutions within small gaps from global
optimality. We rely on convex algebraic geometry to solve holistic power system
optimization problems with a massive number of binary variables and nonlinear
constraints. An integral feature of this research is its innate parallelism to
be exploited with high-performance computing platforms, particularly using
graphical processing units, and achieve the desired scale, order, and speed. The
PIs have award-winning, published track records in optimization and control of
power and energy systems, and their respective laboratories will be well-
equipped with high-performance computational capabilities for the algorithms
developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-performance
algorithms to clear the electricity market, plan operation, and assess
operational security can potentially save billions of dollars, annually.
Contemporary insights from optimization theory, scientific computing, and power
systems will enable aggressive industry-wide adaptation of modern tools for more
reliable, secure, and efficient electric power grids. The PIs distinct yet
complimentary backgrounds in optimization theory and energy systems can bridge
the pedagogical gap across fields to address the imminent workforce shortage in
the power and energy sector. Comprehensive pedagogical activities include
development of a new graduate-level course, enhancing the content of existing
curriculum, boarder dissemination to K-12 students and high-school teachers, and
mentorship for under-represented minority students at the University of Texas at
Arlington that is a Hispanic-Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.