* 1809536
* Tail-Free Discotic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Brett Ellman, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,282.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are compounds that
display "phases" (states of matter) that are more ordered than liquids, but less
ordered than crystalline arrangements. LCs are the basis of a huge display
industry as well as potential game changers as semiconductors, enabling cheap
flexible electronics, organic photovoltaics, and sensors. This project, funded
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, breaks a paradigm in liquid crystal (LC) molecular design and
drives a transformation in the understanding and use of these important
materials. Liquid crystal molecules, and especially discotic (disc-like) LCs,
are nearly always built of a rigid central "core" surrounded by long, flexible
"tails", which constantly change shape. These highly dynamic tails represent a
challenge to computer modeling of LCs and also often compromise conduction in LC
semiconductors. How can society better reap the benefits of materials like LC
semiconductors while avoiding the limitations imposed by tails? A new light-
driven synthesis offers a way out of this conundrum, revealing multiple families
of tail-free discotic LCs based on simple building blocks with a few added
fluorine atoms. Besides offering LCs of technological interest, these materials
promise to shine light on a difficult question: Why do some molecules form LCs
while other closely related ones do not? To answer this question and gain
insights into the design and synthesis of new semiconductors, the researchers
tightly couple experiment and theory. Using computational modeling of the
molecules to understand the details of their interaction with each other, new
chemical syntheses and measurements of structural and electronic properties the
researchers identify new tail-free LCs and increase the understanding of what
drives liquid crystallinity in these fascinating systems. Additionally, this
project supports a public outreach project, "What?s in the Box?", in which
everyday electronics will be deconstructed in a guided, fun atmosphere. Through
this activity the public gets an opportunity to better understand everyday
electronic technology, and children might become more interested in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of liquid crystals (LCs) in the
display industry is well known, and discotic LCs are promising organic
semiconductors. Liquid crystals, and especially discotic LCs, are nearly always
comprised of a rigid core surrounded by flexible, highly dynamic, often
saturated tails. Families of discotic LCs are usually found empirically, with
limited theoretical guidance, partly due to the complexity of modeling the
tails. Recent work on fluorinated triphenylene and other fused-ring aromatics
demonstrates that there are multiple families of tail-free discotic LCs
(TFDLCs). These new materials promise to illuminate a difficult question: Why do
some molecules form LCs while other closely related ones do not? TFDLCs are
structurally rigid, simple model systems much closer to idealized models of LCs
than conventional discotic LCs with tails. In this project, funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research at
NSF, TFDLCs' small size and rigidity are leveraged to perform quantum ab-initio
calculations of intermolecular potentials and enable realistic simulations to
discover what forces drive liquid crystallinity. These simulations are built on
literature methods, enabling efficient Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics for
real molecules including effects of anisotropic potentials and steric
interactions. Experimentally, all of TFLDCs are comprehensively characterized,
including time-of-flight charge transport and x-ray diffraction in the crystal
and discotic phases. The researchers correlate experimental results with the
simulations. Design principles, resulting from this work are expected to lead to
new classes of organic semiconductors to probe the role that disorder plays in
transport, the use of fluorination to enhance electron mobility, and the effects
of dimensionality due to strong intercolumn interactions in the absence of
tails. Larger TFDLCs are studied to explore potential high mobility discotic
semiconductors to enhance device design and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.