* 1809997
* On-chip Metasurface Polarimeter Array for full Stokes Polarization Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Yu Yao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2021
* USD 329,978.00

It is no exaggeration to say that the development of imaging sensors has made
profound impact on our life, from a smartphone camera to the most advanced
medical imaging equipment, and even to space exploration. Besides its intensity
and color, light is also characterized by its polarization state that can be
affected by emission, scattering or transmission of an object. Detecting light
polarization has been proven to be essential for various applications such as
biomedical diagnostics, remote sensing, target detection and astronomy. Yet,
despite the fact that the sensitivity, speed, pixel density and color range of
image sensors have been continuously improved, the capability of full-
polarization imaging, hasn't been realized on monolithically integrated sensors.
This project is to develop a chip-integrated imaging sensor array, or in another
word, polarimetric imaging array, to detect not only light intensity and color
but also the complete polarization state of light. Such a compact system can be
further incorporated into many portable systems for clinic diagnostics, real
time environmental monitoring network, or a smartphone polarimeter for field
study and research. By integrating research and education, the project is aimed
to inspire and cultivate the next-generation of scientists and engineers in
nanophotonics and nanotechnology to address grand challenges in health,
security, environmental issues and space exploration. In particular, the
proposal aims to promote participation in science and engineering (esp. under-
represented groups) by engaging undergraduate students in research, showcasing
research to K-12 students through outreach and a summer enrichment program.
&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this project is to investigate the
feasibility of integrating artificially engineered planar optics to realize on-
chip polarimetric imaging sensor array. Conventional polarimetric sensing and
imaging systems are very bulky and require moving parts, which makes it
difficult for minimization. Moreover, these systems also suffer from reduced
frame rate and inaccuracy of extracted polarization information due to motion in
the scene. Monolithic integrated polarimetric imaging systems have been
extensively studied; however, these polarimetric imaging systems have various
limitations, such as large pixel size, degradation in imaging quality, lack of
compatibility with silicon technology and poor accuracy. The proposed technology
fully exploits the cutting-edge development in nanophotonics and nanofabrication
to provide significantly improved solutions for on-chip polarimetric sensing and
imaging applications. All the detection elements are realized based on
subwavelength-thick structures directly integrated onto silicon photodetectors.
The polarization extinction ratios and transmission efficiency are 30 and
&gt;40% in the visible range for all polarization detection elements,
respectively. The fabrication process developed in this project is compatible
with CMOS technology, and well tolerates a lateral alignment error as large as
tens of nanometers. All these detection elements can be made down to
submicrometer size while still maintaining reasonably good performance, feasible
for large-scale inexpensive CMOS production. The project will lead to the
realization of on-chip polarimetric imaging sensor arrays with high sensitivity
and accuracy. Moreover, the research will enable an in-depth understanding of
the fundamental device physics and fabrication techniques involved in
integrating metasurface flat optics on chip, which is essential for realizing
ultra-compact optical system with other unique properties and unprecedented
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.