* 1809470
* Bioarchaeological and Forensic Applications of Oxygen and Strontium Isoscape Methods
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Kelly Knudson, Scaffidi                Cassandra      K
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kelly Knudson
at Arizona State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how spatial variation in stable and
radiogenic isotopes throughout complex hydrological systems can be used to "geo-
locate" or assign human or animal individuals of unknown geographic origin to
specific places of origin along an isotopic landscape or "isoscape" Mammalian
tissues record the signature of oxygen and strontium isotopes from the food,
water, and air consumed during the period of development. Comparing oxygen and
strontium tissue values enables the identification of outlier individuals, or
first-generation migrant. However, to match migrants to their places of origin,
it is first necessary to develop predictive, spatially-explicit isotope models
of oxygen and strontium values throughout a study region. This project will
systematically collect samples of water, soil, plants, and animals from ten
major river valleys, analyze these materials to establish isotopic baseline
values, and generate predictive dual-isotope and single-isotope models. Human
archaeological values will then be matched to their most likely place of origin
using probabilistic statistical methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
conducted with the Archaeological Chemistry Laboratory of the Center for
Bioarchaeological Research and the W. M. Keck Foundation Laboratory for
Environmental Biogeochemistry at Arizona State University, analyzes
biogeochemical variation in order to generate predictive isotope models for the
probabilistic determination of provenience and isotopic life histories. The
Fellow will carry out dry and wet season sampling campaigns, systematically
collecting environmental samples of water, soil, plants, and fauna from regular
altitudinal intervals. Samples from 100 control points will be re-sampled in the
wet and dry season to understand the impact of seasonal weather patterns on
isotope values. Archaeological applications of these methods can be used to
trace ancient migration and trade networks between specific locations, or to
identify the isotopic provenience of important people or artifacts. Importantly,
this project will also establish a database, which will be a collaborative,
cloud-based application for collecting and sharing isotope baseline data before
and after publication. The field collection side of the database will be
critical in standardizing the collection of baseline data, which will allow the
scientific community to explore the relationships between landscape conditions
and isotope values. The data-sharing side of the database will allow
professionals and scientists access to isotope data and isoscape models, which
will provide a tool for helping forensic and other researchers to pinpoint
likely origins for individuals. These data and methods will serve as the
foundation for geostatistically robust baseline maps, which can be used by
anthropologists to understand human responses to environmental and cultural
change, by ecologists or biologists working with these species, or by
researchers investigating similar questions throughout the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.