* 1809071
* Eye Movements and the Dynamics of Adaptive Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Leah Bakst, Bakst                   Leah
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2019
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Cognitive Neuroscience program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Joseph T. McGuire at Boston
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the neural mechanisms of human decision-making. To make
advantageous decisions in a changing world, we must learn from new observations.
How quickly we learn should depend on the context: in stable but noisy
environments, new observations should be given limited weight, whereas volatile
environments require faster updating. The proposed work uses eye tracking and
brain imaging to investigate how decision-makers incorporate new information
into their existing knowledge. These methods allow us to capture the richness of
an individual's subjective predictions, and investigate the effects of
uncertainty and reward on sensory and cognitive representations. This work to
understand human decision-making is critical to a healthy and equitable society,
and is especially important when it comes to behavior that deviates from
expectations. When thinking about the domains of economics and health, for
instance, there are myriad examples of decisions that seem irrational. These
decisions defy our sense of logic, but they are incredibly common. The proposed
work seeks to further our understanding of how people take in new information
and integrate it with existing knowledge to make decisions in a dynamic world. A
full description of how people do this will allow us to craft better policy,
promote health and prosperity, and support our national defense, taking into
account the realities of human irrationality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim
of the project is to explore the temporal dimension of belief updating and the
influence of reward in a free-viewing implicit spatial prediction task. Eye
tracking will allow us to monitor the trial-by-trial evolution of individuals'
predictive distributions, and investigate the effects of reward and punishment
on learning rate and saccade dynamics. In contrast to prior work, we now have
access to information about the construction and updating of underlying
predictive distributions, instead of single point estimates from the
distribution on each trial. The second aim of the project is to use pupillometry
and neuroimaging to probe the mechanisms of belief updating in a fixational
spatial prediction task. Pupillometry will allow us to assess whether reward and
punishment enhance learning rate through common arousal/incentive mechanisms, as
this is an unresolved question in the field. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) will allow us to probe changes in sensory representations in
response to different types of uncertainty (environmental noise and volatility)
separately, as well as how these factors change the functional connectivity
between frontal brain regions and visual cortices. This work will serve to unite
research on the impact of uncertainty on sensory and cognitive processing.
Ultimately, this project will help us understand how subjective belief
distributions are created and updated, and how the brain dynamically adapts this
process in a changing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.