* 1809077
* Heterogeneous integration of ultra-wide bandgap (UWB) diamond and beta-Ga2O3 nanomembranes towards next-generation power switching devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Uttam Singisetti, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2022
* USD 385,000.00

The wide bandgap semiconductors have the potential for having better power
conversion efficiency and higher current handling capability. Among various wide
bandgap semiconductors, b-Ga2O3 has a stable thermodynamic property with a large
bandgap and high electron mobility which makes it an attractive semiconductor
candidate for next-generation power electronics and optoelectronics. Despite
promising material property of b-Ga2O3, two well-known deficiencies of b-Ga2O3,
namely, the poor thermal conductivity and the lack of efficient p-type dopant
largely prohibit the use of b-Ga2O3 toward wider spectrum power electronics.
This proposal aims to address the unipolar doping challenge and poor thermal
property of n-type b-Ga2O3 by heterogeneously integrating with p-type single
crystalline diamond, which allows us to bond two dissimilar semiconductors
without restricted by lattice constants of b-Ga2O3 and diamond. To create a
novel n-type b-Ga2O3 and p-type diamond heterojunction, an ultra-thin form of
semiconductor, also called semiconductor nanomembranes, will be used. Building
upon this, the specific objective of the proposed project is to realize the new
class of ultra-wide bandgap high power heterojunction bipolar transistors based
on the multiple p-n junctions using p-type diamond nanomembrane and n-type
b-Ga2O3 nanomembrane. The outcome of the proposed research will result in the
development of high power electronic devices operating at higher power density
level, which could revolutionize power distribution and conditioning, allow for
a more versatile and stable power system with the improved power conversion or
handling efficiencies toward future high-power
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
develop the new class of ultra-wide bandgap high power device based on the novel
heterogeneous integration method. It will provide a comprehensive solution to
develop a completely new class of highly efficient high-power switches which
will lead to greatly enhanced switching performance metrics over that of today's
power electronics. We expect that upon the success of this project, the related
commercialization will experience a significant change toward employing our new
heterojunction technology in many possible ways. This research will also help
train the next generation of scientists/engineers who will work at the interface
of physics, materials science, and engineering. During the project period,
various educational and outreach activities will be given at several different
levels, including graduate, undergraduate, K-12, and community. The vision of
this program is to provide these students with hands-on, interdisciplinary
experiences in computational simulation and experimental research topics for
tackling current technological and societal challenges. The project will provide
excellent opportunities to educate and train undergraduate and graduate
students, who will be exposed to various interdisciplinary fields of materials
science and semiconductor nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.