* 1809365
* Technologies for a position independent wireless power transmission system
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Amir Mortazawi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

Wireless power transfer (WPT) is an emerging technology with an immense
potential for a wide range of applications. WPT systems use dedicated sources or
transmitters for contactless electrical power transfer at different power levels
ranging from milliwatts to kilowatts. Examples of the WPT applications include
wireless powering of biomedical implants and wireless charging of mobile
devices, robots, drones, and electric vehicles. Such technologies have attracted
much interest as they simplify daily life by eliminating the need for power
cords required for plug-in charging. Although some commercial products have
adopted WPT technology, the technology remains underdeveloped because of the
limitations in existing WPT system designs, mainly the position-dependent
efficiency. The objective of this proposal is to design and implement position-
independent WPT systems that are capable of functioning under variable
transmission distances and misalignments between the transmitter and receiver
while maintaining high power transfer efficiencies. Another important component
of this proposal is the research-based education for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The proposed research is of particular value for students due
to its interdisciplinary nature, where students will study nonlinear devices for
electrical implementation of nonlinear resonance circuits to design power
inverters and efficient rectifiers used in systems. These skills are highly
valuable in the nation's workforce, where the combination of expertise in
materials, devices, and circuits are desirable for today's multi-disciplinary
research and engineering in areas involving electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, for the first time,
provides a solution for designing position-independent WPT systems in which the
operating frequency remains fixed. The project will study the dynamics of
coupled nonlinear resonant circuits, investigate nonlinear materials and devices
for operation at various power levels, perform nonlinear device modeling,
electromagnetic simulation, and circuit simulation, and implement the WPT
prototype. The proposed approach has a strong potential to solve the challenging
problems in wireless power transfer systems, in particular the performance
variations due to misalignment and change of distance between transmitter and
receiver. Upon the successful implementation, the proposed circuits will provide
a unique and low-cost solution to design position-independent WPT systems. The
project is transformative since it has a potential to impact many different
aspects and applications of radio frequency circuit
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.