* 1809937
* GOALI: Engineered photonic structures with extreme energy density for single particle studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Shuren Hu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The capabilities of microelectronic chips currently dictate the ultimate
performance of many modern technologies, including cell phones, laptops, and
cloud computers. Incorporating light alongside electricity on a chip is
recognized as a promising approach for increasing computation speed and reducing
the power budget. This project aims to investigate a new on-chip silicon
structure capable of concentrating light into nanoscale volumes with extremely
high energy density. This innovation could allow light with low input power to
locally operate with a much higher effective power for ultra-low power, ultra-
high speed on-chip information processing. The fundamental work to be undertaken
in this project includes exploiting the new on-chip silicon structure to enable
the investigation of turning light "off" and "on" using a single vanadium
dioxide nanoparticle on a chip, and measuring the emission from a single quantum
dot on a chip. Neither of these phenomena has been previously demonstrated on a
microelectronic-compatible chip and their realization could lead to
significantly expanded on-chip capabilities to be leveraged for higher
performance modern technologies. The world-class fabrication facilities at
GlobalFoundries that monolithically integrates electrical and optical components
on a single silicon chip will be utilized for this project. The diverse team of
participating Vanderbilt students will do cutting-edge research at the
intersection of nanotechnology, engineering, physics, and materials science in
collaboration with industrial researchers at GlobalFoundries. Faculty and
graduate students will share their enthusiasm for STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) with middle and high school students in middle
Tennessee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Expanding the
capabilities of microelectronic chips likely holds the key to continued
performance improvement of modern technology. The objective of this research is
to study fundamental light-matter interaction in single particles that are
integrated onto a silicon photonics chip to probe the limits of what is possible
for on-chip light modulation and emission. To achieve this objective, silicon
bowtie photonic crystals with extreme energy density will be utilized to provide
a platform by which properties of single particles can be monitored in a
straightforward manner. Guided by simulations, this project will utilize
relatively low input power to measure (1) the phase change properties of a
single grain vanadium dioxide nanoparticle and (2) emission from a single
quantum dot on a silicon chip. The intellectual significance of the proposed
activities includes: (a) determination of the ultimate switching speed and
threshold energy density per unit volume of vanadium dioxide to elucidate the
prospects of this phase change material for terabit per second optical
modulators; (b) investigation of the limits of photoluminescence intensity and
spontaneous emission rate enhancement achievable from a single quantum dot
embedded in the extremely high energy density silicon bowtie photonic crystal
cavity; and (c) demonstration of the integration of photonic crystals with
customizable unit cell geometries on a monolithic multi-project wafer platform
for the first time. This project will train participating students in optical
science and engineering, silicon photonics, materials science, and advanced
computational techniques, and will give them experience working alongside
industrial researchers. Project members will engage in science and technology
outreach targeting middle and high school students in both Metro Nashville and
surrounding rural Tennessee counties by participating in successful programs
already well-established at Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.