* 1809860
* Meeting: SICB Symposium on Integrative Biology of Sensory Hair Cells San Francisco, CA, January 6, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Duane McPherson, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 12/31/2018
* USD 13,537.00

The "Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) Symposium on
Integrative Biology of Sensory Hair Cells" will take place January 6, 2018 at
the San Francisco Marriott Marquis Hotel in San Francisco, California. This
meeting will focus on hair cells, which are found in invertebrate aquatic
animals, in the grooves in the skin (called the lateral line system) of fish and
larval amphibians, and in the inner ear of adult amphibians, reptiles, birds and
mammals. These small cells respond to water vibration and sound, and are also
vital for orientation relative to gravity, acceleration, and fluid motion
detection. In humans, they are necessary for hearing and for vestibular
function, and developmental defects or later loss of function in these cells are
the major cause of deafness, impairments of postural stability, and of the
ability to stand or walk. Despite much recent research progress on hair cell
biology in invertebrate animals and in the auditory, vestibular, and lateral
line systems of vertebrate animals, hair cell researchers working in those
different systems tend not interact with each other, and therefore overlook
major new research developments. This meeting is both timely and important, and
two expected outcomes are (1) the broad dissemination of new information to
biology teaching faculty and their graduate and undergraduate students, all of
whom are the main attendees of the SICB conference, and (2) the formation of new
scientific collaborations that will lead to novel approaches to the fundamental
questions of hair cell evolution, development, physiology, and regeneration.

Hair cells are responsible for mechano-transduction, hearing and vestibular
function in a variety of invertebrate and vertebrate animals. This symposium
brings together researchers who study hair cells in a variety of organ systems
(invertebrate outer body, cochlear, vestibular, and lateral line systems) and
who utilize a variety of experimental approaches (including molecular
developmental analysis, perturbation of gene expression, and electrophysiology,
to name a few), with the goal of initiating a major interdisciplinary
conversation and exchange of ideas about hair cell function, development and
evolution. For example, the discovery of sensory hair cells in ascidian
tunicates, a non-vertebrate chordate, has fostered important evolutionary-
developmental studies that have illuminated common features with the development
hair cells in cranial placodes in vertebrates. In vertebrate animals, cochlear
and vestibular hair cells are derived from the otic placode, while hair cells of
the lateral line system are derived from lateral line placodes. Molecular
analysis of the genes required for hair cell development and differentiation in
these different contexts is ongoing, as are efforts to identify the ion channel
or channels responsible for mechano-electrical transduction by hair cells in the
inner ear. It is thus a highly opportune time to bring researchers from these
different communities together with the joint purposes of broadly disseminating
new information about hair cells to biology teaching faculty and their graduate
and undergraduate students, all of whom are the main attendees of the SICB
conference, and fostering new scientific collaborations that will lead to novel
approaches to the fundamental questions of hair cell evolution, development,
physiology, and regeneration.