* 1809790
* NSF-BSF:  A Self-sustaining Wind Energy Extraction Technique (SWEET) Using Multi-level Control Design Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vladimir Golubev, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 303,933.00

Oscillating foil-based wind harvesting systems utilize the phenomenon of limit-
cycle oscillation (or constrained flutter) to generate power, and these systems
are capable of generating enough power to support the average household
electricity usage of 900 KWH per month. In this project, researchers aim to
address one of the most challenging aspects of this renewable energy technology,
in which significant gaps still exist in understanding methods to actively
maintain limit cycle oscillations and achieve continual power generation in the
realistic, time-varying operational environments that foils would encounter in
Nature. To this end, the project will investigate new active flow control
methods, which are shown to achieve well-controlled flutter-induced wind energy
extraction characteristics in realistic operating environments. To achieve the
highest possible net power output, the project researchers will employ low-
auxiliary power actuators embedded in the foil, which are known to be effective
in conventional flow control applications. The proposed closed-loop active flow
control systems will be tested and refined using high-fidelity computational
fluid dynamics simulations and experimental wind tunnel tests. The developed
active flow control methods could be successfully employed in further
optimization studies of the wind energy extraction technology, which could offer
several potential benefits (including low noise, low wind speed requirements,
and compactness), compared to the traditional wind turbine designs. The project
further offers the potential to enhance the practical performance of oscillating
foil-based wind harvesting systems, thus making them more amenable to widespread
implementation. The project integrates research and education through the
creation of a multidisciplinary research and development group, in which
aerospace engineering and engineering physics undergraduate and graduate
students work in teams to develop conceptual designs for physics-based control
methods for wind energy harvesting systems. Project team leaders will follow the
tradition of promoting equal opportunities for underrepresented groups when
nominating students for the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To perform the
proposed investigations, control-oriented, reduced-order mathematical models
will first be formulated for oscillating foil-based wind energy harvesting
systems, which incorporate detailed dynamic models of the power generation
system, foil-mounted flow actuators, fluid flow dynamics, and the aeroelastic
effects of the oscillating foil. New methods of nonlinear, closed-loop active
flow control will then be developed and rigorously analyzed, which are proven to
influence the foil-surface fluid flow velocity/pressure field in such a way that
the energy harvested by the oscillating foil is maximized over a wide range of
wind velocities and unexpected gusts. The project will utilize detailed
mathematical analytical methods to investigate and rigorously quantify the range
of operating conditions within which the newly developed active flow control
systems can reliably maintain foil oscillations. An additional aim of this
research project is to develop feedback control designs that are practically
implementable, requiring no function approximators, minimal computational
complexity, and few sensor measurements. Oscillating foil-based wind harvesting
systems promise performance levels comparable to that of rotary wind turbine
systems, while benefiting from low wind-speed environments. To design reliable
and practical oscillating foil-based energy generation systems, detailed
mathematical modeling and active control of the fluid-structure interaction
dynamics must be rigorously investigated and clearly understood. The
experimental validation aspect of the project will be performed in collaboration
with Dr. Oksana Stalnov, of the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in
Haifa, Israel, using their wind tunnel facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.