* 1809291
* Tailored Chain Sequences of Pendant Functional Groups and Resulting Phase Behavior of Gel-State Functionalized Blocky Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Robert Moore, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2021
* USD 450,115.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers are a unique
class of long chain molecules (polymers) that are made up of two different
chains (blocks) attached together at one of their ends. If the blocks possess
distinctly different chemical properties, then they may be capable of self-
assembling into well-ordered physical structures that impart material properties
that are very different, and often better, than the properties of the individual
blocks alone. Unfortunately, the chemical synthesis of block copolymers is
generally much more complicated, energy intensive, and expensive compared to
that employed in synthesizing a typical commodity polymer of just one block.
While polymer chemists have made remarkable progress in developing new ways to
synthesize block copolymers, commercial success has been limited and often
relegated to applications in high-cost fields such as advanced medical devices
or semiconductor manufacture. In this project, a new physical approach will be
used to create blocky copolymers in a straightforward, economically-attractive
fashion by selectively modifying specific sequences of units along the chains of
commercially available polymers. The breakthrough approach here involves
performing chemistry in the gel state, whereby specific portions of the chains
are essentially hidden from the modifying chemistry. This research will provide
significant advancements in accelerating the creation of tailored block
copolymer assemblies and enhance fundamental insight toward next-generation
membrane technologies. With respect to the grand challenges facing our society,
this project will provide cost-effective, readily available alternative
materials needed to meet critical demands for water purification membranes, fuel
cell membranes for clean energy conversion, and environmentally-friendly
materials for the medical and healthcare industries. The interdisciplinary
nature of research activities in this project, ranging from pure chemistry to
materials structure and properties, will provide a plethora of educational
opportunities to a diverse community of students and researchers eager to
contribute to our nation's leadership in a scientifically and technologically
advanced society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on a new way to create
blocky copolymers using straightforward, post polymerization chemistries on
semi-crystalline homopolymers in the gel state. With reactions upon only the
accessible amorphous chain segments within the semi-crystalline network, this
new physical process yields a non-random, blocky incorporation of functionality,
and is a simple alternative to the complex polymerization mechanisms that are
conventionally employed in the synthesis of block copolymers. Building upon
recent discoveries that semi-crystalline polymers, such as syndiotactic
polystyrene and poly(ether ether ketone), can be brominated in the heterogeneous
gel-state as a simple way to create blocky copolymers with tailored sequence
distributions, this project aims to engage a wealth of substitution chemistries
available with brominated aromatic templates to create a wide variety of new
blocky copolymers as a means to systematically manipulate phase behavior and
thus the formation of ordered morphologies with tailored properties. In addition
to the substitution chemistries, the morphological parameters of the semi-
crystalline gel will be altered by controlled temperature, concentration, and
solvent to precisely affect the sequences of functionalized and non-
functionalized chain segments. The grand challenge to be addressed in this
project will be: Can we now direct the formation of ordered phase-separated
domains, similar to that observed with conventional block copolymers, by
tailoring the chemical composition of these new, gel-state functionalized,
blocky copolymer systems? Membranes of the blocky copolymers will be
architecturally tailored for energy conversion and water purification
applications. The interdisciplinary nature of research activities in this
project, ranging from pure chemistry to materials structure and properties, will
help to educate a diverse community of researchers, including underrepresented
groups. Educational outreach activities will engage citizens of all ages through
the focus on cutting-edge research aimed at ensuring a healthier, more energy-
efficient global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.