* 1809495
* Interplay of Molecular Structure and Solution Behavior in High Performance Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Elsa Reichmanis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affordable, low-cost flexible
electronics could revolutionize how we think about and use devices in
applications ranging from displays, to sensors for environmental and health
monitoring, to energy. To attain this vision, new materials are needed, as are
fundamental insights into how these materials interact with each other in
solution and solid state. This research aims to design and synthesize new
polymeric materials applicable to a broad range of advanced device technologies,
and investigate their solution and solid-state characteristics. Different
molecular architectures will be explored, as well as solution-based processes
that facilitate assembly of these polymers in solution and in thin films for
device configurations. Students participating in the program will realize
benefits from its multidisciplinarity: they will be cross-trained and have
opportunities to expand their knowledge and experience through relevant
additional collaborations. Students will be recruited from the Schools of
Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Materials Science &amp; Engineering,
and Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at Georgia Tech. They will be provided with
leadership opportunities and encouraged to participate in broadening
experiences, such as industrial internships, teaching practicums, and energy
policy courses, based on each student's interests and career goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust, reliable and flexible devices could be
transformational for industries ranging from healthcare, environmental quality
and energy, to security. The planned research program will identify high-
performance, soluble and robust pi-conjugated polymers that are expected to
exhibit enhanced field-effect induced charge transport, photovoltaic and thermo-
electric properties. New polymer structures will be synthesized, characterized
and fabricated into devices. Photoluminescence studies will investigate the
behavior of these polymers in solution and during solvent evaporation. In
particular, polymer molecular structures will be selected with the aim to design
materials with extended conjugation lengths that are soluble in environmentally
friendlier solvent options, and allow for tuning of HOMO/LUMO energy levels. The
targeted materials will be characterized, and significant materials structure-
processing-property parameters will be identified. Spectroscopic investigations
will provide fundamental insight into how conjugated polymers self-assemble in
solution and during the deposition processes into structures that are
commensurate with effective charge transport. These studies will support the
vision of robust and reliable flexible optoelectronic devices fabricated via
additive solution processing from benign solvents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.