* 1809314
* Collaborative Research: Stability, security and emergency control for reconfigurable networked microgrids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jean-Jacques Slotine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Networked microgrids (NMG, e.g., interconnections of house or district level
microgrids powered by a solar panel or wind turbine) are increasingly utilized
for sharing resources among microgrids, which can offer significant economic
benefits. However, there is a poorly understood trade-off between robustness and
fragility in this network setting. On one hand, the interconnection of multiple
individual microgrids can improve the robustness of the microgrid network since
the increased aggregate inertia will allow for better rejection of relatively
small disturbances like load and renewable generation changes or minor
load/generator outages. On the other hand, the interconnection will also extend
the electrical and operational couplings between individual microgrids and lead
to more routes of cascading failures (for example, a local failure of any
microgrid can propagate throughout the network and threaten the whole network
fragility). The project will make contributions in: (i) development of high-
fidelity models of networked microgrids, bringing a new application domain to
dynamics analysis and controls; (ii) development of computationally tractable
optimization algorithms to solve the stability constrained optimal power flow
problems involved in the analysis of the control actions; (iii) introduction of
innovative network reconfiguration and intentional islanding algorithms to
enhance networked microgrids resilience, which can inform innovations in risk
mitigation of other complex networks. In the broader contexts, this project can
help protecting critical infrastructures, e.g., airports, hospitals, buildings,
during prolonged power outages due to natural disasters or cyberphysical
attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aiming to fill the knowledge gap, this project
will investigate intricate aspects of the robustness-fragility trade-off in
networked microgrids. This knowledge then allows for the synthesis and
validation of integrated preventive-corrective operational strategies that
achieve the optimal compromise between overall robustness and fragility.
Technically, we will analyze independently two complementary preventive-
corrective strategies for ensuring the security of the NMG system with respect
to the most common faults. Analyzing the cost-risk tradeoff of these two control
actions will then lead to an optimal integration of preventive and corrective
strategies into NMG operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.