* 1809229
* Development of Ultra-low-CMC Micelle for Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Zhiqiang Cao, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 365,188.00

Non-technical: Surfactant molecules assemble into sub-50 nanometer micelle
entities and play a pivotal role in a wide range of applications or products
from detergents to cosmetics. The micelles are ideal carriers to contain and
protect a variety of therapeutic or imaging cargoes in drug delivery
applications. Despite certain success, micelle molecules are known for their
poor capability to stabilize cargoes, which remains the major challenge in the
field. When diluted to a concentration below the Critical Micelle Concentration
(CMC), a working concentration for the micelle-payload system to be applied, the
micelle entities disassemble into free surfactants and prematurely dump the
cargoes, resulting in a low delivery outcome. This project will address the
instability issue of current micelles by developing novel biomaterial
surfactants with ultra-low-CMC assembling behavior. Fundamental knowledge will
be obtained on how material structural factors impact the unusual low CMC
property, and the capability of the ultra-low-CMC micelle to stabilize cargos at
conditions relevant to future application scenarios. The success of this project
will enable future development of more efficient drug delivery formulations
based on the novel biomaterial to improve the public's health. The research
project will be integrated into educational activities to inspire students,
particularly underrepresented ones from K-12 to graduate level to pursue STEM
education and potential manufacturing careers in nano- and bio- medical
industry. Dr. Cao's laboratory will continue to recruit high school students and
LSAMP (Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation) undergraduate scholars
and to mentor their research. Through Open Lab Days K-12 students will be
engaged and recruited to conduct research supported by this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This award by the Biomaterils
program in the Division of Materials Research to Wayne State University is to
develop novel micelle-forming surfactant biomaterials showing an ultra-low
Critical Micelle Concentration (CMC) below nanomolar (six orders of magnitude
lower than CMCs of common surfactants), and protecting various hydrophobic
cargos from dumping upon extreme dilution. This is to address the main challenge
with conventional micelles that, unless chemically crosslinked, they disassemble
into free surfactants in diluted conditions below CMC, and prematurely release
the protected payload. The research objectives of this project include i) to
investigate key micellar structural factors to achieve ultra-low CMC properties,
and ii) to study how this novel platform can address major stability challenges
facing micellar drug delivery. The challenges include micelle disassociation
upon dilution in blood, opsonization, and phagocytosis, and premature drug
release. This project will test the hypotheses that i) the unique chemical
moiety gives rise to ultra-low-CMC properties, and ii) properly structured
micelle/cargo is the key to overcome aforementioned stability challenges. The
novel biomaterials resulted from this award are expected to ultimately increase
the stability and the delivery of the protected drugs, compared with
conventional micelle materials, for potential improvement to the national
health. The knowledge obtained will inspire the future design of surfactants to
address a broad range of application challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.