* 1809841
* Photoresponsive Bond Exchange in Liquid Crystalline Polymer Networks: A Route to Complex and Controllable Shape Shifting Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 371,666.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart materials are those that are
capable of responding to their conditions so as to change their behavior in a
desired manner. One class of these is shape-shifting materials that have the
capacity to alter their shape in a desired manner. Such shape-shifting materials
have the potential for implementation in the fields of artificial muscles, soft
robotics, self-deploying devices, smart windows, self-healing materials,
adhesives, and many other areas. The materials developed here combine the
benefits of (a) liquid crystalline elastomers (which are highly deformable
polymeric materials that reversibly change shape upon heating) and (b)light-
activated chemical changes in the material that enable it to be reshaped,
healed, and realigned at will. The overall scope of the project seeks to
understand the underlying relationships between the molecular structure of the
materials and their remarkable properties and performance, and subsequently use
that knowledge to design improved approaches and molecular structures for such
smart materials. In addition to advances in technology, this project will also
contribute to the development of a "bootcamp" in the recently formed PhD degree
program in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Colorado with
the express goal of bringing in students from diverse backgrounds that would not
otherwise consider or be ready to enter a PhD program in materials science. This
program aims to recruit and train diverse personnel, comprising a large number
of undergraduate and graduate students, in a powerful combination of chemical
synthesis, materials science, and polymer
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programming fully reversible, shape-shifting
polymers presents a special challenge despite a large amount of promising work
in this area. Liquid crystalline networks (LCNs) represent one of the most
capable polymeric materials because they offer thermoreversible strain,
programmable simply by directing molecular-scale alignment. Although the polymer
network enables the translation of molecular order to shape, it is also
inherently limiting when trying to program new or complex alignment. Here, light
will be used as a stimulus for radical-mediated addition-fragmentation chain
transfer (AFT) that causes a cascading dynamic covalent-bond exchange reaction
to occur within the network. Using this chemistry, readily reprogrammable shape-
shifting materials will be explored with independent control over the LC phase
shape, disordered shape, and the switching temperature. &lt;br/&gt; The overall
objective of this work is to further the understanding, accessibility, and
implementation of AFT-based LCNs through chemical design in coordination with
programming conditions to develop versatile, readily reprogrammable shape-
shifting materials. This work will focus on fundamental understanding of these
smart materials and their design at both the macro- and nano-scale, including:
i) determining fundamental formation-structure-property-programming
relationships that will be used to develop a library of photopolymerizable,
programmable LCNs, ii) combining disparate material compositions, alignments and
structures in macroscale materials to understand the impact of interfaces and
gradients in composition and structure on the material actuation and response,
and iii) forming nano-scale structures through imprinting and holography to
determine and understand the effects of feature size as compared to LC domain
size on the bond-exchange process, its effectiveness, and the LC alignment. Each
scientific direction is coupled to education and training of a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.