* 1809293
* Collaborative Research: Development of Atomically Thin Tunnel Barriers for High-Performance Tunnel Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2022
* USD 313,288.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Tunnel junctions are an enabling technology for future
electronics. They are formed by inserting a thin insulating layer, known as a
tunnel barrier, between metal or semiconductor electrodes. Devices based on
tunnel junctions have the advantages of enhanced quantum coherent transport,
fast speed, small size and energy efficiency. Tunnel junctions are used, for
example, in sensors, flash memory and in quantum or neural computers. The
performance of a tunnel junction depends critically on the quality and thickness
of the tunnel barrier. Charge transport through a barrier, known as quantum
tunneling, increases exponentially with decreasing layer thickness and defect
concentration. Despite decades of effort, current tunnel junction technology is
limited to barriers that are at least one nanometer thick and have a high defect
density. Creating atomically thin (one tenth of a nanometer), defect-free tunnel
barriers will enable the next-generation of tunnel junction devices. This
project will advance tunnel junction technology by creating atomically thin,
high-quality tunnel barriers using atomic layer deposition. Two important types
of tunnel junctions will be studied. Superconducting Josephson junctions serve
as quantum bits (qubits) for quantum computers. Magnetic tunnel junctions are at
the heart of nonvolatile, fast magnetic random access memory and neuromorphic
computers. The scientific knowledge developed through this project will broadly
impact the development of future microelectronics. Atomic scale control of
materials and interfaces applies to sensing, catalysis, and energy production.
The project emphasizes forefront education and the cutting-edge research. This
will attract students, especially those from underrepresented groups, to pursue
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the development of atomically thin tunnel barriers by atomic layer deposition
(ALD) for use in tunnel junction devices. The goal is to understand and control
the physical and chemical properties of materials used in tunnel junctions at
atomic scales for high performance devices in order to achieve defect-free,
atomically thin tunnel barriers. Despite exciting preliminary results on
Josephson junctions and magnetic tunnel junctions with 0.1-1.0 nm thick Al2O3
tunnel barriers, many fundamental questions remain in synthesis and physical
properties of these tunnel junctions. Two topics are proposed to answer these
questions. Topic 1 will focus on growth of Josephson junctions and magnetic
tunnel junctions using a custom-designed system for in situ ultra-high-vacuum
atomic layer deposition-physical vapor deposition (ALD-PVD) for tunnel junction
deposition. This system is integrated with a characterization system with
scanning probe microscopy and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SPM-TERS)
capabilities. The SPM-TERS system will be used to understand the growth
mechanism of the ALD tunnel barriers and the metal-insulator (M/I) interface and
the role of growth parameters, such as ALD growth temperature, source pulse
durations and sequence will be investigated. Experimental work will be guided by
simulation. Topic 2 will carry out in situ study of the tunnel barriers and the
electrode/tunnel barrier interface using UHV SPM-TERS and multi-scale
characterization at device and circuit levels to understand the microscopic
properties of insulating barrier and electrode/tunnel barrier interface,
especially the effect of defects, on the performance of superconducting qubits,
Josephson junctions, and magnetic tunnel junctions. The goal is to demonstrate
an innovative technological approach towards next-generation high-performance
electronics based on tunnel junctions with ALD tunnel
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.