* 1809570
* Multiplexing Detection of Extracellular and Intracellular Toxins in Water by GaN Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Wu Lu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

Cyanobacterial blooms, also known as harmful algal blooms have been known to
produce a variety of harmful toxins including microcystins, saxitoxins,
anatoxin-a, and cylindrospermopsins. These blooms have become a major concern
when it comes to water safety and management as they can have severe impacts on
public health, aquatic ecosystems, and local economies. Current methods for
toxin detection include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, polymerase chain
reaction, high performance liquid chromatography, and liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry. These methods require complex operation, fluorophore labeling,
sophisticated and bulk instruments, and skilled personnel. Additionally, these
methods take days for analysis, cannot be easily performed in the field, and
cannot determine multiple toxins at the same time. Therefore simple and low cost
detection technologies that can meet this challenge are critically needed in
recognition of the importance of water quality monitoring and environmental
protection. The development of novel sensors for detection of toxins in water
can revolutionize our understanding of aquatic ecosystem functions governing
water quality at the watershed scale. For example, it can be accomplished, in
part, by assembling a portfolio of novel sensors for on-site real time
multiplexing monitoring of the biotic and abiotic compartments within the water
cycle. The pervasive networking of these sensors will enable process monitoring
at spatial and temporal scales that are much higher than is currently feasible.
Integrating these data streams into simulation models of the water cycle will
deepen our understanding of these processes, facilitate the development of real-
time indices to forecast events such as algal blooms, and identify strategies
that can be followed to avert such events. The outcome of the research will be
integrated in the outreach activities include working with industry for
validation, field testing in Lake Erie, publicizing the technology through
annual "Media Day" at OSU Stone Lab, "Nanobiotechnology Summer Camp" and
"Adopting a Class" from local school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop GaN (gallium nitride) based
immunologically field effect transistors biosensors for detection of
extracellular and intracellular cyanotoxins in water and environmental samples.
The proposed devices are capable of label-free multiplexing detection rapidly
(in minutes) by both immuno-sensing and nucleic acid detection as necessary.
These sensor devices can be fabricated in a large array system with each device
using distinct antibodies, so that a full profile of contaminants can be
achieved by a single low cost test. Due to the fact that these devices can be
fabricated at very small sizes and monitored at the individual device level,
each sensing array can detect potential toxins at extremely low concentrations.
Although this kind of biosensors have been demonstrated for other biosensing
applications, their application to cyanotoxin detection and monitoring has yet
to be demonstrated. The team choses AlGaN (aluminum gallium nitride)/GaN
heterojunction semiconductor structures as the device platform because this
material system is chemically inert and stable so a high signal-to-noise ratio
can be achieved. The proposed toxin sensors can meet the following requirements:
(1) high sensitivity or low detection limit and large dynamic range; (2) high
specificity and multiplexing detection; (3) rapid detection and short analysis
time; (4) label free; and (5) field-portability and easy-of-use, capable of
detection of both extracellular and intracellular toxins, and forming a sensing
network for long term environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.