* 1809915
* Novel Aspects of Topological Photonics in Open Optical Systems: Non-Hermiticity and Fano-Resonances
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Alexander Khanikaev, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 689,988.00

Nontechnical description: Our ability to control light scattering and
propagation is at the core of modern technologies, from lenses in smartphone
cameras to optical fiber networks in datacenters. Many advancements in
functionality of today's optical components are attained by using new or
improved materials. The concept of metamaterials further enables this approach
by offering artificially structured materials with properties absent in any
natural materials system. One such unique engineered property, known as
robustness, is found in specially designed structures referred to as topological
metamaterials. Topological metamaterials allow guiding light with unprecedented
insensitivity to obstacles and defects, inevitably present in any material or
device, thus upending common notions of propagation and scattering of light.
Most importantly, topological metamaterials offer a new platform for optical
materials and devices exhibiting significantly higher tolerance to fabrication
errors. In this project, we aim to design and test such optical devices, whose
functionality is tolerant to both fabrication imperfections and environmental
factors. This project is interdisciplinary in nature, bridging areas of
fundamental and applied sciences. Significant outreach efforts towards high
school and undergraduate minority students are planned. Activities for high
school students from local schools include summer research conducted in the PI's
laboratory through CCNY Summer Science Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Topological photonics offers a fundamentally new vision on optical
scattering, which may be exploited to manipulate the phase and amplitude of
light in locally non-uniform ways. This suggests that open topological
metamaterials with their topological modes leaking into a surrounding medium,
such as two-dimensional metasurfaces patterned on the nanoscale, may offer new
mechanisms of controlling scattering of light and thus enabling new approaches
to generate desirable scattering patterns. On the other hand, the open character
of the system, which renders photonic systems non-Hermitian, may itself affect
topological properties of metamaterials in a nontrivial way. The goal of this
project is to understand aspects of the interplay between topology and non-
Hermiticity, and to explore the limits of topological robustness in open
systems. Our research reveals the role of leakage of topological modes into
free-space, and of their interaction with incident light. Understanding these
properties enables a new class of topological optical devices endowed with
topological protection. Within this project we aim to design and test
topological gratings, metasurfaces, flat-lenses, and vortex phase plates. The
proposed research plan bridges areas of fundamental and applied science, optics,
photonics, and condensed matter physics. The project presents opportunities for
students from high-school to the graduate level to get involved in all stages of
research, and to obtain hands-on experience in photonic materials and devices.
By opening opportunities in research on topological metamaterials to students,
this project further attracts emerging generations to pursue careers in physics
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.