* 1809572
* Gravitational Wave Transient Astrophysics with LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Deirdre Shoemaker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 640,000.00

The direct detection of gravitational waves, tiny oscillations of the curvature
of space-time that were predicted 100 years ago by Einstein's theory of General
Relativity, was a groundbreaking event for gravitational physics. On September
14, 2015, The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) made
the first direct detection of gravitational waves, which in this case were
produced by the collision of two black holes nearly 1.4 billion light years away
from Earth. Since then, several more black hole collisions have been detected by
LIGO and its European counterpart, Virgo. Then, on August 17, 2017 LIGO and
Virgo detected a new type of signal, from the coalescence of two neutron stars,
in coincidence with a gamma ray burst. Over 70 observatories have participated
in following up this detection in almost every possible electromagnetic
wavelength, and a richness of information is now available on this unique event.
The era of gravitational-wave enabled, multi-messenger astronomy has officially
begun. This award supports critical LIGO research at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, for the detection, characterization and astrophysical interpretation
of gravitational wave transient signals in LIGO data, at a new frontier in
science that aims a deeper understanding of the universe. The award will benefit
from the long term collaboration of the PI and co-PI and a synergistic team at
the Georgia Tech Center for Relativistic Astrophysics, with experts in
computational astrophysics, cosmology, particle astrophysics, astronomy, the
college of computing and a strong outreach program in Atlanta, enhanced by the
new ties to the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, and a firm commitment to
diversity and the role of women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports
an active LIGO group at Georgia Tech, with work on two topics of critical
importance to the LIGO mission: 1) Participation in the LSC-Virgo Burst all-sky,
morphology-independent search for gravitational transients, sensitive to a wide
range of signatures, including core-collapse supernovae, coalescence of neutron
star and/or black hole binary systems and neutron star oscillations, including
characterization of LIGO data to enable scientific discovery, to deliver the
data quality information necessary to clean the data sets and veto false
positives, and to identify data quality issues early enough that they can be
mitigated in the instruments. 2) Integration of generic analytical and numerical
relativity waveforms in searches and interpretations of signals from a variety
of astrophysical sources, especially in those sources where the strong field of
gravity is at its peak and information provided by numerical relativity is at
its most influential, such as intermediate mass black hole mergers, follow-up
simulations of exotic sources, and consistency tests of waveform models. With
this award, the Georgia Tech group will contribute to core science of the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC), capitalizing on existing resources and
expertise, and enabling advanced LIGO science of highest priority while
stimulating intellectual curiosity and exploring novel
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.