* 1809181
* Probing Strong Electronic Correlations in Ferroelectrics and Multiferroics Through High-Order Harmonic Spectroscopy and First-Principles Calculations
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Volodymyr Turkowski, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 364,842.00

Nontechnical Abstract: One of the goals of modern condensed matter physics is to
control the properties of materials so that they can be modified 'on demand'. In
relevant materials intense pulses of laser light can force the materials far
from equilibrium, dramatically changing their electronic, magnetic, and optical
properties. This work focuses on experimental and computational studies of the
non-equilibrium properties of such materials which exhibit unique electronic and
magnetic responses to external stimuli, induced by intense infrared laser
fields. Using advanced laser techniques, the dynamics of interactions in such
materials are reconstructed from measurements of light emitted through a process
known as high-order harmonic generation. While most previous studies of
ultrafast dynamics in solids are performed at the femtosecond and longer
timescales (1 femtosecond = 0.000000000000001 seconds), this project seeks to
uncover details of the sub-femtosecond dynamics and to establish the link
between ultrafast interactions in non-equilibrium materials and the spectral-
and time-domain structure of high-order harmonic emission. The experimental and
theoretical tools developed through this project can also be used to describe
processes relevant to technological applications such as solar energy and
spintronics. Students trained as a result of the award will gain experience in
advanced laser and computational techniques, as well as state-of-the-art
materials synthesis, preparing them for high-tech
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Understanding and controlling
the quantum many-body dynamics of strongly-driven, strongly-correlated materials
is one of the grand challenges of modern science. Although the nonequilibrium
dynamics of strongly-correlated materials have been studied for decades, the
few- to sub-femtosecond dynamics of strong electronic correlation have been
hidden from experiments. Through measurements and first-principles calculations
of the high-order harmonics generated from intense mid-infrared laser fields in
bulk and thin-film solids, this project aims to resolve electronic correlations
in ferroelectric barium titanate and multiferroic bismuth ferrite crystals, and
the role of these correlations in the strong-field laser response. Through
measurements of the spectrum, polarization, and time-domain structure of the
emitted high-order harmonic radiation, the project reveals the impacts of
crystal structure and ferroelectric polarization, Berry curvature, and
correlated electron dynamics on the high-order harmonic generation process.
Calculations, using time-dependent density functional theory with exchange-
correlation functions obtained via dynamical mean-field theory, accurately
capture the time-domain Coulomb interactions at the heart of strong electronic
correlations. The experimental and theoretical tools developed through this
project can also be used to describe processes relevant to technological
applications such as solar energy and spintronics. Students trained as a result
of the award will gain experience in advanced laser and computational
techniques, as well as state-of-the-art materials synthesis, preparing them for
high-tech careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.