* 1809645
* Elucidating the Molecular and Hierarchical Structure of Spider Silk
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jeffery Yarger, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 393,932.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiders are the masters of silk: a
typical web-spinning spider produces at least six different silks, each
synthesized and spun by different silk glands and spinnerets located on its
abdomen. The ultimate goal of this research is to be able to mimic this process
and materials in the laboratory. Silk fibers produced by spiders are protein-
based and currently there is not a good molecular understanding of the structure
responsible for the "high-performance" mechanical properties of spider silks.
Understanding the molecular structure, dynamics and the hierarchical
organizations in spider silk proteins is critical to the ultimate goal of
producing materials in the lab with properties comparable to natural spider silk
fibers. This research group plans to explore the molecular structure, protein-
protein interactions, and hierarchical structures formed in silk proteins (the
silks that produce dragline and web-building for spiders). This research will
establish relationships between hierarchical structure and mechanical function
in a variety of natural silk proteins from several different spiders, including
orb-weaving, cob-weaving and jumping spiders. This is a critical component to
realize silk biomimicry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A single orb-weaving spider produces up to 6
different types of biopolymer fibers that are commonly called silk. These silk
fibers produced by spiders are protein-based biopolymers and span a large range
of physical and mechanical properties. Currently, there is not a comprehensive
molecular and hierarchical understanding of the protein structures responsible
for the "high-performance" mechanical properties of spider silks. The critical
component of spider silk fibers is the fact that they are almost completely
protein based, and clearly contain a complex set of secondary protein
structures, nanocrystalline domains and hierarchical organizations of these
molecular level structures. Understanding the molecular structure and the
hierarchical organizations in spider silk proteins is critical to the ultimate
goal of producing a protein-based material with properties similar to natural
spider silk fibers. This research group plans to explore the molecular
structure, protein-protein interactions, and hierarchical structures formed in
major and minor ampullate silk proteins (dragline and web-building) with an
ultimate goal to establish relationships between hierarchical structure and
mechanical function in a variety of natural silk proteins from several
evolutionarily different spiders, including orb-weaving (Araneus), cob-weaving
(Latrodectus) and jumping (Peucetia) spiders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.