* 1809186
* Variation in Women's Economic Tradeoffs and Risk Preferences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Melissa Thompson, Starkweather            Kathrine       E
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 166,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Melissa Emery
Thompson at the University of New Mexico, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the effects of differences in
women's occupations on their household economies and physiological states, as
well as the heath of themselves and their children. Most women in the United
States and around the world engage in occupations that are more compatible with
childcare than men's occupations and also that are less economically risky than
men's occupations. However, some women do choose occupations that are neither
compatible with childcare nor low risk, but very little is understood about what
leads women to choose those types of occupations and what the outcomes are for
women and their families. In order to better understand why some women choose
these types of occupations and others choose more traditional ones, this project
will conduct a study with women whose primary occupations represent this range.
The goal of the project is to learn about potential positive and negative
outcomes that result from different women's occupations in order to understand
women's economic choices across different cultures. In doing so, factors that
may buffer women and their children against more negative potential outcomes
will be explored as well. The results of this project will be critical as
women's roles in the household, local, and global economy continue to expand. It
will also contribute to that expansion by employing and training women from
underrepresented communities in social and lab-based sciences.

The sexual division of labor is a hallmark of human societies that requires men
and women to trade off allocation of individual time and energy between
productive work and childcare. While evolutionary explanations for sex
differences in these activities are rooted in the different reproductive roles
of males and females, suggesting less flexibility for women than for men,
empirical evidence suggests a great deal of variability in women's behavior.
This project will highlight variability in women's productive work and risk
preferences within a society where women show considerably more occupational
variability and engage in significant risk-taking economic behavior. We will use
a robust between- and within-individuals study design that employs mixed data
collection methods in order to characterize behavioral and physiological
flexibility and the costs and benefits for employing particular work and
childcare strategies. The scope of this project will contribute to theory and
knowledge about the evolutionary importance of variation in women's tradeoffs in
three specific ways: 1) Results will challenge a pervasive notion in
evolutionary theory about the human sexual division of labor with a case study
of women who exhibit cross-culturally rare subsistence and parenting behavior;
2) Physiological correlates of behavior will shed light on the function of
women's productive strategies and risk preferences; 3) Economic and health
outcomes of women's productive strategies and risk preferences will tease apart
costs and benefits of these behaviors and determine the nature of tradeoffs made
by women. The broader goal is to contribute to a more comprehensive
socioecological model of the human sexual division of labor that foregrounds the
variability of women's tradeoffs in their familial and societal roles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.