* 1809453
* Forming functional surfaces through surface-anchored macromolecular networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2022
* USD 536,630.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and fabrication of
materials with functional and tailorable surface properties represents one of
the most important challenges facing current materials research. It is daunting
to identify a material that enables independent control of chemical composition,
surface topography, mobility of functional groups, mechanical properties, and
charge. Polymer coatings comprising macromolecules linked at various locations
via so-called crosslink points attached to surfaces may fit the bill. A major
obstacle that has hindered widespread application of such materials is the need
for chemical synthesis of specialty polymers. This project overcomes this
limitation by turning a wide variety of polymers into surface-anchored
crosslinked polymer coatings using a family of simple crosslinker molecules that
are either commercially available or are very easy to synthesize. Thus, anyone
can utilize the proposed method in combination with a variety of starting
materials to fabricate functional surfaces with controlled composition,
softness, surface topography, and other important physico-chemical
characteristics. The processes leading to the formation of such surfaces have
been designed to be highly scalable, so that they could be, in principle,
applied to coat large-area surfaces. This research project will also contribute
to education of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in science and
engineering. These involve scientific training and communication, presentation
skills, as well as ethical principles in science and technology. Outreach
activities in both local venues (high schools and colleges in the Research
Triangle area) as well as at elementary school in Ararat, VA (located in one of
the most rural areas of our country) will take place. Local K-12 students and
teachers will be encouraged to participate in the research/educational
activities through individual mentoring and via programs organized by NC State's
Science House. Current efforts and future plans for organizing scientific and
outreach meetings for academe, industry, and general public in the Research
Triangle region are
included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to create
functional surfaces by attaching polymer network films with highly tailorable
characteristics onto solid substrates. These polymer networks comprise arrays of
long chain molecules (i.e., macromolecules) connected mutually at several nodes
(i.e., crosslink points). The polymer networks are generated by crosslinking
macromolecules using small functional molecules (SFMs) equipped with two
functional groups, A and B, wherein A forms a chemical bond with a neighboring
polymer chain, and B groups from two neighboring SFMs (or/and the substrate)
form either a chemical or a physical bond, depending on the nature of the B
units. This method makes any polymer, regardless of its functionality, amenable
to chemical crosslinking and immobilization on surfaces. Importantly, the SFMs
are either available commercially or can be readily synthesized. The immediate
scientific and technological impact lies in providing a source-agnostic
framework to design and produce surfaces with controlled chemical composition,
tuned (and erasable) topology, tailorable softness and friction, and other
relevant physico-chemical interfacial characteristics. The simplicity and
tunablity of the network-forming process makes it ideal for scientists and
engineers without requiring high chemical expertise, and broadens its scope to
biomedical and healthcare sciences, security, or national defense. The project
description outlines tasks that aim at testing the proposed hypothesis of
network generation and establishing structure-process properties. Specifically,
the structure and kinetics of network formation will be established for a series
of different SFMs, different annealing times, and annealing temperatures.
Functional polymer network coatings that alter mechanical properties of
topography in response to external magnetic fields will be generated by
incorporating magnetically-responsive nanoparticles into the SFMs. The proposed
effort also outlines new ways of forming bilayers featuring hydrogels (i.e.,
polymer networks that swell in water) and silicone elastomers (i.e., flexible
rubbers that do not require solvent to remain flexible). These laminates are
frequently used in biomedical, shape-changing, and deformable materials, yet
their preparation currently relies on harsh physical treatment of the elastomer
component. The proposed methodology removes this limitation and enables novel,
cleaner, and reproducible manufacturing of these important composite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.