* 1809878
* The impact of Hurricane Maria on the mesophotic reefs of southwest Puerto Rico
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Ernesto Weil, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2020
* USD 199,997.00

Major Hurricane Maria, on 20 September 2017, delivered a devastating blow to the
island of Puerto Rico. Both terrestrial and marine ecosystems were heavily
impacted.  This powerful and rare weather event provides an opportunity to
examine the effects of extreme physical forces on coral reefs. The research team
will concentrate on the mesophotic reefs or "twilight zone reefs", which rival
shallow water coral reefs in diversity and beauty.  Mesophotic coral ecosystems
are reefs found between 30 and 100 m depth, and are thought to serve as refugia
for the declining shallow water coral reefs because they are further removed
from anthropogenic and natural disturbances. Hurricane Maria is one of those
rare, high-magnitude disturbance events that could affect even those deeper,
mesophotic reefs. The investigators are positioned with pre-deployed
oceanographic instruments and previously-collected ecological data to measure
the effects of Hurricane Maria on the presumably sheltered, mesophotic reefs.
The investigators will document the hurricane effects on the reef communities by
comparing photographic data from pre-established transects at shallow and
mesophotic reefs. Misplaced corals will be used to test the capacity of extreme
weather events to shape the population connectivity of key species. Radioisotope
analysis will be used to identify the origin of sediments collected from the
mesophotic reefs. The investigators will interpret all data described above in
light of the physical conditions that were recorded before, during, and after
the passage of Hurricane Maria. The project will involve the collaboration of an
interdisciplinary team of five researchers and a graduate student from a
Hispanic-serving Institution. The investigators will disseminate the results to
Natural Resources Management Agencies and will use local media outlets and
organize outreach events to inform local communities about the effects of
hurricanes on coral reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The landfall of major Hurricane
Maria on the south coast of Puerto Rico provides a unique opportunity to examine
its impacts on an insular shelf margin reef ecosystem (~25 to 70-80 m depth). 
The powerful weather system likely triggered major off-shelf transport of
sediments, turbidity, terrigenous material and benthic organisms, affecting
entire shelf margin benthic ecosystems. It also constitutes a unprecedented
natural experiment where coral colonies were likely dislodged and transplanted
to deeper areas, allowing to test various hypotheses related the deep refugia
model and connectivity between shallow and mesophotic coral reefs. The
investigators will assess the ecosystem stability that underlies the deep-reef
refuge hypothesis of the insular-slope mesophotic reefs by: a) repeating high
resolution photo-transects at pre-established sites at shallow and mesophotic
stations, b) documenting the type and extent of displaced/damaged benthic taxa,
c) examining the possibility of hurricane-assisted vertical connectivity through
the displacement of shallow corals to deeper depths, d) measuring the potential
recent input of terrigenous material to mesophotic depths by radioisotope
analysis of sediment samples and, e) relating all the above observations to
actual physical conditions, which were measured in situ before, during, and
after Hurricane Maria.