* 1809783
* Simple Molecular Systems at Ultrahigh Pressures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Russell Hemley, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 590,338.00

Nontechnical Abstract: The millions of atmospheres of pressure that can now be
produced in the laboratory can impart profound effects on atoms and molecules,
molding matter to make new materials with unprecedented properties. Conventional
understanding fails to predict such effects, beginning with hydrogen, the first
element in the Periodic Table, and extending to other "simple" elements. This
project explores this new world of materials when compressed up to five million
atmospheres (5 megabars or 500 gigapascals). A key property to be explored is
superconductivity - the ability of a material to conduct electricity without
resistance - at very high temperatures, including possibly room temperature and
above. Advanced experimental techniques to study materials to very high
pressures while at variable temperatures are employed to synthesize and
characterize these materials, and theoretical and computational methods are used
to interpret the results as well as to predict new materials and their
properties to guide syntheses. The results have implications for fields beyond
condensed-matter physics, including chemistry, advanced technology, planetary
science, and astrophysics. An important goal is education and training of
graduate students and undergraduates in the field. There is also a component
that impacts locally STEM education and the public understanding of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Pressure is not a simple
thermodynamic parameter but an effective tool for the creation of exotic
materials and phenomena not accessible at ambient conditions. Materials
subjected to pressures up to several hundred gigapascals exhibit unexpected
properties, including very high-temperature superconductivity, counterintuitive
bonding patterns and electronic topological states, entirely new crystal
structures, and potentially new physics. Investigations of materials at these
conditions thus test both the limits of experimental techniques as well as
fundamental theory. Addressing these questions in "simple" elemental and
molecular systems at ultrahigh pressures, the project is divided into the
following tasks: 1. Very High Tc Superconductivity; 2. Metallization and Novel
Transitions in Dense Hydrogen; 3. High-Pressure Electrides; 4. Novel Interfacial
Phenomena at Megabar Pressures; 5. Unconventional and Exotic Compounds; and 6.
Methods and Technique Development. Each of the tasks involve tightly integrated
experiment and computational theory. In particular, the experimental effort
takes advantage of new developments in diamond-anvil techniques and capabilities
at advanced radiation facilities to explore the nature of these materials in
extreme conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.