* 1809311
* Integrable Structure of Interacting Particle Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Craig Tracy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 320,000.00

Statistical mechanics is that area of theoretical physics that predicts
macroscopic behavior of physical systems given the microscopic dynamics. The
dynamics can be either classical or quantum. Equilibrium statistical mechanics
(the foundational work going back to L. Boltzmann and J.W. Gibbs) has a well-
formulated, in principle, procedure to go from the microscopic dynamics to the
description of the macroscopic system. Carrying out this procedure can be
extremely difficult; nevertheless, the broad outlines are well understood. Most
physical systems are not in equilibrium and the main interest is their long-time
behavior. The Gaussian distribution (the familiar bell-shaped curve) is
important because of its universality; that is, it applies to a wide variety of
seemingly unrelated problems. The underlying common theme for all these problems
is the fact that the objects under study have some degree of "independence"; or
stated in more physical terms, are non-interacting (or weakly interacting).
These types of problems are well-understood both physically and mathematically.
The foundations of nonequilibrium statistical physics are not as well understood
as equilibrium statistical physics, in particular when the processes involve
interacting particles. This project is directed at understanding the processes
which are strongly interacting; and as such, there is no satisfactory general
theory as there exists for the non-interacting cases. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Simple models occupy a bigger role in understanding systems far from
equilibrium. The asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP), a model of
interacting particles on a lattice, is one such model. ASEP is one of the
simplest, nontrivial stochastic models in which to study transport phenomena as
it models processes far from equilibrium. This project, building on earlier work
of the one-point correlation, will analyze a class of higher-order correlations.
The first higher-order correlations are block probabilities for step initial
conditions. By a block of length L we mean a contiguous block of L particles
(starting, say, at position m on the lattice). Recently the probability of this
event was computed. The project will generalize this block probability result to
the case of step Bernoulli initial conditions. This same result is also the
starting point of the project where similar higher-order correlations will be
analyzed. For example, the correlation of the first particle with the particle
at position m. The methods employed are both combinatorial and analytical. In
particular new combinatorial identities generalizing those found for block
probabilities are an essential element of the project. The possible long term
impact of this project is to discover new universal limit laws that generalize
the Tracy-Widom distributions that appear in the limit laws for the one-point
fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.