* 1809830
* Sustainable Integration of Distributed Energy Resources in Distribution Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Timothy Mount, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 390,592.00

The proposed research addresses a major obstacle to a large-scale integration of
distributed energy resources that have transformative impacts on the
distribution systems and the overall energy economics of this century. The goal
is to develops system and control theoretic approaches, economic analysis, and
data analytical tools for the sustainable integration of distributed energy
resources (DER) such as behind-the-meter solar, distributed storage, and demand
response in distribution systems. The focus is on the dynamics of DER adoption
as results of engineering innovation and market interactions among regulated
utilities, emerging energy service providers, community DER, and prosumers.
Using nonlinear system theory, optimal control, and machine learning tools, the
proposed research aims to characterize the stability of DER adoption, the
potential of death spiral induced by the endogenous positive feedback, the
impacts of policy prescriptions such as net-metering and tax incentives, and
economic implications on equity and fairness. Complementing the theoretic
analysis are empirical studies of prevailing pricing mechanisms and new tariff
proposals. To this end, this research has a significant component in developing
data analytic and machine tools for extracting models from online data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses an emerging problem in DER
adoption in distribution system. The proposed Research has potential to
contribute a fundamental understanding of the interactions among consumers,
regulated utilities, and service providers. The research will provide a set of
novel system and control theoretic tools in analyzing different DER integration
models, market designs, and policy prescriptions. The proposed research advances
the state of the art theory and practices and helps to unleash the full
potential of distributed energy resources through an innovative, economically
viable, and operationally secure pathway to a new paradigm of power
distribution. The multidisciplinary nature of this research provides rich
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students and enriches curriculum
developments in a critical area engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.