* 1809356
* Localizing Sources of Network Diffusion via Graph Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Gonzalo Mateos Buckstein, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 01/31/2022
* USD 245,229.00

Localizing Sources of Network Diffusion via Graph Signal Processing&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade there has been a growing fascination
with the complex connectedness of modern society. As a result of the pervasive
interest in scientific analysis at a system level along with the ever-growing
capabilities for high-throughput data collection in various fields, the study of
networks has increased dramatically with multidisciplinary research efforts from
researchers ranging from physics to systems engineering and the bio-behavioral
sciences. As modern interconnected systems grow in size and importance, while
they become more complex and heterogeneous, there is an urgent need to advance a
holistic theory of networks. In this context, research in this project will
contribute towards understanding the inherent complexities of large-scale and
strongly coupled systems ranging from critical engineering infrastructures to
the brain. It will also impact teaching and design of networks, as well as
signal processing theory and practice at the fundamental level. At a broader
scale, through cross-domain extrapolation of this project's Network Science
leitmotif, the insights and technologies developed here will provide valuable
tools for fundamental science and engineering research, positively impact
environment and economy, and permeate benefits to cyber-security, IoT
technologies, neuroscience, healthcare and sensing-integration for cyber-
physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort places particular
emphasis on modeling, identification, and controllability of distributed network
processes - often conceptualized as signals defined on the vertices of a graph.
To untangle the latent structure of such signals, the key novel insight is to
view them as outputs of unobserved graph filters that model the emergence of
complex network dynamics. Albeit simple, graph filters are appealing since they
represent linear transformations between graph signals that can be implemented
via local interactions among nodes, and they are well-suited to model network
diffusion processes while remaining analytically tractable. In this direction,
the research agenda is to develop novel theory and algorithms for the
challenging problem of localizing sources of network diffusion given an observed
(output) graph signal, e.g., a spatial temperature profile measured by a
wireless sensor network, an opinion profile in a social network, or the neural
activity in different regions of the brain. At a fundamental level, this effort
broadens the scope of classical blind system identification to networks, or, of
blind deconvolution of temporal and spatial signals to unstructured graph
domains. Advocating a graph signal processing approach the aim tis o boost the
interest in the area beyond its theoretical aesthetics as an elegant
generalization of classical signal processing, and highlight its practical
implications when solving real-world engineering problems encountered with
sensor, social and brain networks, to name a few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.