* 1809455
* Collaborative Research: Microengineered electroactive polymer strain sensors towards soft self-powered wearable cyber-physical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kam Leang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,972.00

Recent research efforts have emphasized the vital role of soft strain sensors in
a variety of applications in bioengineering, rehabilitation and medicine, soft
robotics, and human-machine interactions. Current soft strain sensors often
necessitate external power for operation that severely limits the possibility to
make such sensors light weight, comfortable to wear, and capable of functioning
over long periods of time. On the other hand, existing self-powered sensors,
such as piezoelectric ceramics, are typically very stiff, non-stretchable, and
limited to extremely small deformations. Thus, there exists a clear and urgent
need to identify novel sensing systems that combine self-powered behavior with
soft mechanical characteristics. This research will result in the development of
the next generation of soft, self-powered, high sensitivity polymer-based strain
sensors for applications in novel biomedical and soft robotics endeavors. When
successfully deployed, these sensors could be embedded in smart gloves for use
in hand rehabilitation by patients suffering from stroke or Parkinson's disease,
as well as an instrumentation suite for prosthetic devices or in human-machine
interfaces, or could be embedded in wearable adhesive patches and interfaced
with smartphones and the internet for continuous remote personal health
monitoring of vital signs. Furthermore, this project will lead to discover novel
electroactive materials systems, promote advancements in advanced manufacturing
and mechatronics, and benefit the multiphysics modeling community. This research
will support and impact the education of graduate and undergraduate students,
contributing to the formation of the next generation of researchers, engineers,
and educators. Active involvement of underrepresented students will be pursued
via educational and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
at establishing a new class of electroactive materials with superior
multiphysics properties towards soft, self-powered, high sensitivity strain
sensor applications in cyber-physical systems. Ionic polymer metal composites
are electroactive soft composite materials that comprise a thin electrically
charged polymer membrane, plated with noble metal electrodes, and infused with a
charged solution. Due to their combined self-powered sensor behavior and soft
mechanical characteristics, ionic polymer metal composites emerge as an ideal
candidate for soft strain sensor applications. However, inconsistent and
uncontrollable morphology of their polymer-metal interfaces poses the challenges
of limited sensitivity, poor property control, and non-versatile mode of
operation. So far, these challenges have limited the use of these materials in
critical engineering applications. It is hypothesized that the multiphysics
sensing properties of ionic polymer metal composites can be dramatically
enhanced by tailored 3D-structured microengineered polymer-metal interfaces. To
test this hypothesis, this research will develop a novel fabrication process
integrating electroless chemical reduction with inkjet printing to prepare ionic
polymer metal composites with microengineered interfaces. These interfaces are
responsible for inhomogeneous strain developed in response to a mechanical
stimulus and its subsequent electrochemical transduction and sensing
performance. The main goal of this research is to gain a comprehensive
understanding of the structure-property relationships in microengineered ionic
polymer metal composites that determine enhanced strain sensing performance.
This goal will be achieved by integrating theoretical multiphysics modeling and
experimental efforts and by synergizing the investigators' complementary
expertise in modeling of smart materials and systems, advanced manufacturing,
sensing systems, and mechatronics and controls. This project will elucidate the
role of polymer-electrode interfaces in shaping the chemoelectromechanical
response of the system and formalize experimentally validated models that
incorporate interface morphology information to predict multiphysics sensing
properties. The potential of the proposed sensing system will be demonstrated by
designing, manufacturing, and testing functional sensors in experimental
platforms for studies on soft robotics and human-machine interaction. The
knowledge gained through this project will significantly advance the state of
understanding of electroactive materials towards development of high performance
sensing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.