* 1809343
* Quantum Control, Chaos, and Measurement with Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andrew Jordan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on the measurement and control of quantum mechanical
systems that comprise circuits made from
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum physics has undergone a
renaissance of activity, spurred on by the discovery of quantum information
theory. The principles of quantum physics are being applied towards developing
new kinds of computers, sensors, and simulators, that can surpass in performance
their classical analogs. Superconducting quantum circuits are a leading
candidate for making quantum computing elements because of fast processing
speeds and their ability to preserve quantum information from environmental
interference for long times. They are also excellent testbeds for fundamental
quantum and condensed matter physics because they can be precisely controlled
and measured. This PI and his group will advance theoretical investigations of
these systems together with experimental collaborators. The research team will
investigate the possibility of chaotic behavior emerging during the operation of
these quantum systems. Chaos in this case is characterized by sensitive
dependence of the system's dynamics to small changes to the system's initial
conditions. Another problem that will be tackled is how to make measurements of
system parameters as precisely as possible, a topic important for quantum
sensing. A final research topic concerns how to transfer energy and light
between spatially distant superconducting circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the grant will provide training for graduate students,
as well as a summer class for high-school students that will include teaching
quantum physics at a qualitative level using minimal mathematics. In addition,
the PI will write a book based on his previous experience teaching that class,
presenting basic quantum phenomena at a high-school level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to advance fundamental
understanding of quantum control, chaos, and measurement with superconducting
quantum circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the interface of quantum and condensed
matter physics there has been fruitful recent activity utilizing superconducting
quantum circuits. This award funds several research topics in this frontier
field. The PI and his research team will apply the stochastic path integral
theory of continuous quantum measurements, developed in the PI's group, to
research dynamical chaos of continuously measured, driven quantum systems. The
most likely paths of the monitored quantum system are described by a set of
nonlinear, deterministic, equations of motion. By considering a time-dependent
Hamiltonian, chaos in the most likely paths is predicted to occur in relatively
simple quantum situations. Quantum enhanced metrology for superconducting
circuits will also be developed, building on recent demonstrations of a scaling-
law improvement in the precision of frequency measurements. Limitations of
decoherence for metrology may be overcome with methods such as dynamical
decoupling. The PI's group will investigate more complicated cases where the
parameter itself is a quantum one, so the measurement disturbance of the
parameter must be considered. As a third topic, the research team will
investigate energy and photon transfer with entanglement creation between
superconducting cavities and circuits. The theoretical research will be pursued
in collaboration with groups of experimental
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the grant will
provide training for graduate students, as well as a summer class for high-
school students that will include teaching quantum physics at a qualitative
level using minimal mathematics. In addition, the PI will write a book based on
his previous experience teaching that class, presenting basic quantum phenomena
at a high-school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.