* 1809143
* Band Flips and Bound States in Leaky-Mode Resonant Photonic Lattices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 367,999.00

Abstract title: Band Flips and Bound States in Leaky-Mode Resonant Photonic
Lattices&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical part&lt;br/&gt;A photonic lattice is
a periodic structure of materials with differing refractive indices. It is
analogous to the familiar crystal lattice possessing a regular atomic
arrangement. Photonic lattices effectively reflect, filter, and redirect
incident light. Metamaterials constitute a new class of photonic lattices
wherein principal performance metrics are controlled by the properties of a
collection of subwavelength particles. Periodic and aperiodic metasurfaces and
metagratings can be fashioned to provide complex functionality in extremely
compact format even as single-layer &amp;#64257;lms. Lossless dielectric media
are particularly promising for high-ef&amp;#64257;ciency applications. Thus,
there is great interest in exploring metamaterials as building blocks for high-
performance photonic devices including metalenses, perfect re&amp;#64258;ectors,
and new types of holograms. Here, we propose to demonstrate new fundamental
effects in nanophotonic resonance systems that are connected to asymptotic bound
states in the spectral continuum. The new understanding generated under the
project may lead to innovative ways to control light. The project provides
excellent analytical and experimental experience for undergraduate and graduate
students thus supporting the development of the next-generation workforce in
photonics technology. If successful, the project will lead to innovative optical
engineering ideas with substantial economic benefits and societal value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical part&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to conduct research into band flips found to occur in leaky-mode photonic
lattices. Their connection with non-leaky photonic states or bound states in the
continuum (BIC) is of great interest. We seek solid physical understanding of
these band flips and associated bound-state transitions and propose to
demonstrate them experimentally with proof-of-concept prototypes. These elements
will be fashioned as periodic nanostructures in nanocomposites with nanoimprint
lithography allowing perfect control of spatial modulation, harmonic content,
and spectral linewidths. We investigate fundamental aspects of the resonance
interactions in these devices. The detailed spectral properties including band
structure will be measured. Thus, we will treat photonic thin-film lattices
supporting resonant leaky modes. Their properties include versatile spectra,
polarization effects, substantial resonant Q-factors with strong local fields,
and phase control. The band structure is unique supporting a leaky edge and a
non-leaky edge for each supported resonant mode if the lattice is symmetric. The
non-leaky edge is associated with a bound state in the continuum (BIC), or
embedded eigenvalue, currently of great scientific interest. It is possible to
control the width of the leaky band gap by lattice design. As a modal band
closes, there results a quasi-degenerate state?this state is remarkable as it is
possible to transit to it by parametric and material choice as shown in this
proposal. It is possible to dither dynamically around this point with band-edge
transitions into and out of the BIC dispersion branch. There are associated
modulation and tuning possibilities. Using semianalytical and rigorous
mathematical methods, we will characterize band flips and BICs relative to
lattice harmonic content as this has great effect on the band properties. We
will study BIC-generated passbands under leaky-mode band flips for the various
mode bands. Moreover, we can implement band flips using double resonance
structures with paired leaky-mode devices. When the devices are close to each
other, the resonance bands interact via evanescent-wave coupling. This
configuration possesses additional interference effects along with the band-
transition and BIC properties of the simpler embodiments. Electrically induced
coupling in and out of the bound continuum states might be possible. The new
band-flip concept proposed here is unexplored with high potential impact in
various branches of photonics along with exciting possibilities for new
scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.