* 1809372
* Elucidation of ligand-centered electrochemical reactivity in complex transition metal oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 338,805.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Batteries store electrical energy through
electrochemical reactions at electrodes. In the positive electrode of Li-ion
technologies, these reactions involve a change in oxidation state of a
transition metal in a solid compound. This project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
pushes the limits of these reactions to increase the amount of energy that can
be used between charges. The researchers investigate the ability of oxide ions
in solids to change their electron count, in addition to the transition metal
ions. They advance the understanding of this alternative reactivity by
describing changes in exemplary compounds, in view of their stability and
cyclability. The viability of this new chemical avenue to tailor materials which
effectively store large amounts of electrical energy is established at a
fundamental level. Such materials would boost the energy storage of Li-ion
batteries, thereby transforming existing and emerging applications in portable
electronics, transportation and the smart grid. This project also structures
research experiences for undergraduate and high school students from
Chicagoland, on topics relevant to modern challenges in chemistry and
technology. Recruitment is vigorous among the highly diverse community at the
University of Illinois at Chicago, to reach populations that are often
recognized as underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Current battery electrode materials are unable to reversibly
accommodate redox changes of more than one electron per total transition metal
content. The formal activity of transition metal centers is traditionally
employed to account for chemical changes during these redox reactions. In
oxides, recent studies suggest that bands with a large oxygen character can
supply additional charge beyond the amount compensated at transition metal
centers. The descriptions of the associated modifications of crystal and
electronic structure, especially locally, remain deficient, and so is the
understanding of the role of the specific transition metal. Furthermore, the
reactions involve chemical states that could be unstable, potentially triggering
secondary reaction pathways. This project, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
produces a comprehensive picture of the fundamental chemical and structural
changes to assess reversibility, stability, and, therefore, viability. The
researchers combine a suite of spectroscopic, diffraction and scattering
techniques to gather insights into these processes. Their focus is on gathering
the greatest chemical detail for model systems showing evidence of this novel
reactivity, without constraints from technological applicability. The ability to
control anion-only redox activity without irreversible reactions has the
potential to unlock families of compounds that transcend existing frontiers in
charge storage capacity. The educational component of this project aims at
encouraging undergraduates at the University of Illinois at Chicago to pursue
research activities in energy applications, an economic sector that continues to
witness job growth and demands highly skilled professionals, by providing
mentorship in structured experiences with the team. Through outreach activities,
the researchers also convey the importance and value of chemistry and energy to
K-12 students in Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.