* 1809888
* Nucleation Control of Conjugated Polymers through Melt-Crystallization and Self-Seeding
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lucia Fernandez-Ballester, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2023
* USD 345,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semicrystalline conjugated polymers
are a class of electrically conductive materials currently in research for use
in flexible electronics, solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and sensors. The
morphology that develops in these polymers is determined by processing
conditions and dictates final electronic, optical, and mechanical properties.
Conjugated polymers are typically processed through utilization of organic
solvents, the use of which poses environmental concerns. In contrast, melt-
processing has received little attention, so the fundamental mechanism of
crystallization from the melt state and the types of morphologies that can be
attained for these polymers remain poorly understood. The research to be
conducted here has potential to enable new solvent-free approaches for
processing semicrystalline conjugated polymers with less environmental impact
than their solution-processed counterparts, and to provide access to novel
morphologies (and thus properties) not attainable through crystallization in the
presence of solvents. This project explores how molecular attributes and melt-
processing approaches can be employed to manipulate the crystallization process
and the resulting semicrystalline structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will also seek to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in science by
actively recruiting female and minority students, and will result in training of
undergraduate students through research opportunities. It will also involve
training of graduate students in a field of great value in both academic and
industrial settings. Results of this research will be broadly disseminated by
publishing in relevant journals, presenting at conferences, and making materials
and publications available online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to control the
melt crystallization process of a benchmark conjugated polymer by manipulating
its nucleation behavior through self-seeding both under quiescent and flow
conditions. For this purpose, the processes of nucleation and growth and the
interplay of molecular attributes and processing variables during melt-
crystallization will be explored. The obtained knowledge will allow control and
optimization of the resulting semicrystalline morphology (which is key to
optimizing properties) through solventless processing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the proposed work is two-fold. On one
hand, it will advance fundamental knowledge of the mechanism of melt-
crystallization of conjugated polymers, providing insight into the steps of
nucleation and crystalline growth, the detailed morphologies that develop during
crystallization from the melt state, and the specific role of polymer molecular
attributes and well-defined processing conditions. The acquired knowledge will
serve to establish similarities and discrepancies between the basic melt
crystallization process of conjugated polymers and that of classical insulating
polymers. On the other hand, this project will explore how solvent-free
processing and selection of polymer chain characteristics (particularly
molecular weight and molecular weight distribution) can be used to tailor
semicrystalline morphology through manipulation of the nucleation step under
quiescent and flow conditions. It is expected that some approaches developed for
control of nucleation in traditional polymer melts may be applicable to
conjugated polymers as well. Therefore, the proposed work will ultimately
provide a framework that allows control of semicrystalline morphology when a
conjugated polymer is crystallized directly from its melt
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.