* 1810143
* Acoustoelectric Amplification in Composite Piezoelectric-Silicon Cavities: A Circuit-Less Amplification Paradigm for RF Signal Processing and Wireless Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Reza Abdolvand, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 319,999.00

This project aims to introduce a new family of electro-acoustic devices that
utilize the coupling between the electrons and phonons in a semiconducting
substrate to amplify bulk acoustic waves in a micro-scale piezoelectric-on-
silicon acoustic cavity/resonator. Acoustic resonators are used in a wide
variety of applications including wireless transceivers and miniaturized
sensors, and their significance in facilitating technological innovation is only
going to grow for the foreseeable future. For many decades, surface acoustic
wave (SAW) devices fabricated on piezoelectric substrates and quartz-based
resonators dominated this field. During the past decade, bulk acoustic wave
(BAW) devices fabricated based on sputtered thin-film Aluminum Nitride have
changed the landscape by extending the application of acoustic devices to higher
frequency bands at smaller footprint and lower manufacturing cost. This
proposal, if successful, will have a sizable impact on further extending the
application of BAW resonators in new fields as the proposed acoustoelectric
amplification will offer unmatched overall system-level reduction in cost, size,
and power consumption while offering improved overall performance. The principal
investigator (PI) has a track record of promoting diversity, particularly
through supporting female students to engage in research and working with
university-wide programs that are dedicated to promoting research experience for
minorities. He is also a co-PI on an NSF-supported research experience for
teachers (RET) site. The resources available through this project will directly
impact the PI's involvement in all such activities by providing new
research/teaching opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to demonstrate that bulk-mode resonant cavities made of thin
composite piezoelectric-silicon substrates such as lithium-niobate (LN)-on-
silicon can be a breeding ground for a flurry of devices in which bulk acoustic
waves are amplified through application of a DC current, eliminating the need
for large actuation areas to achieve low signal loss. The models and preliminary
results predict that &gt;50 dB of signal gain is achievable in a 0.2-mm-long LN-
on-silicon cavity at GHz frequency range. The magnitude of the achievable gain
is limited to the coupling efficiency of the piezoelectric material and the
electron mobility in the semiconductor (i.e., silicon) which could be
independently optimized in the proposed composite structure. To study this novel
concept and explore the performance limit, the following specific tasks are
planned: 1) The underlying theory of acoustoelectric amplification in composite
structures will be studied in detail, and the design guidelines for optimized
gain and power efficiency will be developed. 2) Devices will be designed and
fabricated for two specific applications; first, circuit-less oscillators at GHz
frequency in which the acoustoelectric amplification compensates for the total
acoustic cavity loss in order to achieve sustained spontaneous oscillation; and
second, bulk-mode monolithic filters with near-zero insertion loss. 3)
Application of circuit-less signal amplification will also be explored in
passive wireless piezoelectric resonant sensors to improve their limited
resolution and range. The circuit-less signal amplification, if successfully
demonstrated, will advance the development of filters to achieve comparable
signal-to-noise ratios with much smaller size than existing BAW/SAW filters used
in wireless transceivers today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.