* 1810641
* RAPID: Northern California Wildfire Emissions and their Atmospheric Chemical Transformations in a Highly Populated Urban Region
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Allen Goldstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 187,893.00

This RAPID research focuses on the analysis of data and samples collected during
the massive wildfires burning in Napa and Sonoma Counties that began on October
10, 2017. Samples were collected from the beginning of the fires for
approximately 2 weeks, through periods of major pollution episodes in the San
Francisco Bay region that resulted from the interaction of biomass burning
emissions with urban air pollution. The fires also burned more than 5000 homes
and commercial structures, resulting in emissions from the burning of household
and commercial items not typically found in emissions from more remote
wildfires. This research is expected to be of great public interest due to the
focus on emissions from fires that caused stinging eyes and throats, closed
schools, and curtailed planned outdoor activities.

This work will quantify the contribution of emissions from these fires to the
observed concentrations of organic aerosol, and document how this contribution
changes with atmospheric aging. It is expected to lead to the identification of
additional sources contributing to organic aerosol, both primary and secondary,
that may influence the aging of the biomass burning emissions. Gas/particle
partitioning data will be used to elucidate information on the formation
mechanisms for secondary organic aerosol. The temporal and chemical resolution
provided by the observations during plume aging will be an important tool for
investigating fire emission and transformation processes.