* 1810081
* Heterogeneous Interconnect Stitching Technology (HIST) For High-Performance Computing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Muhannad Bakir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Every aspect of modern life (e.g., economy, health, and communication) is
dependent on advanced electronics. As such, discovering methods that improve the
performance of electronic systems will directly lead to improvements in quality
of life. Moreover, improving the energy efficiency of electronics directly
impacts society as it reduces the carbon footprint of modern data centers and
increases the lifetime of ubiquitous mobile devices. This project aims to
improve both the performance and energy efficiency of electronic systems by
exploring a new electronic integration concept based on heterogeneous
interconnect stitching. The principle innovation in the proposed integration
approach is the use of stitch chips on the surface of a package to form dense
and low-energy interconnects between the assembled dice. The assembled chips,
moreover, are interconnected using multi-height and multi-pitch compressible
micro-interconnects, which are high density mechanically flexible interconnects
that enable robust interconnection between all chips. To accomplish our
objectives, the following fundamental research topics are investigated: 1)
analysis of the power supply noise in multi-die assemblies using interconnect
stitching; 2) experimentally demonstrating the assembly of a 2x2 array of chips
using interconnect stitching; and 3) extracting the frequency-dependent
parasitics of the compressible micro-interconnects up to 50 GHz. All research
will be performed at Georgia Tech, which is one of the nodes within the NSF
supported National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure program. This
enables us to easily expose K-12 students to this research and encourage them to
pursue science and engineering education. The proposed research will also
involve the graduate and undergraduate students conducting the research with
multiple disciplines that include electrical engineering, mechanical
engineering, and chemical engineering. Such research experience will enhance
their education and better prepares students to work in industry because they
would already have a fundamental understanding of how different disciplines
interact with each other in electronic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance and power dissipation of electronic computing systems have become
increasingly dominated by interconnections. The proposed Heterogeneous
Interconnect Stitching Technology (HIST) can greatly reduce interconnect length
between components; thereby offering higher bandwidth density at reduced energy
per bit. Moreover, the proposed research will enable the integration of active
devices (photonic, logic, memory, etc.) in very close proximity (i.e., face-to-
face bonding); thereby greatly reducing electrical parasitics and improving
interconnect densities. But, the proposed integration approach may exacerbate
the challenges in power delivery due to increased power density of the assembled
package. As a result, the intellectual merit of the proposed research is
twofold. First, the proposed research will develop fundamental understanding of
the power delivery network design in the proposed heterogeneous integration
approach to minimize parasitics-induced voltage drops and switching noise as a
function of several technology parameters. Second, the proposed research will
experimentally demonstrate the key interconnect and assembly technologies that
will enable low-power and high-performance computing systems. The experimental
effort will specifically focus on developing a 2x2 array of dice interconnected
using stitch chips and the characterization of the HIST interconnect channels up
to 50 GHz. The experimental research will also explore robust and high-yield
batch-scale fabrication of multi-height and multi-pitch compressible micro-
interconnects as well as their mechanical reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.