* 1810508
* Deep Optical Learning Devices and Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kelvin Wagner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 366,000.00

In this proposal the authors introduce a new concept for an optical device, the
optical Rectifying Linear Unit or ReLU, and motivate it as the key enabling
technology required for constructing an optical deep learning system. The ReLU
neuron was introduced to alleviate the vanishing gradient problem in deep multi-
layer neural networks, and it has allowed the training of state-of-the-art deep
neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors present an efficient optical
implementation of the ReLU in which a bidirectional transmissive optical switch
that is controlled by an interferometric differential detector part of the
forward propagating field implements both the rectifying linear forward response
but also the derivative needed for gating the backwards propagating error needed
for deep learning. The optical ReLU is the key component necessary to realize
the vision of a physically implemented trainable optical machine learning
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such an optical deep learning system has the
potential to scale up in performance to a level far in excess even the most
optimistic projections for the further development of massively parallel super
computers and will use much less energy by harnessing the efficient analog
computational capabilities of coherent photons. The research team will design,
fabricate, test, and demonstrate large arrays of these new optical ReLU devices
using liquid-crystal-on-Silicon smart-pixel technology. A proof-of-concept
laboratory demonstration of a self-aligning deep learning optical system will
then be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train a graduate
student in the fields of machine learning and deep neural networks as well as
CMOS device design and fabrication, liquid crystal chemistry and physics,
coherent and nonlinear optics, lasers, and computer controlled experimental
technology. Such a cross-disciplinary background will produce a nimble research
leader capable of advancing the frontiers of both optical and machine learning
science and technology. During this program the PI will continue to develop a
Massively Open Online Course (MOOC) in the areas of Fourier optics and
holography that will help to train a new generation of optical
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.