* 1810984
* Re-Living Paleontology: Studying How Augmented Reality Immersion and Interaction Impact Engagement and Communicating Science to the Public
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* William Swartout, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,471,459.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. This Research in
Service to Practice project will study how visual immersion and interactivity in
augmented reality (AR) affects visitors' engagement and understanding of
science. The research involves creating different versions of an AR exhibit to
communicate paleontology research from the La Brea Tar Pits to the general
public. Different versions of the exhibit will be compared to learn how design
choices for immersion and interactivity impact visitors' engagement and
understanding of science. The result of this study should be a model to follow
for similar public exhibits, as well as design principles that generalize to AR
experiences for a broader range of informal learning environments. This project
will also demonstrate and report on specific AR mechanisms that help visitors
understand the scientific process and increase knowledge about paleontology
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study includes a user-centered design and
evaluation process with both formative and comparative studies. This project
investigates two high-level design factors for mobile AR: visual immersion and
interactivity. These impact the learning experience and the development so
extensively that multiple versions are seldom compared. These factors also have
unique considerations for informal settings, such as how to balance immersion
against situational awareness (e.g., 3D viewers reduce field of view). One goal
of this project is to systematically compare qualitatively different AR designs
that convey equivalent science content and study these tradeoffs empirically.
The second goal is to leverage these findings to publicly release an AR
experience that promotes engagement, increases understanding of science, and
reduces scientific misconceptions. This research will also contribute to
understanding usability and logistical issues for different AR designs for
public, outdoor, informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.