* 1810779
* Traces in Algebraic K-theory and Topological Fixed Point Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kathleen Ponto, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2023
* USD 184,966.00

One of the barriers to answering many math questions is that there is just too
much information - too many examples and too many possibilities. There are many
ways to attempt to manage this problem but many of them are based on not
remembering some of the differences between our examples. One way to do this is
to define a function, an invariant, that assigns some simpler information, say a
number, to each of our examples. This by itself doesn't help make progress since
there maybe no special pattern to the function and it may distinguish between
too many examples. We can make this work much better by imposing conditions on
these functions. One of the most important options is to ask that for a function
that can determined by its values on smaller pieces. This perspective is very
powerful and informs approaches to many topological invariants, but important
invariants associated to fixed point theory have escaped its reach. The goal of
this project is to rectify this and use the tools that prioritize this
additivity to further develop fixed point invariants. The project also supports
the PI's work with the socioeconomically diverse graduate student population at
the University of Kentucky. The PI has worked to build a community where
students can identify difficulties, feel comfortable asking questions, and learn
to effectively advocate for themselves.

The additivity of the Euler characteristic is one of the most important
properties of this very important invariant. One way to capture this additivity
is to observe that the Euler characteristic can be understood as the image of a
class in algebraic K-theory. Classically, the generalizations of the Euler
characteristic that relate to topological fixed point theory ignored the
significance of additivity. The work in this project seeks to rectify this
omission. Previous results suggest two to approaches to this goal. The first
recognizes that the Reidemeister trace, a refinement of the Euler characteristic
that gives a converse to the Lefschetz fixed point theorem, takes values in
topological Hochschild homology. Topological Hochschild homology receives a map
from topological restriction homology and it seems likely that the Reidemeister
trace will lift through this map to a topologically meaningful class in
topological restriction homology. An alternative approach is to start with the
question of understanding K-theory of endomorphisms of modules over E-infinity
ring spectra. From here the goal is to describe connections between the
cyclotomic trace and trace in bicategories and symmetric monodial categories. In
all of this work it also important to ground the results in topological meaning
- to verify that classes constructed in these various groups are invariants
associated to interesting questions. For example, these constructions should
start by giving interesting invariants for periodic points and possibly extend
to invariants for dynamical systems. This perspective also fits within a longer
term goal of use fixed point theory as a test case for new methods of producing
additive invariants that arise from wrong-way-maps or transfers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.