* 1810880
* Collaborative Research: Consistent Risk Estimation under High-Dimensional Asymptotics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Kamiar Rahnama Rad, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 69,999.00

Learning from large datasets has been the cornerstone of modern innovations and
discoveries in science, medicine, and technology. Fast prediction of unseen
events is a canonical goal in statistical learning. A classic approach to this
end is leave-one-out cross-validation, a time-consuming routine of leaving a
datum out, fitting the model on the rest, and testing it on the left out datum,
repeatedly. The recent emergence of massive data has exacerbated the
computational infeasibility of such approaches. Moreover, in many recent
instances, the number of features per observation can be extremely large, adding
another challenging facet to the fast estimation of prediction error. To
overcome these problems a new set of scalable and consistent risk estimators
will be developed in this project.

The importance of risk estimation has motivated this project of different
schemes, such as cross-validation, Stein's unbiased risk estimation (SURE),
Generalized cross-validation, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), and Bootstrap.
The emergence of high-dimensional datasets has challenged most classical
approaches to risk estimation. For instance, the large discrepancy between in-
sample and out-of-sample prediction error, in applications involving predictions
based on previously unseen features, makes it hard to rely on popular
estimators, such as SURE or AIC, in high-dimensional regimes where the number of
predictors is smaller than or at the same order as the number of observations.
On the other hand, the information value of a datum in these regimes (as opposed
to the information value of a datum in low-dimensional settings) casts doubt on
the reliability of other techniques, such as 5-fold cross-validation. The
project offers a novel theoretical framework to find the middle ground between
scalability and reliability, and specifically, to obtain theoretically
consistent and computationally efficient risk-estimation schemes under high-
dimensional settings. Since risk estimation is at the core of areas including
but not limited to machine learning, signal processing, medical imaging,
neuroscience, and social and environmental sciences, any success in this project
will lead to reliable and immediate scientific discoveries and better learning
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.