* 1810169
* Single photon nonlinear nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Qiang Lin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 06/30/2022
* USD 365,000.00

Non-Technical Description: Nonlinear optics forms a critical foundation for
modern optical science and photonic technology. Strong nonlinear optical effects
at the single photon level represent the ultimate efficiency of nonlinear
optics, which underlies crucially many important photonic functionalities such
as optical transistor, photonic logic, energy-efficient photonic computing,
high-efficiency single-photon conversion and detection, to name some. The
objective of the proposed research project is to explore and develop
transformative approaches that potentially offer unprecedented strength of
optical nonlinearities down to single photon level, significantly beyond current
state of the art. By engineering micro/nano-photonic structures to produce
intriguing mechanisms to enhance the nonlinear wave interactions, the PI's group
aim to open up a transformative research avenue towards single photon nonlinear
nanophotonics that is of immense importance for broad applications in nonlinear
optics, quantum photonics, communication, computing, and photonic information
processing in general. Fundamental research findings and device innovations will
be disseminated to the broader research communities through published papers;
the research outcomes will be also incorporated into the courses offered by the
PI at the University of Rochester. The proposed research would result in
training graduate students and undergraduate students in the diverse
interdisciplinary areas of nanophotonics, nonlinear optics, quantum photonics,
and photonic signal processing. Through the outreach programs, this project will
also help promote the interests and participations of K-12 students, and broaden
the participations from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The proposed research aims to explore and develop transformative
approaches to tackle the current grand challenge in realizing strong optical
nonlinear effects at the single photon and few photon level that are able to
operate at room temperature, at ambient environment, and over broad spectral
band. The proposed research will leverage novel intriguing light-matter
interaction mechanisms inside engineered micro/nano-photonic devices that are
able to significantly enhance nonlinear wave interactions. With strong expertise
in both the physics and engineering of nanophotonic devices, the PI's group plan
to carry out explorative research within the three-year effort, to study the
fundamental physics underlying such strong single-photon and few-photon
nonlinear effects, to develop novel nanophotonic device structures for strong
nonlinear wave interactions, to explore the potential ultimate efficiency limit
of nonlinear optical processes, to develop applications based upon these
extremely strong optical nonlinearities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.