* 1810586
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Meredith Palmer, Palmer                  Meredith       S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
focus is to understand the mechanisms underlying predator-prey dynamics in
natural systems. Prey make behavioral decisions to decrease their chances of
getting eaten, but the circumstances that elicit particular anti-predator
responses are still poorly understood. As the choice of prey behavior can have
cascading impacts on ecosystem dynamics, much work has been attempted to define
how prey make these decisions. However, many of these models fail to predict
observed anti-predator strategies in nature. The fellow will develop a new
predator-prey framework, incorporating a rarely-explored dimension of complex
communities. How predators modify their activity in response to competitors may
substantially alter the risk prey ultimately experience. The fellow will study
behavior of mammalian herbivores in ecosystems throughout Africa, using
extensive networks of camera-traps to capture prey behavioral strategies under
different predation regimes. To accomplish these aims, the fellow will work
extensively with local scientists and students, providing valuable training to
African K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students, in addition to running
capacity building workshops with government and non-governmental agencies. The
fellow will develop teaching tools and citizen science programs to introduce the
general public in the US and abroad to key concepts in ecology and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will quantify non-additive
effects of multiple predators on overall predation risk by examining how prey
mitigate combined risk at multiple spatial and temporal scales. The fellow test
(I) whether predator-predator interactions affect how aggregate predation risk
is structured spatiotemporally across a landscape, and (II) explore whether
these synergies are modulated by functional traits of the prey or the
environment by (III) developing novel statistical approaches for using camera-
trap data. This framework will be parameterized using data from intact systems
and tested to see whether removing hypothesized linkages between different
predators predicts prey behavior in degraded systems where portions of the
predator guild are extinct. The fellow will be working in multiple African
countries during the course of this research and will expend significant effort
training students locally and globally. She will also work to increase the
participation of diverse groups in STEM by developing citizen science and online
educational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.