* 1810494
* Superfluid-inspired reconfigurable magnetic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2022
* USD 345,000.00

Processing and transporting information are the central tasks in today's age of
information. Current devices that perform this task require increasing amount of
power. Many modern applications, such as mobile computing, on the other hand,
does not have access to large power sources to remain functional. This has
created a need to search for alternate means to process and transport
information. Superfluidity, that is coherent flow of information in the absence
of dissipation, provides an ideal solution to this problem. However, in
materials explored so far, the superfluidity has been limited to cryogenic
temperatures. Recently, taking advantage of the advancement of efficient
electrical and thermal excitation of magnetic materials, phenomena inspired from
superfluidity have been proposed to exist in room temperature magnetic
materials. The goal of this project is to utilize such superfluid-inspired
phenomena to propose and numerically evaluate energy-efficient superfluid-
inspired magnetic devices. In particular, the prinicipal investigator will
construct novel magnetic analogues of Josephson junctions, which are the
building blocks of conventional cryogenic information processing and
communication devices. Moreover, exploiting the fact that magnetic materials
have inherently long memory and tunable properties, device functionality beyond
those possible in conventional Josephson junctions will also be explored. During
this project, the principal investigator will train undergraduate and graduate
students, in modern materials modelling, for enhancing the United States?
science, technology, engineering and math workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research aims at unraveling novel superfluid-inspired magnetic devices
by covering aspects-starting from the use of new magnetic materials to designing
and benchmarking of application-driven device concepts. For this purpose, the
following specific objectives will be pursued: (a) designing novel magnetic
insulator-based Josephson junctions which are inspired from superconducting
Josephson, (b) developing circuit theory for electrical and thermal bias driven
superflow of spin through magnetic Josephson junctions (in close analogy to
superconducting Josephson junctions) utilizing the phenomena of spin-orbit and
thermomagnonic torques, and (c) using the circuit theory to assemble magnetic
Josephson junctions for constructing new class of magnetic devices and
benchmarking them for classical to quantum information processing, communication
and energy harvesting applications. The last objective takes advantage of the
well-developed device concepts based on superconducting Josephson Junctions,
which can be mimicked within our proposed magnetic insulating systems. In
addition, the proposed magnetic devices (being electrically reconfigurable and
nonvolatile) add functionality beyond those existing in superconductor-based
devices, such as amenability to beyond von-Neumann in-memory computing
architectures. Exploring such device concepts will also form an integral part of
the last objective. The proposed approach combines, for the first time,
superfluid-based Josephson phenomena with above room temperature ordering of
magnets. By tapping into superfluid-like properties of magnets, it opens up
completely new avenues to solve the central technical challenge of achieving
minimal energy wastage at high operating temperature for the next-generation
information processing and communication devices. On a fundamental level, the
theoretical program will serve as a unique playground to test and discover new
phenomena at the interface of magnetism, superconductivity and
caloritronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.