* 1810318
* Collaborative Research: Intersubband transitions and devices in non-polar strain-compensated InGaN/AlGaN
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mikhail Belkin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The scientific objective of this proposal is to develop and test artificial
semiconductor nonlinear optical materials and semiconductor quantum cascade
lasers based on indium-aluminum-gallium-nitride materials. The indium-aluminum-
gallium-nitride materials system has fundamental advantages over the materials
that were previously used for making quantum cascade lasers and artificial
semiconductor nonlinear optical materials. In particular, indium-aluminum-
gallium-nitride semiconductor lasers operating in the terahertz spectral range
(frequencies in the range of 1-10 THz) are expected to be able to operate at
room temperature, unlike semiconductor lasers previously demonstrated in other
materials systems. Room-temperature terahertz semiconductor lasers will have a
major transformative impact on the instrumentation operating in this frequency
range. Indium-aluminum-gallium-nitride materials are also expected to enable the
creation of a novel kind of nonlinear metamaterials for operation at the
wavelengths used by fiber-optics telecommunication equipment with
sub-1-picosecond response time. Two graduate students will be trained during the
course of the program. The two principal investigators will also continue their
annual participation in the National Science Foundation research experience for
undergraduate program and in various K-12 outreach activities at their
institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to develop intersubband optoelectronic devices
based on strain-compensated InGaN/AlGaN/GaN heterostructures grown on non-polar
m-plane GaN substrates for operation in the short-wavelength infrared
(wavelengths in the range 1.4-3 microns) and terahertz (wavelengths in the range
30-300 microns) regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Current intersubband
devices rely on materials with relatively low conduction band offsets (&lt;1 eV)
and low longitudinal optical phonon energies (~30-40 meV) that, respectively,
prevent intersubband devices from operating in the short-wavelength infrared and
limit the operation of terahertz quantum cascade lasers to cryogenic
temperatures. GaN/AlGaN heterostructures grown on c-plane substrates have been
previously investigated to overcome the abovementioned problems. GaN-based
materials system offers conduction band offsets over 2 eV and have optical
phonon energies of ~90 meV. However, strain-dependent piezo-electric fields make
it virtually impossible to produce desired intersubband bandstructure in
practical devices grown on c-plane substrates. Additionally, relatively small
heterostructure thickness, limited by strain, and poor optical field confinement
in the heterostructure prevented efficient light-matter interaction in devices
reported previously. The proposed AlInGaN heterostructures on m-plane GaN
substrates are free from strain-induced fields making reliable intersubband
bandstructure design possible. Strain-compensation will be used to overcome
critical thickness constrains in materials growth. The heterostructures will be
further processed into double-metal plasmonic cavities using
photoelectrochemical etching for substrate removal to enable efficient light-
matter integration. Two types of intersubband devices will be investigated:
double-metal waveguide THz QCLs and intersubband nonlinear metasurfaces for
operation in the telecommunication spectral range. The former devices represent
a viable path towards developing the first room-temperature electrically pumped
semiconductor lasers in the THz spectral range, while the latter devices offer a
path for developing intersubband metasurfaces with a giant nonlinear response
for short-wavelength infrared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.