* 1810358
* STEM Achievement and Participation among Mexican-Origin Students across Latino/a Destinations
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Elizabeth Ackert, Ackert                  Elizabeth      S
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2019
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Sociology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Robert Crosnoe at the Population Research
Center at the University of Texas at Austin, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating STEM experiences among Mexican-
origin students in K-12 education in new and established Latino/a destinations.
By focusing on the fast-growing and disadvantaged Mexican-origin student
population, this research addresses racial/ethnic inequality in STEM
participation. The study will identify aspects of communities and schools that
help or hinder positive STEM experiences among Mexican-origin students, which
can inform policy interventions to increase participation in STEM fields among
this underrepresented group. This research thus seeks to broaden STEM
participation in a growing and vulnerable population in U.S. schools while
supporting the career development of a scholar dedicated to this goal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the ways in which K-12 schools in
both traditional and emerging Latino/a destinations in the U.S. shape Mexican-
origin student experiences in STEM with three primary objectives: 1) To
determine whether Mexican-origin students attending schools in new destinations
have lower STEM participation and achievement than Mexican-origin students in
established communities; 2) To investigate whether systematic differences in
school contexts across Latino/a destinations explain such STEM disparities
between Mexican-origin students in new versus established destinations, and; 3)
To examine whether variability in school contexts within new and established
Latino/a destinations moderates links between destinations and STEM
participation and achievement among Mexican-origin students. The Postdoctoral
Fellow will pursue these goals with quantitative analyses of datasets from the
U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Education Statistics. This
research will draw from and contribute to disciplinary fields including
sociology, demography, and education. This work will advance inquiry into STEM
outcomes among underrepresented groups and will contribute to debates about
immigrant-receiving contexts and incorporation among the Mexican-origin
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.