* 1810005
* Synaptic dynamics in ferroelectric devices and their application to deep neural networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Saibal Mukhopadhyay, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 458,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;One of the grand visions of the modern computing era has
been to mimic the cognitive capabilities of the human-brain, and even to rival
them. This vision is becoming possible due to recent advances in machine
learning and artificial intelligence. Current computing technologies are still
far from creating a digital entity that is as capable and as energy efficient as
a biological brain. Digital learning systems are notoriously power hungry and
can require a room-full of digital computer clusters. Compare that to the human
brain which performs all its feats at a meager power budget of twenty watts and
a weight of less than two kilograms. One reason for this inefficiency is that
transistors, the basic building blocks of digital computers, do not function in
the same way as synapses, the basis of biological computing. The proposed
research aims at overcoming this barrier by making a relatively basic change to
the structure of the transistor. An emerging material with ferroelectric
properties, doped hafnium oxide, will be introduced into transistors. The new
device is called a ferroelectric field effect transistor and can emulate the
properties of biological synapses. In this project, the unique properties of the
synaptic ferroelectric transistor will be used to design and optimize artificial
intelligence cores such as deep neural networks that vastly exceed the
performance and efficiency of the current state-of-the-art. The project will
train participating students in an interdisciplinary setting that involves
material science, circuit design, computer architecture, and neuro-science. The
STEM outreach and education programs will help participating undergraduates,
high school students and high school teachers to broaden their experience in
computer science and novel semiconductor
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore the
rich domain dynamics in ferroelectric hafnia-zirconia alloy gated silicon
transistors to build synaptic units for vector matrix multiplication crossbars.
The architecture and system level work will entail the design and optimization
of full-blown deep neural networks based on these ferroelectric crossbar
kernels. Physics based compact models of ferroelectric transistors that account
for the important details of domain dynamics will be developed which will tie
the material-device level work and the architecture-system level work. A key
feature of the project is its vertically integrated approach that involves
different levels in the computing hierarchy from materials to systems.
Innovations at all these different levels will ensure that the interesting
properties of the emerging ferroelectric device technology can be fully
leveraged to create an energy efficient and high-performance hardware platform
for advanced machine learning and data intensive cognitive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.