* 1810867
* Kahler-Einstein Metrics on Fano Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Chi Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2021
* USD 193,421.00

Geometric shapes can be either smooth or singular. Smooth ones have been studied
effectively by the calculus, while singular geometric shapes are much more
difficult to study in general although they appear with abundance in the world
around us. One method to understand singular shapes is by measuring distances
between their points. To do that, the best way is to use the so-called Einstein
structures, which originate from general relativity. In this project, the
investigator plans to study Einstein structures on a class of geometric shapes
called algebraic varieties, which are central objects in many branches of
mathematics. This study will allow us to measure distances and reveal certain
mysterious structures of algebraic varieties. This project requires combinations
of many techniques and will bring experts from different fields to interact. Its
outcome will have potential applications in the development of several theories,
including canonical metrics in differential geometry, stability theory in
algebraic geometry, and string theory in mathematical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will study the Yau-Tian-Donaldson
conjecture about the equivalence of K-stability and the existence of Kahler-
Einstein metrics on singular Fano varieties. This requires new strategies to
overcome difficulties due to the presence of singularities. The investigator has
introduced a new process, the minimization of normalized volumes, for detecting
local geometries of algebraic singularities. On the algebraic side, the
investigator will continue his research on the K-stability of Fano varieties by
studying minimization of normalized volumes and applying deep techniques of the
minimal model program from algebraic geometry. This could lead to new criteria
for the K-stability of singular varieties. On the analytic side, the
investigator will apply various newly-developed techniques, including a
variational approach via pluripotential theory, a priori estimates for singular
complex Monge-Ampere equations, Cheeger-Colding-Tian's regularity theory from
metric geometry, algebraic structures on Gromov-Hausdorff limits, and
asymptotical analysis of singular metrics. The combination of these techniques
will be effective in solving Kahler-Einstein equations on singular
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.