* 1810645
* Singularities in Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Luca Spolaor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 10/31/2019
* USD 157,841.00

The study of geometric variational problems -- the `problem' here means finding
an object that minimizes some geometrically-defined notion of energy -- is one
of the oldest and most fascinating topics in mathematics, dating back at least
to the first "Nobel prize for mathematics" (the Fields Medal) awarded to J.
Douglas in 1932 for his advances in this field. Solutions of geometric
variational problems can describe equilibrium configurations of physical systems
or socio-economical models -- situations where we expect real-world systems to
naturally reach a minimum-energy configuration. As well, in the mathematical
field of topology -- where objects are regarded as equivalent no matter how they
are bent or stretched -- the solutions to variational problems can provide
preferred representatives within such large equivalence classes. The
investigation of geometric variational problems is thus of fundamental
importance both in pure mathematics and in applications. This project is
intended to significantly improve our knowledge on geometric variational
problems by addressing a series of old and new questions, whose answer will
require either the development of new techniques and ideas, or devising new
approaches to known methods. This will be done through the collaborations with
many leading experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
put a step forward in the study of geometric variational problems by dealing
with the following lines of research. Inspired by work of L. Simon, the
investigator proposes to study the optimal regularity of the singular set for
minimal surfaces close to special classes of minimal cones and to construct new
examples of singular area minimizing hypersurfaces. In the free-boundary
setting, following ideas of Caffarelli and Weiss, the investigator proposes to
study the regularity of the singular set of solutions to the Alt-Caffarelli
functional and the thin-obstacle problem. Finally, in a joint project with Y.
Liokumovich, the investigator proposes the problem of constructing smooth
minimal hypersurfaces for a generic set of metrics on a compact manifold,
generalizing works of Hardt-Simon and N. Smale. These problems are of
fundamental nature, as they could lead to extensions of theorems such as
Colding-Minicozzi's proof of the finite time extinction of the Ricci flow,
Marques-Neves' proof of Willmore's conjecture, or Schoen-Yau's proof of the
positive mass theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.