* 1810876
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: The Effects of the 2017 Central Mexico Earthquake on Reinforced Concrete Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Michael Kreger, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will support a collaborative team
of researchers from five U.S. universities to collect data to document the
performance of reinforced concrete buildings during the Puebla-Morelos, Mexico
earthquake of September 19, 2017. The ground shaking from this earthquake caused
widespread damage to buildings in the epicentral region, as well as in Mexico
City (approximately 120 kilometers from the epicenter). In Mexico City,
approximately 40 buildings collapsed, and over one thousand structures have been
identified with moderate to major structural damage. The 2017 earthquake, having
impacted an area that had already been shaken by a strong earthquake in 1985,
provides an opportunity to learn about the effectiveness of reinforced concrete
building repairs and retrofits made after the 1985 earthquake, as well as an
opportunity to study how modern and older, unrepaired reinforced concrete
buildings performed during strong ground motion. The majority of collapsed
buildings were constructed prior to 1985 before there were major seismic
revisions to building codes. There were also a few cases of newer and
retrofitted buildings that also sustained damage. Mexico City has soil
conditions ranging from stiff rock to very soft soil, producing a diverse set of
ground conditions affecting buildings that can facilitate understanding of
seismic building performance not only in Mexico, but also in the United States.
Because the United States and Mexico have similarities in reinforced concrete
building construction, the collected data from this earthquake will contribute
to better building design and performance assessment methods, numerical
simulation methods, and earthquake intensity indices in both countries, and help
foster safer buildings and more earthquake-resilient communities. The collected
data will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure, Data Depot and Reconnaissance
Integration Portal (http://wwww.DesignSafe-ci.org). Graduate students will
participate in the data collection and gain valuable post-earthquake field
experience. The project team will disseminate its data collection and research
findings through a webinar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this RAPID project
is to collect perishable data on reinforced concrete building damage that can be
used towards understanding and improving seismic performance of buildings and
the resilience of communities in the United States. The data collection in
Mexico will be conducted in collaboration with researchers and engineers in
Mexico and include the following activities: (1) survey buildings built near
recording stations with emphasis on retrofitted buildings, buildings that
survived the 1985 earthquake, and modern buildings, (2) document damage to non-
ductile reinforced concrete buildings for calibration of existing methodologies
used to identify vulnerable buildings in the United States, (3) map damage to
test commonly assumed correlations with earthquake intensity indices such as
peak ground acceleration, peak ground velocity, peak ground displacement, and
peak or discrete spectral values of acceleration, velocity and displacement, (4)
document the performance of instrumented and base-isolated buildings, (5) deploy
accelerometers on damaged and undamaged reinforced concrete buildings with and
without retrofits to record ambient vibrations and obtain building dynamic
properties, (6) evaluate numerical models of reinforced concrete buildings by
subjecting them to ground motion records obtained nearby and compare the
numerical estimates and observed performance, and (7) study relationships
between building performance and soil conditions.