* 1810513
* Topological Solitons in Liquid Crystals and Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Ivan Smalyukh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 638,928.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Colloids are abundant in nature, science and
technology, with examples ranging from milk to quantum dots that are of interest
for quantum computing. Similarly, liquid crystal ordering is important in
contexts ranging from biological membranes to displays in consumer devices. In
every pixel of a liquid crystal display, the direction of rod-like molecules is
rotated by a low-voltage electric field, so that the transmitted light can be
controlled to convey information at will. This facile electric switching, which
is at the heart of $500 billion per year global liquid crystal industry, deals
with very simple uniform and continuously distorted structures of the molecular
alignment field of rod-like molecules. The PI and his team study how liquid
crystals can be controlled to host knotted patterns of this molecular alignment
field. They study tiny rod-like and disc-like colloidal particles dispersed in a
liquid crystal to develop a "recipe book" for organizing particles into
precisely controlled structures. Electric and magnetic fields can interact with
these structures, knotting or unknotting them, which may enrich the means of
controlling light by liquid crystals. This research may lead to applications of
importance to society, such as new breeds of displays, beam steering and data
storage devices. PI combines this research with a broad range of synergistic
educational and outreach activities, including shows and science tours for
school teachers and students, advising student chapters of professional
societies, providing research experiences for students from minority-serving
institutions, advising undergraduate and PhD researchers, teaching conference
courses for liquid crystal industry, participation in visiting lecturer programs
and organization of conferences and summer
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI explores the
fundamental organizing principles behind topology-dictated self-assembly of
anisotropic liquid crystal molecules and colloidal nanoparticles into
topologically distinct soliton configurations that are thousands-to-millions
times larger than molecules and nanoparticles. Widely studied magnetic skyrmions
are 2D solitons with a spatially localized topology-protected continuous winding
of magnetization. 3D skyrmions (hopfions) are localized in all three spatial
dimensions and characterized by the Hopf index, a topological invariant with a
geometric interpretation of the linking number of any two closed-loop preimages,
regions in space with the same orientation of field corresponding to a single
point on the order parameter space, such as a unit sphere for the magnetization
vector field. PI develops a new breed of tunable liquid crystal structures with
complex but predictable topology-dictated response to external fields and
propagating optical solitons and vortices of laser beams. Both equilibrium self-
assembly and dynamic interactions between 2D and 3D solitons are controlled and
probed using a combination of laser tweezers, 3D nonlinear optical imaging, and
video microscopy. This interdisciplinary work addresses key problems at the
interfaces of condensed matter physics, topology, nanoscience and photonics. The
emerging scientific frontiers at the nexus of these fields show exceptional
promise of new discovery and applications. This work advances our fundamental
knowledge of structure and dynamics of 3D topological solitons, expands the
diversity of self-assembly phenomena in complex fluids and impinges on
fundamental knowledge in scientific fields as diverse as colloidal interactions,
topology, nonlinear and singular optics, all optical information processing, and
other. In addition to serving as a model system for fundamental studies,
potential technological uses of the studied solitons include beam steering
devices, generators of optical vortices for singular optics applications,
optical circuitry with robust capabilities of controlling polarization of light,
and topologically nontrivial solitons with knotted field configurations forming
crystalline and other lattices in materials. Building on his past education and
outreach accomplishments, the PI integrates this research with a broad spectrum
of synergistic activities, ranging from training of students and teaching
courses for non-scientists to conveying the scientific excitement to public and
children through the University of Colorado Saturday Physics Lectures and Wizard
Shows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.