* 1810548
* Hybrid quantum dot-nanowire heterostructures for deterministic biphoton quantum communications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 410,000.00

Nontechnical description: Recently there has been intense interest in next-
generation quantum cryptography, a communications method immune to
eavesdropping, which enables unbreakable secure data sharing. Quantum
cryptography is based on the concept of entangled photons, which are uniquely-
coupled particles of light. The important property about entangled photons is
the ability to gain knowledge about one photon when measuring the properties of
the other photon. This uncommon behaviour is unique to quantum particles such as
photons, and is at the core of secure quantum information technologies. To date,
however, sources that efficiently produce entangled photons have not been fully
developed due to lack of appropriate material systems, precision fabrication, or
optical characterization approaches. This project overcomes these challenges
through advanced photonic materials design and precise nanoscale synthesis of
quantum dots in which entangled photons are created. The project activity also
embraces the pedagogical efforts for outreach into the undergraduate,
underrepresented, high-school and general community, with emphasis on
underrepresented students in science and technology. Consistent cross-training
of undergraduate and graduate students and new cross-disciplinary curricula
development impact the scientific advances at the interface of mesoscopic
materials and quantum sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
generation of entangled photons is the cornerstone towards quantum
communications, where the collapse of the photon wavefunction upon measurement
or detection can be detected through channel monitoring. Much of the entangled
photon sources, however, are based on spontaneous parametric downconversion. The
spontaneous emission process is not deterministic and some degree of photon
statistics - whether in Bell inequality measurements or tomography - is still
needed, resulting in long-time counting and slow secure key rates. This project
aims to tackle the challenge by demonstrating a deterministic entangled photon
source based on a hybrid quantum dot-nanowire heterostructure. The first part of
this project aims to demonstrate a hybrid quantum dot-nanowire heterostructure
by selective area epitaxy for deterministic entangled photon generation. To
achieve near-zero fine-structure splitting, the heterointerfaces and the
geometry of quantum dots need to be carefully controlled by appropriate growth
techniques. The second part of the research seeks to examine the photon
correlation and measure the indistinguishability of the entangled photons
generated in the mesoscopic solid-state implementation. The project also
integrates the research with a pedagogical educational and outreach plan,
including innovative outreach, training and mentoring of undergraduates and
graduates, and a new graduate course on physics of quantum communication
devices. Some examples of activities include hosting summer high school students
to experience laboratory work, employing undergraduate students to fully
participate in academic research, and developing a new graduate course:
Mesoscopic Materials for Quantum Communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.