* 1810060
* Relevance of positive selection on human salivary amylase gene
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Alyssa Crittenden, Schnorr                 Stephanie      L
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2021
* USD 175,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Alyssa
Crittenden at University of Nevada, Las Vegas, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating the impact of positive
selection for increased copy number of the salivary amylase gene (AMY1) on the
ability for humans to digest starch during the oral phase of food consumption.
This project tackles unanswered questions regarding the significance of salivary
alpha amylase (sAA) for starch consumption. Oral activity of sAA is the first
step towards digestion of starchy foods. Yet humans have removed the need for
oral digestion by externalizing food degradation through cooking, which breaks
down large molecules such as starch. However it is unknown whether sAA activity
during chewing is relevant for humans to digest starch. Importantly, no research
exists that explores rate variation of sAA activity on raw versus cooked starch.
Humans uniquely possess multiple copy numbers of AMY1, signaling a shift in
dietary intake of starch. Such dietary shifts impact human health as it relates
to tolerance of starch-rich diets. This project will contribute towards an
understanding of human sAA genetic adaptations. Furthermore, understanding the
impact of AMY1 variation on nutritional acquisition among ethnically and
geographically diverse human populations helps inform dietary therapeutic
strategies for metabolic disease prevention. This project uses a
multidisciplinary approach to answer open questions about how dietary adaptation
impacts health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three phases -
an in-vitro modeling phase, a human participant trial phase, and a field work
phase. Phase I will investigate starch digestion from exposure to sAA as a
function of AMY1 copy number by measuring the reducing sugar byproducts across
varying short time intervals. Histological assays will show sAA activity via the
morphological changes to starch. Phase II will investigate oral starch digestion
in human participants over short time intervals via oral manipulation of a
starch solution. The expelled solution will similarly be measured for reducing
sugars. Enzyme quantity will be measured on stimulated saliva using an ELISA kit
for Amylase Alpha 1, and gene copy number will be measured using digital PCR
against a reference single copy gene using DNA extracted from buccal swabs.
These data will be combined with medical and dietary history data to help
discover factors that influence the production and activity of sAA. Phase III
entails field work to quantify chewing time allocated for orally processing
starchy foods. These are valuable data to contextualize chewing for humans that
subsist from foods that have not undergone extensive mechanical or thermal
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.