* 1810976
* Petascale Polar Topography Production
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Paul Morin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 04/30/2020
* USD 14,999.00

The polar regions are changing faster than any other region of the Earth, with
accelerating rates of coastal erosion, permafrost loss, glacier thinning, and
other changes. Yet the poles are also among the least well observed regions, due
to both their relative inaccessibility and coverage limitations in prior global
surveys by remote sensing. The project will use the high performance computing
capabilities of Blue Waters to produce high-resolution, high-quality, time-
dependent, and openly distributed digital elevation models (DEMs) for the
Earth's poles. This data set is needed for measuring and understanding rapid,
ongoing changes to the polar landscapes, as well as for impact mitigation and
adaptation planning by polar communities. The produced DEMs will be distributed
at no cost to the science community and public at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use Blue Waters to produce 2m resolution
DEMs with absolute accuracies of approximately 1m or better and relative
accuracies of 0.2m over the Antarctic and Arctic regions. The project
incorporates the capability for repeat, high-resolution and high-precision
topographic mapping in the form of sub-meter stereoscopic imagery from the
DigitalGlobe constellation of five polar-orbiting sun-synchronous Earth imagers
(WorldView 1-4 and GeoEye-1), as well as the archive of IKONOS and QuickBird.
These satellites images allow for precise stereo photogrammetric DEM
construction from overlapping image pairs over a wide range of terrain types and
light conditions, including the "flat white" interior of ice sheets and shadowed
mountain faces. The time-dependent collection of DEMs will be invaluable to
scientists studying change in the polar region. Resources for obtaining and
maintaining the imagery, tools for post-processing the results, software
development time, and methods for distributing the DEMs have been secured by the
project. All DEMs will be publically distributed through the Polar Geospatial
Center (PGC) website and a consortium including the National Geospatial Agency
(NGA) and NASA, as well as Amazon web services and the geospatial software
company ESRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.