* 1810807
* Mathematical Models for Delegated Portfolio Management
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jaksa Cvitanic, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 260,765.00

This project addresses two topics: (i) studying optimal compensation of managers
who manage the risk of their projects or portfolios, and studying price
formation in financial markets in the presence of such managers; (ii) for a firm
offering mutual funds, studying what kind of funds are optimal to offer to
investors, with what fees and contracting features, to satisfy the demand of
investors of varying beliefs, risk preferences and consumption needs. The
findings on topic (i) will help understand which type of compensation schemes
are optimally offered to managers that manage risk of companies or portfolios,
and to understand the effect of managerial compensation on the formation of
asset prices. The findings on topic (ii) will explain how fund families
structure their offerings and the associated investment fees. The findings will
shed light on which issues to focus on when regulating compensation of
executives, or regulating hedge funds and mutual funds, or giving advice to fund
customers. This line of research is of interest given that one of the reasons
for the 2007/2008 financial crisis was the way managers had been compensated.
Moreover, because of the crisis, new changes and challenges are facing financial
markets and it is important to maintain and improve the training and support
available to young researchers in this field, as they will play an important
role in facing those challenges in the future. This will be helped by supporting
and training students working on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
technical terms, this project will: (a) use recent advances in Stochastic
Analysis to develop a general theory of optimal contracting that includes the
case of contracting managers who manage the risk of their projects, and apply it
to the problem of equilibrium asset pricing in the presence of delegated
portfolio management; (b) reverse the roles of managers and investors, and solve
contracting problems from the perspective of managers: how to optimally
structure the menu of funds offered to investors with heterogeneous features.
From the economic point of view, topic (a) will partially cover a gap in
contract theory: most of the dynamic models only the effect of the managers on
project return, and not on its risk. Methodologically, it requires extending
recent sophisticated mathematical results for second order Backward Stochastic
Differential Equations. Topic (b) will cover another gap: most of the contract
literature assumes that investors offer take-it-or-leave-it contracts to
managers. However, in financial practice, it is usually other way round - hedge
funds or mutual fund families offer their services with precise contracting
features. Methodologically, it requires solving difficult dynamic adverse
selection problems, sometimes formulated as calculus of variations problems,
sometimes reduced to studying Backward Stochastic Differential Equations and
associated Partial Differential Equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.