* 1810315
* Using Parents' Strengths to Facilitate Behavioral Change and Family Reunification in Juvenile Dependency Cases
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Jill Duerr Berrick, Cleveland               Kyndra         C
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2020
* USD 28,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Law and Social Sciences program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Judy Gerber at Vanderbilt
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the role of parent strengths in predicting family
reunification in juvenile dependency (i.e., child protection) cases. The burden
on the U.S. child welfare and juvenile dependency system is heavy. There are 4
million reports of child maltreatment annually; the government spends billions
of dollars on improving the system every year; and community providers spend
countless hours delivering intensive services to families. Yet, even after these
efforts are successful in reunifying children and parents, families continue to
experience problems, with approximately 30% of children re-entering foster care
within three years. These statistics highlight the critical need for research to
determine what predicts successful, safe, and long-lasting family
reunification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the study is to identify
strengths (e.g., commitment, insight, social support) in a sample of parents who
have recently become involved in the juvenile dependency system. The study also
will examine the extent to which these strengths change over the course of
parents' cases, why they change, and how they relate to parents,compliance,
behaviors, and permanency outcomes (i.e., reunification and re-entry rates).
Parents who have recently had children sheltered in the juvenile dependency
system will be interviewed to identify these strengths. A 6-month follow-up
assessment will examine changes in strengths, and will include a qualitative
component to examine why families experienced changes in the strengths,notably,
a component not included in current strengths-based models. Case file reviews
conducted within 12 months of case opening, will determine parents' compliance
with services, professionals perceptions of parents, behavior change, and
reunification rates. Administrative data reviews, conducted 6 months later, will
determine re-entry rates. Findings have the potential to illuminate our
understanding of the mechanisms associated with family reunification.
Additionally, findings will help to inform the policy contexts that shape family
planning and engagement to ultimately improve the lives of children and parents,
and keep families together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.