* 1810599
* CAREER: Effects of Reductive Evolution on Amino Acid Stress Responses in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 10/26/2017,06/30/2023
* Scot Ouellette, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,019,937.00

Most bacteria cope with starvation by launching a global change in gene
expression known as the stringent response. The stringent response causes
growth-related genes to be turned off and genes that are needed for survival
under nutrient-limiting conditions to be activated. This response is absent in
obligate intracellular human pathogens such as Chlamydia, which only grow inside
a host cell. The aim of this project to understand how these bacterial pathogens
cope with starvation, since they lack the stringent response and yet they are
often able to survive amino acid starvation, which is induced by the human host
to combat the infection. This project will address fundamental questions about
the evolution of pathogens and the unique manner in which they respond to
starvation. More practically, it will result in the identification of potential
drug and diagnostic targets to treat and identify diseases caused by pathogens
such as Chlamydia. In an effort to broaden participation, several strategies
will be used to increase participation of American Indians in college-level
research. Some of these students will present their research to their alma mater
high schools to help encourage the students to pursue college degrees in STEM.
In addition, various science-themed activities will be used to increase
interest/awareness/participation of American Indian high school and college
students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to understand the
adaptations and their consequences in evolving to obligate intracellular growth.
The obligate intracellular bacterium Chlamydia has minimized its genome by
eliminating the stringent response and amino acid biosynthesis pathways. The
stringent response is activated when an uncharged tRNA binds in the A site of
the ribosome, leading to (p)ppGpp synthesis, a global regulator that, in part,
regenerates amino acid pools. Chlamydia does not make tryptophan (trp) or
(p)ppGpp thus how it survives trp starvation is not well understood. Prior work
by the PI has shown that Chlamydia globally increases its transcription in
response to trp starvation while globally decreasing its translation. This
observation is unusual for a bacterium, and therefore, represents a unique
opportunity to advance knowledge. How the amino acid content of a transcript
affects gene expression during starvation has not been fully characterized. The
hypothesis is that, during trp limitation, chlamydial gene expression is
determined by the trp content of the encoded protein. The goals of this project
are the following: 1) to determine if the trp content of open reading frames
controls transcription during trp starvation; 2) to determine if trp-free
proteins are preferentially translated during trp starvation; 3) to compare and
contrast the chlamydial response to trp starvation (1&amp;2) with that of other
trp auxotrophs, Streptococcus pyogenes (wild-type and stringent mutant) and
Coxiella. The major goal of the broader impacts of this project is to increase
participation of American Indians in STEM research. In conjunction with the
Native Studies Program, the PI also plans to develop a course on science in the
context of the American Indian worldview.