* 1810179
* Investigating Inequality in Environmental Exposure
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* David Pellow, Carrillo                Ian
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 170,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. David Pellow
at the University of California, Santa Barbara, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating inequalities in
environmental exposure for under-represented minority (URM) groups. While
researchers have quantitatively documented how URM groups are disproportionately
exposed to environmental harms, the qualitative forces and mechanisms that
underpin this inequality remain underexplored. This project has the potential to
create societal benefits by discovering solutions to environmental problems that
disproportionately affect URM populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
Investigating Inequality in Environmental Exposure, will advance knowledge
within the fields of environmental studies and sociology by exploring how
regulations shape the distribution of environmental harms. While the statistical
association between race and toxic exposure has been well documented, few
studies have examined the social forces that create and sustain these
environmental inequalities. In contrast, this project uses qualitative and
ethnographic methods to generate explanations for why environmental inequalities
persist and why URM populations continue to be disproportionately exposed to
environmental harms. This project focuses on a single agricultural industry in
which hazardous labor and environmental practices are highly correlated with
race. Based on this case study, the project hypothesizes that the following
factors are likely to co-construct the context that shapes regulatory
enforcement and compliance: 1) farmland characteristics, 2) state capacity, 3)
producers' access to credit and technology, 4) labor availability, and 5) market
volatility. The research team will collect data through interviews and
ethnographic observations with agricultural producers and state regulators.
Research findings will illuminate the challenges of improving environmental
outcomes for URM populations by providing a comprehensive examination of the
origins of environmental problems, bottlenecks that impede solutions, and
pathways for resolving problems. There are potentially transformative aspects of
the proposed work, which if successful, could generate new knowledge on why URM
populations are unevenly exposed to environmental harms, thus laying the
groundwork for future scholars to replicate findings, test new hypotheses, and
identify relationships in other societies or nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.