* 1810402
* Spatially resolve three-dimensional tactile sensing using functionally graded piezoresistive pillar arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Burak Aksak, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 287,659.00

Despite much advancement in materials, computation power, actuators, sensors,
and design, robots drastically lag in their ability to match humans in dexterous
manipulation. Studies that show success in robotic manipulation suffer from
complex sensing schemes and extensive post processing steps because they utilize
tactile sensors that are not capable of human-like high spatial resolution or
contact force magnitude and direction detection. Artificial skin-like flexible
tactile sensors that can resemble the tactile sensing capabilities of their
biological analogue are bound to revolutionize robotics, providing unprecedented
control and dexterity, and support the recent advancements in artificial
intelligence and humanoid robotics. This work addresses the pressing need for
skin-like distributed tactile sensors and proposes a novel tactile sensor of
flexible construction, which can resolve dynamic contact forces with fingertip-
like high spatial resolution. The proposed work is transformative in its ability
to equip robotic manipulators with tactile feedback comparable to that of
humans, paving the way to human-like dexterity in robotics. This innovative
technology has the potential to be a significant step toward the realization of
corobots living and working with humans. This project complements the
educational activities in biomimetic engineering and entrepreneurial awareness,
giving undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to be involved in
cutting-edge research and gain skills in innovative thinking and
entrepreneurship. Educational outreach activities to introduce and promote
engineering to K-12 students and underrepresented groups will be an integral
part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to enable
spatially resolve three-dimensional contact force imaging and provide skin-like
touch sensing capabilities (namely, local three-dimensional dynamic force
sensing) to robotic platforms and facilitate human-like dexterous manipulation
in robotic manipulators. The PI will achieve this goal by fabricating a novel
array-type tactile sensor comprising a fibrillar polymeric contact layer which
amplifies contact forces at the integrated piezoresistive base sensing layer and
a flexible substrate with integrated electrodes. Preliminary experiments have
demonstrated composite piezoresistors with pressure sensitivity close to that of
a human fingertip. The objectives of the proposed work are to (i) design a
composite microfibrillar sensor array, based on piezoresistive sensing, which
would be flexible, cheap, and durable; (ii) develop repeatable and scalable
fabrication techniques; (iii) study the underlying physics for composite fiber
sensing using micro-and-mesoscale characterization techniques; and (iv) study
and demonstrate friction characterization, slip detection, and slip prevention
using custom characterization tools. The long-term scientific goal is to
understand and quantify the relationship between three dimensional spatio-
temporal contact force images and manipulation to advance robotics as well as
its medical and biological applications. If successful, this project, in
addition to providing unprecedented control and dexterity in robots, will
support the recent advancements in other important areas of robotics, for
example in artificial intelligence and humanoid
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.