* 1810108
* A Revolutionary Way to Tackle Challenging MILP Problems in Power Systems through Accelerated Convergence, Formulation Tightening and Asynchronous Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 359,998.00

Many important optimization problems in power systems are formulated as Mixed-
Integer Linear Programming (MILP, with integer and continues variables and a
linear structure) problems. Because of the existence of integer variables,
problem complexity generally increases exponentially as the problem size
increases. One important example is Unit Commitment and Economic Dispatch (UCED)
with complicated units that are difficult to handle, e.g., combined cycle units.
We have witnessed the breakdown of existing methods on large-scale UCED cases.
The problem is further complicated by the significant increase of distributed
generation, including intermittent renewables, making it very difficult to
solve, and pushing for a centralized/decentralized hybrid grid architecture.
This project seeks to revolutionize the way how complicated MILP problems are
formulated and solved within a decomposition and coordination framework,
exploiting the exponential decrease of complexity upon decomposition and uses
our recent breakthrough on effective coordination. Using UCED as the problem
context, Task 1 is on developing a novel and systematic approach, to tighten
MILP formulations. In the extreme case, a problem's constraints directly
delineate its "convex hull," and the "NP-hard" problem can be solved by using
linear programming methods without difficulties. To solve practical problems
within the decomposition and coordination framework, the focus is on obtaining
"near tight" formulations of single units. Motivated by the foreseeable
transitioning from a centralized grid toward a hybrid grid, in Task 2, a
distributed and asynchronous coordination method will be investigated with
subproblems solved in a distributed way and prices updated asynchronously.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is on the revolutionary way to
formulate and solve MILP problems - not just to describe constraints, but to
transform them to a "near-tight" form, and to exploit exponential decrease of
complexity via decomposition plus effective and asynchronous coordination. The
research will have broader impacts on other MILP problems in power systems and
beyond, e.g., distribution networks, self-optimizing factories, autonomous and
coordinated systems; and on nonlinear problems with separable structures. The
research will also educate graduate, undergraduate and professionals through
courses, seminars, publications and online materials, and impact high school
students through UConn's da Vinci summer program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.