* 1810096
* Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Lead-Halide Perovskite-Based Active Terahertz Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Steven Blair, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2021
* USD 387,001.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Silicon electronics face a technological bottleneck
even as there is a need for devices that operate at ever increasing speeds.
Terahertz (THz) technology is viewed as a potential solution to this problem as
it will enable devices that operate at speeds of 100 GHz to 10,000 GHz, far
faster than conventional electronics. The project will create active THz devices
using a relatively new family of semiconductors, organic-inorganic hybrid lead
halide perovskites. Perovskites have recently gained significant attention
because of their potential for high-performance solar cells. The basic
properties of perovskites that make them attractive for solar cells also make
them appealing for THz applications. For example, the response of perovskites to
light can be altered chemically by changing the halide group in the molecule.
Perovskites are also easy to process. High quality thin films of perovskites can
be readily deposited via a simple spin coating process that is routinely used in
the semiconductor processing industry. Different perovskites with distinct
optical and electronic properties can be easily deposited next to one another.
In contrast, this is difficult to do with conventional inorganic semiconductors,
such as silicon and gallium arsenide. This ease of fabrication allows for new
device capabilities that are simply not possible when only one type of
semiconductor is used. The PI will work to broaden participation in science
education through experiences such as the Utah Science Olympiad. The PI will
develop classes for high school teachers, involve undergraduate and high school
students in research, and engage with first generation students in the Salt Lake
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work intends to
develop a new class of terahertz (THz) devices based on organic-inorganic lead
halide perovskites. These semiconductors, while well examined for photovoltaic
applications, have been almost completely unexplored for THz applications. They
are extremely attractive for THz applications because their optical properties
can be chemically engineered with relative ease. Since they can be solution
processed, multiple perovskites can be cast and delineated with extremely high
precision in close proximity to one another, without any degradation to the
material response. We intend to develop a unique fabrication technique that
allows for patterning of these semiconductors with um-scale precision using a
polymer delamination process that protects the deposited perovskite layers,
while additional layers are deposited and defined. By doing so, we expect to
create active THz devices that exhibit functionality that is not possible using
only a single semiconductor, such as silicon or gallium arsenide. Specifically,
we intend to demonstrate (i) ultrafast THz frequency agile devices, (ii)
electro-optic devices using 2D perovskites, where the applied (THz) electric
field can induce the Stark effect or quantum confined Stark effect in the
multiple quantum well structures, and (iii) field effect transistors based that
exhibit optical wavelength sensitive control of the THz properties. The proposed
research offers transformative capabilities because the use of multiple
perovskites within a single device proposed here is technically challenging to
achieve using conventional semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.