* 1810105
* Stability and Stabilization of Large-scale Modern Power Systems via the Passivity Theory of Port-Hamiltonian Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Qing-Chang Zhong, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,666.00

Sustainability has become a pressing global challenge. A major means to address
this is to utilize renewable energy at a large scale. However, this changes the
nature of power systems and imposes unprecedented challenges to the stable
operation of a power system, which is arguably the most important infrastructure
underpinning social life and economic growth. Following the PI's work on the
large-scale utilization of renewable energy, in particular on the synchronized
and democratized (SYNDEM) grid architecture and the associated enabling
technologies that unifies the interaction of modern power systems, this project
aims to solidify its theoretical foundation by developing fundamental systems
theory and control algorithms. This will speed up the large-scale utilization of
renewable energy, improve the stability, reliability, resiliency of modern power
systems, promote energy independence and sustainability, bring job opportunities
and economic growth, and eventually lead to a low-carbon economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seamlessly integrates profound
multidisciplinary thinking in systems theory, power electronics, and power
systems. The port-Hamiltonian systems theory, which combines the historical
Hamiltonian modeling approach in geometric mechanics and the port-based network
modeling approach in electrical engineering, offers a systematic and scalable
mathematical framework for structural modeling, analysis and control of complex
networked nonlinear multi-physics systems. This powerful mathematical tool will
be further developed to passivate a large-scale, interconnected, geographically
distributed, heterogeneous networked power system with millions of power
electronic converters and rigorously prove its stability, leading to a uniform
mathematical structure for passivated and homogenized modern power systems. The
theoretical framework developed will be validated numerically and
experimentally. The results will also shed lights on the understanding of other
large-scale networked systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results will be
disseminated timely worldwide through various channels, including the LinkedIn
Group on Virtual Synchronous Machines and Power Electronics-enabled Autonomous
Power Systems. Undergraduates and postgraduates from underrepresented groups
will be encouraged to take part in the project. The project results will also be
included in graduate courses and training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.