* 1810687
* Singularity and Small-Scale Formation for Model Equations of Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Vu Hoang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 101,538.00

The Euler equations are a system of differential equations that describe the
motions of fluids like water and air. Together with the Navier-Stokes equations,
which take into account the effect of friction in fluid motion, they are applied
in a wide variety of natural and technical situations, for example when modeling
the lift of an aircraft wing or the circulation of water in the oceans. Although
these equations were first conceived more than two hundred years ago, some of
their fundamental mathematical properties are still not well understood. The
difficulty lies in the fact that all the equations describing fluids show a
strong tendency for "small scale formation." This is seen, for example, in the
formation of very small vortices and irregularities in the flow that ultimately
cause turbulence. In this research project, the investigator and collaborators
study the formation of irregularities in fluid flow from a mathematical point of
view. The goal is to give a detailed analysis of the mechanisms that lead to
small-scale formation.

The projects concern detailed research on geometric singularity formation for
certain model equations of fluid dynamics. These model equations are inspired by
the Euler equations for three-dimensional, incompressible fluid flow. The
overall goal is to gain a better understanding of the complex mechanisms leading
to singularity formation in finite time, and also the exact growth rates of
quantities like the vorticity and vorticity gradient. The main difficulty comes
from the nonlocal and nonlinear nature of the equations. In one of the projects,
the investigator considers the hyperbolic flow scenario for the modified surface
quasi-geostrophic and Boussinesq equations in two dimensions. The goal is to
obtain insight into the hyperbolic flow scenario, which is thought to be a good
candidate to ultimately create finite-time blowup for the three-dimensional
Euler equations. In the remaining projects, the investigator considers one-
dimensional model equations, for which the goal is to describe the singularity
formation in as much detail as possible. An important overall theme consists in
stabilizing the blowup scenario up to the singular time using barrier functions
and a priori estimates that take detailed information about the structure of the
solution into account.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.