* 1810961
* Combustion characteristics of pulverized torrefied biomass for use in co-firing boilers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yiannis Levendis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,999.00

To satisfy energy needs of the fast-growing global population and minimize the
negative impact on the environment, alternative energy sources are needed. The
U.S. has a large capacity for renewable biomass production, the utilization of
which can reduce the total carbon emissions. Partial substitution of coal with
biomass can be a viable option for generating the baseload power that most
alternative sources (wind, solar, tidal) cannot supply due to their intermittent
nature. However, biomass is moist, biodegradable and fibrous. Thus, it is costly
to transport, store and grind for use in the boilers. This research will address
the combustion of torrefied biomass, which has been subjected to the process of
torrefaction (akin to coffee roasting) to remove moisture, chlorine and sulfur.
However, as grinding costs drastically increase with decreasing targeted grind
size, this work aims to identify appropriate maximum torrefied biomass particle
size ranges for effective combustion in existing boilers. Such knowledge is
needed for torrefied biomass to become a standardized product for burning in
virtually unmodified coal-fired plants. During the course of this research,
students will be educated in the energy field and several international
collaborations will be advanced on the subject of harvesting bioenergy to help
achieve a sustainable environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
generate new knowledge pertinent to effective combustion of torrefied biomass in
utility boilers. This investigation will identify methods for assessing the
proper size of various kinds of torrefied biomass materials (including several
typical woody and herbaceous biomass types) for co-firing with pulverized coal,
while maintaining high combustion efficiencies and high radiative fluxes in
existing boilers. Data pertinent to particle burnout times, temperatures of both
volatile matter flames and residual chars, in-flame soot volume fractions,
particle-to-particle interactions, carbon burnout are needed to predict reaction
rates, heat fluxes, and slagging and fouling deposition tendencies in boilers.
The proposed fundamental research will assess these combustion parameters of
pulverized torrefied biomass at the particle level, by monitoring entire
combustion histories of single particles pyrometrically and cinematographically.
These will be compared to analogous data for coal particles of all ranks,
previously collected in this laboratory. Subsequently, combustion effectiveness
and particle-to-particle interactions will be assessed by burning streams of
neat and blended fuels and emissions will be
monitored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.