* 1810492
* Novel RF Volume Coils for High and Ultra-High Field Magnetic Resonance Imaging Scanners
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Branislav Notaros, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,000.00

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an established medical diagnostic method and
tool widely utilized to obtain high-resolution images of the internal structure
of the body or its parts and organs, where atom nuclei of the tissue that is
imaged absorb and reemit applied radio-frequency (RF) radiation. This is enabled
by RF-excitation magnetic fields generated by so-called RF coils, whose
frequency is proportional to the strength of the scanner's magnet, in units of
tesla (T). Whereas state-of-the-art clinical MRI scanners are 3-T systems, MRI
machines operating at 1.5 T still prevail in hospitals by a very large margin.
MRI systems with stronger magnets and higher RF frequencies can provide higher
resolution of images, faster exams, and more comfort for patients, among other
improvements. However, they require new engineering and design approaches to
make them operational, safe, and efficient. The main area of engineering
research in advancing MRI scanners is in improving RF coils and fields. This
exactly is the area of focus of this research project, aimed at introducing,
developing, testing, evaluating, and establishing novel RF exciters and
advancing RF coil designs for magnet strengths of 3 T, 4.7 T, 7 T, etc., for
both state-of-the-art and next-generation clinical MRI scanners. The proposed
research provides a new scientific methodology and engineering technology to
solve a very general and challenging problem at the interface between RF and MRI
and junction between engineering and science and with immediate applications,
and hence it has substantial broader impacts on science and technology. Broader
impacts on society are especially warranted by great and growing needs for
medical diagnostic tools based on high-resolution imaging of human bodies,
organs, and tissues. Education and outreach plan of this project includes
enhancing course materials and delivery, advising and training of graduate
students, undergraduate research, underrepresented groups, K-12 outreach, and
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-field (HF) MRI scanners
are referring to the main static magnetic field (generated by magnet) from 3 T
to 7 T, while ultra-high field (UHF) is 7 T and above. The proposed approach and
novel method for multi-channel excitation of RF magnetic fields is based on
subject-loaded multifilar helical-antenna RF volume coils for HF and UHF MRI, to
advance RF coil designs at both 3 T (current best, yet to be advanced and
broadly adopted at clinics and hospitals) and 7 T (expected next major clinical
overhaul in the near future, yet with lots of unknowns and challenges). The
novelty of this approach consists of using the inner volume of the helix coil to
excite the target sample. Preliminary MRI data obtained in phantoms at 7 T with
4- and 8-channel helix coils demonstrated the feasibility of the proposed
approach, with consistency between experimental results and numerical
simulations. Preliminary simulations at 3 T show that the helical-antenna
exciter provides better RF-field uniformity and larger field of view than other
reported results, with comparable transmit efficiencies. The project will pursue
characterization, evaluation, and advancement of multi-channel helix RF coils at
3T and 7 T, respectively. Based on the obtained results, it will develop,
optimize, and realize coils for 4.7 T operation, chosen for this proposed
research midway between 3 T and 7 T, with RF efficiency, specific absorption
rate distribution, and spatial RF-field encoding quantified in phantom
experiments and in simulations. Principal goals are to provide improved RF
performance while potentially preserving the easiness of use for a volume
coverage coil, to determine the potential gains offered by the proposed new coil
structures, and to further advance them closer to preclinical medical research
and realization for clinical practice on a more global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.