* 1810609
* LSAMP BD: Delaware State University / Greater Philadelphia Region Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Philadelphia AMP)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Tony Allen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022
Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delaware State University (DSU) serves as host of a
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) project within the Greater Philadelphia Region
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation. The DSU BD activity employs a
multifaceted model that integrates research, education, and mentoring to address
challenges underrepresented students face in doctoral programs. As such this
project seeks to (1) improve the overall graduate experience of STEM graduate
students at DSU by increasing the depth and breadth of scientific and
professional skills development activities and raising students' awareness of
the full range of academic careers; and (2) to further enhance the
administrative structure and support to facilitate the long-term sustainability
of DSU's graduate programs. The program components are executed via academic
coursework for scientific and technical competency that prepares BD students for
the doctoral degree qualifying and candidacy examinations; substantive cutting-
edge laboratory research experiences beginning in the first-year to expose
fellows to research that can form the basis for their doctoral dissertation;
professional development experiences such as workshops, seminars and/or
conferences to help students to develop the ancillary skills needed for personal
and professional success; facilitated interaction with faculty and peers to
fully integrate students into research groups; opportunities for students to
present their research nationally and/or internationally to promote their
engagement with the larger scientific and technical community; and opportunities
for student reflection, and the development of coping skills to contextualize
the pressures and challenges associated with graduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.