* 1810163
* Engineered antiferromagnetic materials for terahertz magnon-polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Magnetic materials such as those found in disk drives
are commonly used for information and data storage. Recently, there has been
increased interest in using magnetic materials for data processing and
transmission, as well as for quantum computing, as these materials consume
significantly less power than conventional electronics. This research focuses on
a specific type of magnetic material that oscillates at ultra high frequencies
(approximately a trillion cycles per second) and responds very quickly to
external stimuli; these properties make it a useful building block for very fast
magnetoelectronic devices. It has traditionally been difficult to generate or
control such rapid oscillations in magnetization, especially using the standard
electronic controls used in most circuits. A central goal of this project is to
lay the groundwork for a new class of materials and devices in which one could,
for example, control the magnetization through alternate methods such as with
light, using low-power lasers. As a part of the project, training of graduate
and undergraduate students occurs through involvement in the research, and
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities to engineering occurs
through participation in a targeted research project course within the research
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goal of this project is the
development of engineered hybrid antiferromagnetic/optoelectronic materials for
the realization of strongly-coupled intersubband-magnon-polariton systems. The
intellectual merit lies in the novel realization of a tripartite intersubband-
magnon-photon polariton quasi-particle. Specifically, the "light" component of
the polariton is carried by a specially engineered electromagnetic structure
known as a metamaterial. The "matter" part of the polariton is carried by a
magnon, i.e. a magnetization wave in an antiferromagnetic material. Third, the
system is further coupled to another "matter" part - quantum-mechanical
transitions of electrons confined within semiconductor quantum wells. Key
research goals include engineering magnetic materials and structures so that all
of the constituent resonances occur at similar frequencies at 1 terahertz and
above, as well as maximizing the photon-magnon coupling strength. Furthermore,
since the intersubband electronic system can supply gain when a population
inversion is created via electrical pumping, this opens the opportunity for
magnon polariton amplification and lasing. The broader impacts are addressed at
several levels including undergraduate and graduate research experiences,
dissemination of results, technology advancement, outreach to underrepresented
minorities (URMs), and industrial interaction. Outreach to URM occurs through
the PI's development of research projects for a course designed for the
recruitment and retention of URM engineering freshmen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.