* 1810154
* Collaborative Research: Harnessing Crystalline Phase Transition in 2D Materials for Ultra-Low-Power and Flexible Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Philip Feng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/29/2020
* USD 211,500.00

Rapid advances in wearable electronics and mobile device technologies have made
it crucial and imperative to explore and demonstrate new semiconductor devices
with ultralow-power, fast speed, small size, and flexible mechanical properties.
Atomic layer semiconductors and their two-dimensional nanostructures isolated
from bulk, layered transition metal dichalcogenide crystals are promising for
many applications in nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, and nanoelectromechanical
systems, due to their unconventional and exceptional electrical, optical and
mechanical properties. Controlled crystalline phase transition, which occurs in
certain atomic layer semiconductor materials, and its accompanying
semiconductor-to-metal transition, have the potential to eventually lead to
important device and circuit applications that permit advanced computing,
memory, and sensing with ultralow power consumption. This project combines
experimental, theoretical, and simulation approaches to explore, model, and
demonstrate a new class of atomically thin, mechanically flexible electronic
devices based on the mechanisms of controlled crystalline phase transition in
atomic layer semiconductors. The ultralow power and mechanical flexible
properties of the devices based on phase transition in atomically thin
semiconductors materials make them attractive in future flexible electronics,
internet-of-things, and computer technologies. In this project, the PIs will
develop and disseminate course modules and simulation tools, and timely employ
the research activities to recruit and broaden participation from
underrepresented students from high school to graduate student levels, at both
Case Western Reserve University and University of Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this collaborative research project are to
develop the essential knowledge base for, and to pave the way toward,
understanding and harvesting gate-voltage and strain-controlled crystalline
phase transition in two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide materials
for ultralow-power switching devices and flexible electronics applications. The
proposed research activities include: (i) Develop a computationally efficient
and physically meaningful multiscale simulation platform to simulate crystalline
phase transition phenomena in transition metal dichalcogenide crystals induced
by a gate voltage or strain; (ii) Experimentally explore strain and gate-
voltage-induced phase transition in transition metal dichalcogenide materials;
(iii) Couple experimental characterization of the crystalline phase transition
in transition metal dichalcogenide devices with theoretical work to develop
phase transition flexible electronics and switching devices; (iv) Engineer the
phase-transition switch mechanisms in rationally designed device platforms, to
achieve steep sub-threshold slope and ultralow-power logic switches. This
experiment-theory collaborative team will use advanced nanodevice fabrication,
characterization, modeling and simulation techniques to explore and understand
how phase transition in transition metal dichalcogenide materials can be
tailored, controlled, and utilized for ultralow power and flexible electronics
applications. The study will deepen fundamental understanding of phase change
phenomena in atomic layer semiconductors, and develop promising device concepts
and models to harness gate-voltage and strain-controlled crystalline phase
transition in atomically thin semiconductors, to enable future devices and
systems for computing, sensing, and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.