* 1810916
* LSAMP BD: University of Wisconsin-Madison WiscAMP
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Gail Coover, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and competitiveness of STEM graduate students from
historically underrepresented minority populations, with emphasis on STEM
doctoral matriculation and completion.

The 2018-2020 Wisconsin LSAMP BD (WiscAMP-BD) program will recruit twelve (12)
alumni from LSAMP institutions nationwide for STEM postbaccalaureate studies at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The program leverages activities of the
institution's Graduate Engineering Research Scholars Program (GERS), the
Graduate Research Scholars Program in the College of Agricultural and Life
Sciences (SciMed GRS) and the Teaching, Mentoring and Research for Science (TEAM
Science) programs, including faculty mentored research and communities of
practice. Twenty-four BD participants are currently matriculating in STEM
doctoral programs at the institution. Student support in the form of stipends
and cost of education are provided for two years for each student. The
institution commits to assisting the students financially through completion of
the STEM doctoral program.

Evaluative activities will assess outcomes of students' accomplishments relating
to retention, degree completion, and career progress. Social psychological
outcomes related to career goals and expectations related to STEM identity
development will also be assessed. Outcomes will be disseminated broadly through
the institution's website, scholarly journals, and presentations at STEM
professional conferences. These efforts will increase the diversity of STEM
academic leadership and contribute to the growing literature on broadening
participation in STEM at the graduate and post-graduate level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.