* 1810544
* Imaging electron hydrodynamics in graphene
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ania Bleszynski Jayich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 660,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of how electrons move in
materials is based on simple, semiclassical, equations where all electron
interactions - with the lattice, with disorder, and with each other - is done by
changing the description of the electron into a different particle that accounts
for the interactions. However, in real materials with small disorder or strong
electron-electron interactions, a continuous hydrodynamic description is a
better model where the electrons are said to act like a liquid. Only a handful
of experiments have recently detected the presence of such a strange electron
liquid with many new theories to explain it, which means this is the beginning
of a whole new field of novel and useful technologies. This proposal is driven
by a unique opportunity at UCSB to combine a new, ultra-clean materials system
(graphite gated monolayer graphene) with a newly developed, high sensitivity
scanned probe technique that can directly probe the novel electron flows down to
the nanoscale. New electron phenomena will be directly observed such as
viscosity-driven whirlpools and the onset of turbulence of electron flows. There
is also an opportunity to match these tiny electron flow patterns with large
scale electrical transport measurements. The hydrodynamic regime presents an
opportunity to build novel devices based on manipulating electron fluid
phenomena that have never before been imagined. This research is also tightly
coupled with a strong educational plan that aims to imbue the next generation of
scientists with an excitement for novel electronic materials, quantum sensors,
and their applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electron flow in low dimensional systems is typically
described by semiclassical equations of motion, in which all electron
interactions - with the lattice, with disorder, and with each other - leads only
to a dressing of the bare electron into an electron-like quasiparticle whose
dynamics determine current flow. However, in quantum critical systems, strong
inter-electron collisions can wash away the individual electronic degrees of
freedom - the electron-electron collision length is much shorter than all other
dimensions. Macroscopic observables such as electrical and thermal conductivity
are then described by the equations of fluid mechanics, and the macroscopic
parameters-density, viscosity, and mean velocity-which emerge from the
microscopic collisions between electrons. Recently, several groups have reported
signatures of the hydrodynamic regime in graphene - a material whose band
structure mimics the gapless dispersion of a quantum critical point. However,
these experiments have all focused on macroscopic transport properties. As such
they are unable to directly probe the emergence of hydrodynamic flow on all the
relevant length scales. Here, the principal investigators propose to combine
state-of-the-art graphene devices with an order of magnitude higher mobility
than previously realized along with state-of-the art local magnetometry,
utilizing nitrogen-vacancy center defects in diamond, to probe the emergence of
hydrodynamic flow across the relevant length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.