* 1810431
* Investigation of fundamental creep behavior and mechanisms in a thermally stable nanocrystalline alloy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kiran Solanki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 482,147.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural materials used by power
generation-reliant industries are often processed such that the amount of
material imperfections present at small length scales is reduced. This approach
has been quite successful; however, it is reaching the limits of what can be
achieved, while new demanding applications require even higher material
performance. This award supports fundamental research to look for the next
generation of high performance materials for high temperature structural
applications by using the opposite approach, i.e., to increase the number of
imperfections at small, including atomic, length scales in such a way that
deformation at high temperatures is impeded rather than enhanced by these
imperfections. This requires a complete understanding of composition effects and
processing conditions that can produce the high density of imperfections
required and to make sure that they are retained during high temperature
loading, since high temperatures tend to decrease the number of imperfections in
a material. The physical principles that govern the relationship among
processing, structure and mechanical properties in materials with such high
number of defects as those proposed here are not well understood; hence, they
will be studied in this project through a combination of experiments and
modeling to produce new scientific knowledge in the field of structural
materials. Furthermore, students in science and engineering at both
undergraduate and graduate levels will participate in the research and be
trained in state-of-the-art techniques to process, test, characterize and model
structural material behavior, helping to educate the new generation of engineers
and scientists in this field. Finally, the potential to understand how to
produce a new generation of structural materials for high temperature
applications with better properties than those currently available can have
significant impacts and benefits to society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal
and alloys with a mean grain size below 100 nm have enhanced static strength
compared to coarse-grained alloys and, hence, are very attractive for
engineering applications. However, very few studies have addressed the
fundamental mechanisms of microstructural evolution during time dependent
deformation, limiting their practical use. This critical gap in knowledge has
stemmed from the lack of consistency among various experimental conditions
(processing methods, testing conditions, etc.) along with the grain growth
observed during deformation. This indeterminate understanding hinders our
ability to address the current need for advanced load-bearing structural
materials in many important technologies where creep loading is common (e.g.,
power generation, propulsion). Motivated by this, the hypothesis that will be
tested is that Ni-Y-Zr is a stable duplex system, wherein both grain boundary
segregation (some solid solubility of Zr in Ni) and phase formation (e.g., Ni-Y
precipitates) occur, leading to a microstructurally stable nanocrystalline
alloy. Samples from the resulting material will be tested and characterized
under a variety of loads and temperatures, unraveling true creep behavior and
pertaining mechanisms of microstructural effects on creep of stable
nanocrystalline materials. Furthermore, identification of these mechanisms will
also enhance our understanding of microstructural instability commonly observed
in nanocrystal materials at relatively low temperatures during time dependent
deformation. In a broader context, the proposed work will lay the groundwork to
address gaps in iterative materials design through coordinated modeling and
experimental efforts across multiple length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.