* 1810233
* CQIS: Coherent Spin-Phonon Interfaces with Diamond Color Centers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 365,000.00

Part 1: Quantum science and technology promise the realization of powerful
computers and a secure internet, which together could lead to the development of
unprecedented distributed quantum computational resources. To achieve this goal,
the development of systems comprising many coupled quantum bits (qubits) with
the ability to perform storage, communication and multi-qubit logic operations
is essential. Atomic-scale luminescent defects - color centers - in diamond have
recently emerged as a leading solid-state platform that has many of these
characteristics. However, approaches to efficiently couple different color
centers using light have been limited by a photon loss. This is largely due to
the difficulties associated with confining light to a sub-micron volume on a
diamond chip. The proposed program will explore an alternative approach to qubit
coupling that relies on mechanical vibrations, and will thus enable a new
generation of capabilities for the field of quantum science and technology, with
applications in quantum information processing and quantum metrology. The
program addresses topics related to quantum engineering, quantum information
science, nanofabrication, material science, nanophotonics and nanomechanics and
has strong theoretical and experimental component. Therefore, it represents a
unique research and educational opportunity for students at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Atomic-scale luminescent defects in diamond have
recently emerged as a leading solid-state platform for realization of on-chip
quantum networks. Of particular importance are negatively charged nitrogen-
vacancy (NV) and silicon-vacancy (SiV) color centers that possess all the
essential elements for quantum technology: storage, control and read-out. While
the NV remains the best solid state quantum memory, recent work has shown that
SiV is superior quantum emitter with spectrally stable and atomic-like emission.
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that SiV properties can be engineered by
applying strain, induced by mechanical motion. In this program, strong spin-
strain coupling in SiV will be leveraged to realize quantum networks that
utilize acoustic phonons as information carriers in on-chip quantum networks.
For example, by embedding SiVs inside phononic cavities and waveguides, it will
be possible to engineer spin-phonon interactions and achieve controlled phonon
emission and absorption by SiVs, as well as phonon routing, storage, and phonon-
phonon interactions (phonon switches). This will enable realization of two-qubit
quantum gates based on SiVs embedded inside mechanical resonators, in which
qubit entanglement is mediated by mechanical vibration. On the other hand, by
surrounding SiV with a phononic bandgap structures, phonon emission process will
be suppressed thus enhancing the SiV spin coherence time by several orders of
magnitude. The proposed program will pave the way for a new field of quantum
acousto dyanmics that uses phonons, and mechanical vibration in general, as on-
chip information carriers. Importantly, since mechanical vibrations can be
engineered to couple coherently to many different qubits (spin, charge, flux,
photon), proposed efforts may enable transfer of quantum states between
different degrees of freedom, and lead to realization of hybrid quantum
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.