* 1810343
* A Fundamental Study of Flow Mechanisms in Nanostructured Al Alloys and Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Megumi Kawasaki, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,193.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of lightweight
aluminum (Al) having high strength but sufficiently deformable without breaking
under stress is technically challenging in manufacturing to accelerate their
applications to automotive and aerospace industries. Early studies demonstrated
that significant microstructural refinement through severe permanent deformation
by a combination of high-pressure and twisting (torsion) leads to excellent
hardness in bulk metals. Thus, the objective of this project is to
scientifically investigate how to achieve high strength and good elongations to
failure in conventional Al alloys and intermetallic compounds after the
microstructural refinement process. The importance of this project is to
understand the strengthening and flow mechanisms of the nanostructured Al
systems after the high-pressure and torsion processing, and to determine how to
overcome the paradox of strength and formability in bulk nanostructured Al
alloys and its compounds. These results are expected to have an important
positive impact because a mechanistic understanding of improving the mechanical
properties in bulk metals will provide new opportunities for the development of
strategies for the applications of Al alloys and lightweight engineering
materials selections. The research requires proficiency in a variety of areas
including physics, materials science, and mechanical engineering, making it
challenging and rewarding for graduate and undergraduate students who will be
supported by this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Achieving both high strength and good ductility
is currently not controllable in Al alloys and intermetallic compounds. Although
grain refinement by high-pressure torsion (HPT) generally improves the hardness
of metals, the strategies for achieving both high strength and ductility in
metallic materials are available only under limited conditions: in
precipitation-hardened alloys or in materials containing high densities of nano-
twins. Except in age-hardenable compositions, it is a major challenge to
introduce those into Al systems having high stacking fault energy. Thus,
objectives of this project are to understand the plastic flow mechanisms for
strengthening and plasticity in micro- and macro-scales in ultrafine
microstructures, and to design strategies to increase both strength and
ductility of ultrafine-grained Al systems processed by HPT. This project
combines expertise in metallurgical research on nanocrystalline materials with
advanced characterization methods of measurements by the novel nanoindentation
technique and state-of-the-art X-ray and electron diffraction analysis. These
techniques allow to identify the complex metal flow with concurrent texture
changes in a time scale under ambient and elevated temperatures. The
contribution of this project is significant because the acquired scientific
knowledge of improving mechanical properties of bulk metals can be extended to a
wide range of polycrystalline materials, which is expected to expand our current
engineering materials selections and produce an increased U.S. competitiveness
in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.