* 1810208
* An interdisciplinary approach to investigating mechanisms of vulnerability and resiliency following early-life adversity
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Clancy Blair, Perry                   Rosemarie
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Science of Learning program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Clancy Blair at New York
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the social skill development of children growing up in
environments of socioeconomic adversity. Nearly 20% of children in the United
States are being raised in poverty. Impoverished families face a multitude of
adversities, such as economic and housing obstacles, as well as difficulties
seeking and maintaining employment. Such barriers can produce psychological
stress and diminish time for family interactions and children's social skill
development. The attainment of appropriate social skills is important for
children's development across many areas of functioning, including mental health
and academic achievement. Children with poor social skills are at higher risk
for exhibiting violence, sexual offenses, and criminal behaviors in adolescence
or adulthood. Despite the increased risk of poor social adjustment associated
with living in poverty, some children exposed to poverty-related adversity have
positive social adjustment. One finding that has consistently been linked to
their resiliency is the presence of supportive adult-child relationships. The
proposed studies will assess if quality peer relationships provide the same
benefits that quality adult-child relationships provide in impoverished
populations, by improving social development and biological regulation (i.e.
stress physiology) despite exposure to poverty-related adversity. The studies
are driven by the critical need to create readily accessible and scalable
interventions to promote optimal social development for at-risk impoverished
children.

The proposed research utilizes an innovative cross-species human/rodent approach
to explore peer relationship quality as a potential target for interventions
aimed at promoting social skill and stress physiology resiliency in at-risk,
impoverished children. To this end, the proposed studies will draw on existing
data from the Family Life Project, a longitudinal sample of 1,292 human children
recruited at birth (oversampled for poverty status), in order to complete
longitudinal modeling related to the impact of poverty-related adversity on
social skills and stress physiology, and the mediating role of peer
relationships. The proposed research will also leverage a scarcity-adversity
rodent model to study neurobiological mechanisms by which resource scarcity
impacts the development of social behavior, and test interventions of
neurobehavioral repair grounded in social learning theory. These interventions
will aim to improve the quality of peer interactions via naturalistic and
pharmacological manipulations. This research will inform the creation of
targeted, sensitive, and scalable interventions for the improvement of child
social skill development in high-risk environments

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.