* 1810088
* Probing and Engineering Cell Membrane with Graphene
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 353,178.00

With the advances in graphene nanoscience there has been tremendous interest in
applying graphene for biological and biomedical studies, due to its attractive
physical, chemical and biological properties. Significant research endeavors are
ongoing to explore its potential applications for drug delivery, tissue
engineering, biosensing, diagnostic imaging. Cholesterol is an organic molecule,
an essential building block for cell membranes. However, the knowledge on the
cell membrane and its cholesterol contents is limited due to the lack of methods
to explore membrane cholesterol dynamics and its relationship with other
biomolecules. Recent studies have shown that graphene can directly and
selectively interact with cholesterol in cell membranes and subsequently
modulate the cellular structure and function. In this project, the
intermolecular interactions between cholesterol and graphene will be directly
measured via dual-trap optical tweezers at the single-molecule level. Moreover,
ultrafast graphene field effect transistors will be utilized to explore the
dynamics and distribution of cholesterol in cell membranes and then engineer
cellular structure and function. These fundamental studies will not only provide
new insights into mechanical coupling between biomolecules and nanomaterials,
but also promote future interdisciplinary approaches for deciphering molecular
and cellular mechanisms governing cell membranes. . In addition, this research
will be integrated with an educational plan to promote science and engineering
to students of all ages and backgrounds. The PI will coordinate with
Vanderbilt?s Center for Science Outreach to extend research impact to K-12
students, foster interdisciplinary education and training to undergraduate and
graduate students, and encourage women and underrepresented students in
engineering and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cholesterol is one of the most
important lipid molecules involved in various interactions that shape the
architecture and functionality of the cell membrane. However, the understanding
of the cell membrane and its cholesterol contents is far from complete. Recent
studies have suggested that graphene can be utilized to directly and precisely
manipulate the local cholesterol concentration in cell membranes and thus
control specific transmembrane signaling pathways and associated cell behavior.
This project will develop a graphene-based strategy to manipulate cellular
structure and function with high spatiotemporal resolution. The approach is to
use dual-trap optical tweezers to bring a single cholesterol molecule close to a
suspended graphene transistor to directly measure the binding force between
them. Based on the fundamental knowledge of molecular interface between
cholesterol and graphene, ultrafast graphene field effect transistors will be
used to manipulate local cholesterol concentration in the cell membrane in a
controlled way. Simultaneously, the cellular structure will be monitored via
fluorescence microscopy. These fundamental studies will not only provide an in-
depth understanding of the bonding mechanisms between graphene and cholesterol,
but also shed light on the knowledge of cholesterol dynamics and distribution in
cell membranes, opening up entirely new avenues for future cellular
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.