* 1810419
* Integrated Selective Growth of Diamond and GaN for Maximum Heat Extraction from Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Mark Holtz, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 410,000.00

Diamond, as an electronic material, has the best heat conduction properties and
is readily produced by commercial equipment and processes. Gallium nitride is a
semiconductor material that has seen recent commercial success in high
efficiency light emitting diode bulbs, radio wave communications and radars, and
power conversion switches.&lt;br/&gt;However, the full potential of gallium
nitride is limited by the material's inability to efficiently conduct heat.
Therefore, the project's aim is to combine diamond and gallium nitride in a
novel approach that will focus on (1) the processes that produce both materials,
(2) an in-depth characterization of the electronic and thermal properties
(emphasizing heat flow), (3) fabrication of test structures, and (4) thermal
conduction simulations. There are broad needs for combining diamond's thermal
benefits within individual circuitry that comprises today's
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Transistors and switches (the backbone of the entire
high-tech industry) are well known to produce substantial heat, and the problem
is continually getting worse as devices become smaller and the density of
electronic components packed together on circuit boards increases. (In personal
electronics, consider how hot smart phones and laptops become during regular
usage.) Specific applications that will benefit from the research include
electric vehicles, power conversion for flexible integration of renewable energy
sources to the nation's power grid, radar systems and communications systems for
first-responder, defense and civilian uses. The research will result in basic
and applied knowledge regarding the diamond-gallium nitride interface. Results
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at national and
international conferences. Student engagement and education efforts will take
place through research and classroom experiences and a strong culture of
undergraduate research at the affiliate's
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the research is
to develop a novel diamond-GaN interface and fully characterize its thermal
transport characteristics. Innovative materials research will involve three-
dimensional integration of GaN on diamond to significantly improve thermal
management in high-power electronics. The high thermal conductivity of diamond
makes it highly attractive for mitigating self-heating effects that plague the
efficiency of switches and power transistors. An innovative path will be
developed to selectively grow diamond and GaN to achieve close proximity to the
current-carrying GaN two-dimensional electron gas for efficient heat removal.
Systematic studies will focus on material growth and characterization.
Characterization will emphasize interfaces of these materials and its impact on
heat flow. Fabrication of electrical and electrothermal test structures will be
conducted. These will be used in combination with electrical and optical
measurements to investigate the effects of deposition and heterointerface
quality on fundamental properties, including and thermal boundary resistance
(TBR). The impact of these material properties on transistor operational limits
will be examined with the aid of simulations. Selective diamond deposition will
provide understanding to improve diamond quality, interface properties, and
manage stresses resulting from thermal expansion mismatches. The impact of the
growth steps, particularly of the diamond-GaN interfaces, on material and device
properties will be studied by physical and optical methods. Test structures will
be measured to determine thermal conductivity and TBR. Extensive
characterization will correlate crystal quality and defect properties with these
key macroscopic quantities in thermal transport and electrical performance. The
research will result in basic and applied knowledge regarding material
deposition and properties of the diamond?GaN interface region. Results will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at national and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.