* 1810733
* GOALI: Highly Integrated Grid-Tied Multi-Port Power Module for PV and Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The nation, utility companies, and communities are seeking
innovative solutions that incorporate renewable energy resources into the
nation's power grids. This will reduce United States dependency on fossil fuels
and provide environmental and economic benefits. One such solution is to use and
store photovoltaic (solar) energy within the nation's existing power grid
system, and to proactively address future photovoltaic incorporation as the
nation' grid system evolves. However, the cost to rapidly deploy and maintain
integrated photovoltaic systems, the ability to control and distribute energy
across the grids, potential material deterioration due to thermal concerns, and
the potential for a single point-of-failure are challenges that currently
prohibit the broad use of grid-tied photovoltaics. The iPV++ system will enable
greater penetration of photovoltaic energy into the electric grid, which in turn
will expand worldwide use of solar energy, stimulate the entire photovoltaic
industry, create employment opportunities, and lead to lower energy costs. The
iPV++ module will result in accelerated photovoltaic deployment through
simplified installation processes and features including plug-and-play and the
easy replacement of the battery and inverter, will further accelerate
photovoltaic deployment, and significantly reduce the installation and
maintenance costs. The iPV++ is a novel system which integrates photovoltaic
design with seamless hardware and software integration for a reliable, cost-
effective solution that serves as an asset to the current grid, and becomes
essential for the future smart grid. The novelty of this approach is in the
design and development of a unique architecture that integrates smart power
electronics with local storage and battery management to harvest solar power.
The solution utilizes a new innovative inverter with smart and dynamic control
algorithms, and provides highly stable and predictable energy for grid
connection with utility-interaction functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposed effort is to investigate, design and develop an advanced,
integrated, and cost-effective technology consisting of photovoltaic smart
inverters and battery management. The key innovation is the proposed novel
architecture with innovative multi-port topology and control, enabling the
integration of smart power electronics with local storage to deliver highly
stable and predictable photovoltaic-based solar power for grid-tied
applications. The iPV++ project explores integrating power electronics, battery
and communication into the backplane of the photovoltaic panel by addressing the
associated control and dynamic challenges. The technical approach will provide
ancillary benefits, such as photovoltaic firming, peak load shifting, and
controllable power from the utility perspective. The proposed modular approach
of "building blocks," combined with the innovative passive thermal management
with the industry partner AllCell Technology's Phase Change Composite,
guarantees the safety of the battery modules, simplifies the installation and
maintenance, and significantly increases lifetime due to temperature control.
The control technique will allow for the use of local storage within the
photovoltaic panel with utility access to support grid functionalities, provide
load shifting and peak shaving, minimize transmission and distribution losses,
and optimize local energy production and consumption. A significant improvement
in power density and efficiency is expected as a result of the hardware
development effort, which will further lead to significant cost and size
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.