* 1810647
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Building Infrastructure to Prevent Disasters like Hurricane Maria
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Jerad Bales, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 11/30/2018
* USD 12,118.00

There is an urgent need to understand the impacts of severe flooding and
infrastructure damage on public health after natural disasters. One limitation
to effective disaster response is easy and rapid access to diverse information
about available resources, community resource needs, baseline and current
environmental conditions. This project aims to expand access to environmental
and drinking water quality disaster response and recovery data in a publicly
available format using a widely used collaborative online sharing platform named
HydroShare. Curating a central repository of assembled data has the potential to
greatly facilitate coordinated disaster responses of all types, and improve the
monitoring of the recovery process. The project team will prototype this system
with an assessment of drinking water, environment, and public health concerns
unique to Puerto Rico in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. By working directly
with public water utilities, the project team intends to characterize and map
the severity of impaired water resources and distribution systems in Puerto
Rico, inform communities about how to protect themselves against hazards
specific to their water, and to contribute to rebuilding so the nation is better
prepared for future hurricanes. Developing cyber and social infrastructure to
understand the dynamics of drinking water contamination after natural disasters
will improve disaster preparedness and response, and contribute to efforts
across the nation and the world to build for a resilient
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recovery efforts from natural disasters can be more
efficient with data-driven information on current needs and future risks. This
project aims to advance open-source software infrastructure to support
scientific investigation and data-driven decision making with a prototype system
using a water quality assessment developed to investigate post-Hurricane Maria
drinking water contamination in Puerto Rico. The widespread disruption of water
treatment processes and uncertain drinking water quality within distribution
systems in Puerto Rico poses risk to human health. However, there is no existing
digital infrastructure to scientifically determine the impacts of the hurricane
to inform a response to the crisis. After every natural disaster, including
hurricane Maria, elementary questions on how to provide high quality water
supplies and support basic human health are difficult to answer. This project
will archive and make accessible data on environmental variables unique to
Puerto Rico and Hurricane Maria, damage caused by the storm, and will begin to
address time sensitive needs of citizens. By working directly with drinking
water utilities to collect samples of biological and inorganic drinking water
quality, this project aims to generate understanding and awareness of the degree
to which drinking water systems were impacted by Hurricane Maria and the status
of drinking water infrastructure and emergency recovery in Puerto Rico after the
storm. The goal of this project is to advance understanding of how the severity
of a hazard to human health (e.g., no access to safe culinary water) is related
to the sophistication, connectivity, and operations of the physical and related
digital infrastructure systems. By rapidly collecting data in the early stages
of recovery, the team plans to test the design of an integrated
cyberinfrastructure system to increase the accessibility of environmental and
health data for understanding the impacts from hurricane-related natural
disasters. The team will test and stress the CUAHSI HydroShare data publication
mechanisms and capabilities to (1) assess the spatial and temporal presence of
waterborne pathogens in public water systems impacted by a natural disaster, (2)
demonstrate usability of HydroShare as a clearinghouse to centralize selected
datasets related to Hurricane Maria, and (3) develop a prototype
cyberinfrastructure to assess environmental conditions and public health
impacted by natural disasters. By rapidly collecting data in the early stages of
recovery, The team plans to test the design of an integrated cyberinfrastructure
system to increase the accessibility of environmental and health data for
understanding the impacts from hurricane-related natural disasters. This work
will develop a prototype of a software infrastructure system to advance
understanding of how data-driven information can reduce the impacts of natural
disaster and serve as a platform for future research. The project thus serves to
not only document post-disaster conditions, but develops a process to track the
impact of recovery over time, as monitored through health, power availability
and water quality.