* 1810174
* Data-Driven Operation and Control of Active Power Distribution Systems with High Penetration of Distributed Energy Resources and Energy Storage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Sukumar Kamalasadan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The expansion of large scale temporally changing and spatially separated
distributed energy resources (DERs), storage devices and, flexible loads exhibit
inherent computational challenges for management of active power distribution
systems. Also, time-scale of operation of these devices and configuration
requirements such as micro grid formation, involves integrating dynamic system
models within the optimization framework. Considering these challenges, this
project aims to develop novel algorithms for optimal power flow in power
distribution systems, distributed modeling of subnetworks in power distribution
system with large number of active devices, and a secondary control framework
that can ensure seamless integration with vendor driven controllers. Real-life
data and models from the local utility will be utilized to demonstrate
feasibility of the methodology. Educational and outreach activities of this
project include a) engaging students in problem-based learning from diverse
undergraduate and graduate groups including under-represented and minority
students, b) designing advanced curriculum on power system control with convex
optimization and distributed control approaches, c) providing a platform to
motivate and attract students in engineering especially the underrepresented
minorities and women, and d) developing a comprehensive dissemination platform
through PIs research lab and the center at University of North Carolina at
Charlotte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate: a) a novel
Receding Horizon Control (RHC) based mixed-integer second order cone programming
(MISOCP) model for optimal power flow in power distribution systems that can
scale up to integrate thousands of aggregated nodes and provide set points
(integer or real) for passive and active devices considering unbalanced
distribution system operation, b) a stochastic model predictive consensus
framework for distributed modeling of subnetworks in power distribution system
with large number of active devices, c) a secondary control framework that
provides improved active/reactive power control and can ensure seamless
integration with vendor driven controllers in turn enhancing power quality and
stability, and d) an implementation platform including communication loops with
real-life data and models from the local utility that proves feasibility of the
methodology. The proposed optimization framework can provide global solutions
for decision control variables and set points, including switches and
transformer taps, at all active nodes in power distribution system. Also, the
methodology can incorporate stochastic or deterministic changes in the devices
such as DERs and energy storage, considering each subnetwork. Moreover, the
architecture can be seamlessly integrated with the existing vender driven
controllers thus capable of accommodating high in-feed of distributed resources
and providing a low-cost solution to exponential increase in decision and grid
state variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.