* 1810489
* Electrodynamic Wheel Maglev Vehicle Control using an Integrated Eddy Current Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Jonathan Bird, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;Electrodynamic Wheel Maglev Vehicle Control using an
Integrated Eddy Current Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Maglev vehicles utilize magnetic fields in order to create
suspension, propulsion and guidance forces without physical contact and thus
speeds well in excess of 300 miles/hour are possible. Maglev can offer trip
times that are competitive with air travel. The lack of frictional forces
between the vehicle and the guideway, and maglev's low energy consumption
compared to aircraft means that the operational costs, once the transportation
system has been developed, should be low. Furthermore, whereas aircraft rely
solely on petroleum and consequently create a large amount of air pollutants,
maglev vehicles derive electric power from many renewable energy sources.
Recently there has been renewed interest in maglev vehicle technology because of
the SpaceX Hyperloop proposal to use high-speed vehicles within partially
evacuated tubes or tunnels. By reducing air resistance, vehicle speeds up to 800
mile/hour could be achievable. Such speeds cannot be achieved using high-speed
rail. Also, unlike high-speed rail, maglev vehicles have the ability to
accelerate rapidly, climb steep grades, negotiate tight turns and operate in
extremely adverse weather conditions. Maglev vehicles enable lighter weight and
smaller vehicles to be utilized and their inherently quiet operation eliminates
the need for costly noise abatement in urban environments. Despite maglev's many
attractive characteristics U.S. firms and Transit authorities have been
reluctant to invest in this technology. Overseas, high-speed rail has been
extensively used rather than maglev. The reason for this is undoubtedly, in
part, due to maglev's extremely high initial capital cost. This research seeks
to use an electrodynamic wheel driven maglev vehicle to demonstrate that a low
development risk, low capital-intensive maglev vehicle that is robust,
affordable and energy efficient can be developed. The use of electrodynamic
wheels could radically reduce maglev's system costs because the thrust,
suspension and guidance force can be achieved by utilizing only flat non
magnetic aluminum guideways. This also enables directional switching to be
achieved in a simple low-cost way. This research project will contribute to the
education and awareness of power engineering as an exciting area for research.
High school and graduate students will assist with this project at all levels.
The principal investigator will monitor the retention of minority students
within the electrical engineering undergraduate program with the goal of
increasing the retention rate through summer and academic semester research
experiences. The research will be published in leading control and magnetics
journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on demonstrating the
control and performance capabilities of electrodynamic wheel maglev vehicles. By
electromechanically rotating Halbach magnetic rotor's over flat aluminum sheet
guideways eddy currents are induced that can simultaneously provide both the
suspension and thrust force. By actively controlling the rotational speeds
lateral and angular stability can be achieved. The electrodynamic wheels will be
controlled by making use of recently derived 3-D eddy current force, torque,
magnetic stiffness and magnetic damping equations. The 6-degrees of freedom
dynamic control will be validated by utilizing two existing sub-scale
electrodynamic wheel maglev setups. Following this a full-scale electrodynamic
wheel maglev setup will be constructed that will be capable of supporting and
transporting a 100kg mass around a 108 foot oval-shaped test track. This
research will involve the development of new integrated eddy current control
strategies. By using exact 3-D analytic based eddy-current equations more
precise and predictive control approaches can be utilized. Insightful trade-offs
between stability requirements, efficiency, thrust and suspension levels will be
considered. This research could lead to new methodologies for controlling 3-D
eddy-current based machines. Multivariable state-space predictive control
techniques will be employed in order to ensure stability of the complexly
coupled device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.