* 1810138
* Metastable phases in BCC thin films: formation, stability, and properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 519,102.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;All pure metals are crystalline in their most
stable forms and many metals can adopt different crystal structures under
different conditions. The properties of each metal depend strongly on its
crystal structure, also known as its phase. For example, tantalum (Ta) in its
stable cubic phase is ductile and is a good conductor of electricity. It is
widely used in integrated circuits and thin film capacitors. In 1965, Mildred
Read and Carl Altman discovered that, in certain atom-by-atom thin film
deposition processes, Ta can also be made in a metastable tetragonal phase which
is brittle and has much lower electrical conductivity. Use of this phase has
been limited to thin film resistors. However, in 2012, an electronic effect
(giant spin Hall effect) was discovered in the metastable phase, which promises
to revolutionize information storage by making significant further
miniaturization of computer devices possible. Thus, there is now much interest
in the ability to reliably produce the metastable phase. As it turns out, all of
the elements from group 5 and 6 in the periodic table, which, in addition to Ta,
include tungsten (W), chromium (Cr), molybdenum (Mo), vanadium (V), and niobium
(Nb), have the same stable crystal structure at all temperatures and pressures,
and, with the exception of Nb, metastable phases have been reported for all of
them (a metastable Nb phase has been predicted, but not realized). This leads to
the prospect that, if the metastable phases can be reliably produced in all of
these metals, this may open up a class of new materials with potentially
interesting properties. Indeed, it has recently been shown that the metastable
phase in W has an even stronger giant spin Hall effect than Ta. However, with
the exception of metastable Ta, and now W, the metastable phases of these
elements have primarily been laboratory curiosities. Neither their formation
mechanisms nor their properties are known. In this research, detailed analyses
of the first few atomic layers that form as thin films of Ta, W, Cr, Mo, V, and
Nb are deposited, atom by atom, onto a substrate will be used to determine how
and why the metastable phases form. In addition, a unique ultra-high vacuum
deposition system that is capable of making very pure films under a wide range
of conditions will be used to explore the range of conditions under which
metastable phase films of these materials can be made. Finally studies of the
atomic arrangements and properties such as hardness, electrical conductivity,
and electronic effects in those films will provide information about possible
new applications for these new materials. In addition to fundamental
understanding about why certain phases form, this work should enable
technologists to develop new applications using these materials and to determine
how to control process parameters to reliably obtain metastable films with
desired properties for those applications. In particular, this work has the
potential to revolutionize computer random access memory technology, which would
enable the development of several generations of higher performance
microelectronic devices. In addition, approximately 16 students, including 2 PhD
students, 2 MS students, and 12 undergraduate students (6 from Cornell and 6
from Houghton College, a small undergraduate liberal arts college in upstate New
York) will engage in this effort. All students will be mentored to come up to
speed on the goals, participate in the research, and to present their work in
both talks and papers. The net effect will be very high-level training for these
future STEM professionals. Finally, the project will involve numerous outreach
activities to local area schools and institutions, including presentations,
demonstrations, curricular assistance, tutoring (especially for
disadvantaged/underrepresented students), and many others. These activities are
intended to inform the public about the practice, value, and accomplishments of
science, including this project, and to encourage students to pursue STEM fields
as they see fit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The group 5
and 6 elements, Ta, W, Cr, Mo, V, and Nb, are well known for having only one
equilibrium crystal structure, the body-centered-cubic phase, at all
temperatures and pressures. In addition, it has been shown that in certain atom-
by-atom fabrication processes such as sputter deposition, metastable phases can
be made in all but Nb (metastable Nb has been predicted, but not realized).
However, very little is known about the mechanism by which these phases form,
and, with the exception of metastable beta-Ta and beta-W, very little is known
about their properties. Recently there has been a spike in interest generated by
the discovery of the giant spin Hall effect in both beta-Ta and beta-W. In the
present program, phase formation mechanisms and the relationships among film
deposition parameters, microstructure, and properties, will be studied for the
group 5 and 6 elements. Phase formation will be studied using reflection high
energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy (ARPES) to characterize the initial phases of film growth by
molecular beam. The extent to which metastable phases can be produced in W, Cr,
Mo, V, and Nb will be determined in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) sputter
deposition system that provides a wide range of deposition parameters
(temperature, bias, power, sputter mode) and is capable of reducing oxygen and
other impurities to extremely low levels. The effect of various deposition
parameters on microstructure will be studied using x-ray diffraction (XRD),
electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) and other methods, and the stability
of the metastable phase will be studied by determining stress change (as an
indication of phase change) in-situ during heating in the UHV system. Finally,
hardness and elastic modulus will be determined using nanoindentation and
electrical conductivity will be measured with a four-point probe. This work is
expected to provide fundamental details regarding the mechanism of metastable
phase formation and the crystal structures of the metastable phases in the group
5 and 6 metals, as well as descriptions of the conditions under which those
phases can be grown and the relationships among those deposition conditions and
the microstructure and properties of the resulting
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.