* 1810268
* Direct RF-to-Digital Data Converters Using Time-Varying Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Sudhakar Pamarti, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2023
* USD 373,568.00

Applications demand our portable devices to provide an ever-increasing number of
diverse wireless communications such as cellular, WiFi, GPS, Bluetooth, and
proprietary communications that allow wearable and implantable devices to link
efficiently with a smartphone. As such, it is desirable to have a compact single
universal radio, similar to a Dick Tracy wristwatch radio, to seamlessly handle
the multitude of such communications. Unfortunately, such a universal radio has
proven notoriously hard to build, especially for use in a portable
communications device. This project aims to develop the technology for the
central piece of this universal radio: an analog-to-digital converter that
precisely digitizes a large swath of the electromagnetic signal spectrum
incident on an antenna while consuming low battery power. The technology will
enable radio hardware that can be reconfigured under convenient software
control. In addition, it will enable the so-called cognitive radios that
increase the utilization of scarce electromagnetic spectrum by dynamically
identifying and opportunistically using vacant frequency bands. Both universal
and cognitive radios are critically important to the further advancement of
wireless connectivity in the country. The developed technology can find use in
defense electronics and medical equipment where electromagnetic spectrum sensing
and awareness is important for imaging and security applications. In addition to
the technical impact, the proposed research activities will provide the diverse
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of California, Los
Angeles, with invaluable training in the strong interplay between signal
processing and electronic circuit design techniques. Such cross-disciplinary
training will help engineers better tackle many of the evolving challenges in
electrical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop circuit and signal processing techniques to enable wide bandwidth, high
resolution, analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) that can be placed at, or very
close to, the antenna in a receiver. The proposed approach employs multi-rate
filter-bank concepts and time-varying circuits. In a nutshell, a bank of analog
filters, made of specially chosen, periodically time-varying circuit components,
will be employed to channelize the RF signal into individual, but overlapping,
frequency bands that are then digitized using a bank of slower ADCs. A bank of
digital filters will intelligently combine the ADC outputs to faithfully
reconstruct the original signal. Prototype integrated circuits will be designed,
fabricated, and tested to verify the feasibility and utility of the proposed
direct RF-to-digital converters and demonstrate record-setting ADC bandwidth and
resolution combinations. The intellectual merits of this project are three-fold.
Foremost, it will develop a new frequency-channelization ADC approach that is
less sensitive to circuit mismatch and has relaxed dynamic range requirements as
compared to the conventional time-interleaved ADC approach. Secondly, the time-
varying circuit technique, which is a radical and beneficial departure from the
conventional principle of making circuits linear and time-invariant, will lead
to significant performance and power consumption benefits. The time-varying
approach enables very high linearity and precision control of the frequency
channelization filter to solve the central problem of all prior ADC approaches
that use a bank of analog pre-filters. Finally, the proposed research represents
a very tight coupling between integrated circuit design and signal processing
theory that is becoming increasingly essential to solve the outstanding problems
in integrated circuit design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.