* 1810922
* Time-dependent Density-Functional Approaches for Excitons: Linear Response Versus Real Time
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Carsten Ullrich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,079.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Chemistry Division jointly fund this award on fundamental research and
education to develop theoretical and computational methodology for the study of
light-matter interactions in semiconducting and insulating materials. The
interaction of light and matter is of fundamental importance in science and
technology: it determines the characterization of materials through optical
spectroscopy and forms the basis of photovoltaics as a renewable energy
resource. The goal of this research is to develop theoretical and computational
methods for light-matter interactions that are more accurate and efficient than
existing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When light gets absorbed in a
material, negatively charged electrons are excited into higher states, leaving
behind them a positively charged void that is called a "hole" state. Electrons
and holes can team up to form pairs, called excitons, which give rise to
characteristic spectroscopic features and often dominate the optical properties
of materials. The theoretical and computational description of excitonic effects
is challenging, since the electron-hole pairs are formed within the original
material and are subject to the influence of all other electrons
therein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize a quantum-mechanical
method called time-dependent density-functional theory (TDDFT), which has been
very successful in describing the dynamics of interacting electronic systems in
many areas in physics, chemistry, and materials science. Within this theoretical
framework, the PI will develop new ways of accounting for the quantum behavior
of many-electron systems, specifically focusing on properties that are necessary
for the accurate description of excitons in optical spectroscopy. Another
research goal will be to adapt a computer code called Qb@ll that is capable of
describing the real-time dynamics of complex electronic systems, to account for
excitonic properties, and use it to study the optical properties of materials
with defects and interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will
go hand-in-hand with educational efforts, consisting of training and mentoring
of graduate students in theoretical and computational condensed-matter research,
and the development of an online course in density-functional theory at the
undergraduate and beginning-graduate level. Undergraduate students will be
involved in the design and development of course materials and of hands-on
computational exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division jointly fund this award on fundamental research and education
to develop theoretical and computational methodology for the study of excitonic
properties in semiconductors and insulators. Excitons dominate the optical
properties of many materials in the spectral region around the absorption edge;
they arise from the attractive screened interaction of electrons and holes
created during optical excitations. At present, the Bethe-Salpeter equation is
the standard method for calculating excitonic properties in solids, but at
significant computational cost. The PI will develop and implement alternative
approaches for excitons based on time-dependent density-functional theory
(TDDFT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge for TDDFT is to account for
exchange and correlation (XC) effects via suitable approximations; the accurate
description of excitonic properties requires XC functionals with the proper
long-range behavior and with proper screening. The first goal in this project is
to develop more accurate excitonic XC functionals for linear-response TDDFT,
using three key ideas: simple parametrizations of the matrix form of long-range-
corrected XC kernels, approximations derived from many-body theory, and nonlocal
exchange screened with model dielectric functions. These models will be assessed
by comparing calculated exciton binding energies and spectral strengths with
experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal is to adapt the Qb@ll
computer code for exciton dynamics with the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation
for solids. Qb@ll is capable of massively parallel calculations with unit cells
containing many atoms, which makes it suitable to treat complex systems.
Applications to bound exciton complexes at defects and charge-transfer excitons
in molecular crystals will be carried out. In addition, the Qb@ll code allows
coupling of electronic and ionic degrees of freedom, which is key for describing
relaxation and charge separation in photovoltaic processes from first
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will go hand-in-hand
with educational efforts, consisting of training and mentoring of graduate
students in theoretical and computational condensed-matter research, and the
development of an online course in density-functional theory at the
undergraduate and beginning-graduate level. Undergraduate students will be
involved in the design and development of course materials and of hands-on
computational exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.