* 1810800
* RAPID: Re-developing Puerto Rico's Electric System for Infrastructure Integrity
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Anne Kimber, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2019
* USD 60,000.00

Puerto Rico (PR) faces ongoing threats from hurricanes and earthquakes, and
needs power infrastructure able to withstand and recover from such events. This
capability is defined as Infrastructure integrity (II): the ability of
infrastructure to be reliable (maintain service availability), flexible (respond
quickly to changes in demand), resilient (use operational measures to minimize
service cost impact for recovery from extreme events), and adaptable (invest to
adapt infrastructure to changing futures to provide continuous low-cost
services).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PR is an extreme example of the choices facing
utilities, either because of natural disasters, or because aging infrastructure,
energy markets and distribution smart grid opportunities present utilities with
more (and possibly conflicting) choices for capital investments in transmission,
distribution, central or distributed generation, as well as smart grid
operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four stages over one year to:
1) Identify main threats to providing continuous, low-cost electric energy
services in PR and the primary impediments to restoring electric energy services
following occurrence of such events; 2) provide five visions for enhancement of
infrastructure integrity, and identify strengths and weaknesses of each; 3)
critique and revise the visions based on industry panel debates on strengths and
weaknesses of each vision; 4) simulate the economics, infrastructure integrity
and environmental sustainability of each vision. The final report will summarize
the work and provide a recommendation to move forward with one or a combination
of the visions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's strength comes from 1) our
team's previous peer-reviewed work simulating infrastructure improvements for
greater integrity on behalf of large utilities in the continental US; 2) our
experts-- research professors, utilities from all sectors, and consulting
engineers, in PR and in the continental US, with long experience in generation,
transmission, distribution, and load-side infrastructure investment, all of whom
study and confront choices in investment to satisfy Infrastructure Integrity; 3)
development of an in-depth "on-the-ground" study of a catastrophic impact on
electric systems infrastructure and innovative approaches to enhance
infrastructure integrity for future such events.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
development and vetting of this vision can be replicated for other utilities at
different scales, providing a roadmap for infrastructure investment.