* 1810695
* Modeling and Simulation of Bacterial Outer Membranes and Interactions with Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2022
* USD 663,531.00

The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria is a unique and highly
asymmetric lipid bilayer composed of phospholipids in the inner leaflet and
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) in the outer leaflet. While LPS is the major
component, the OM also contains the enterobacterial common antigens (ECAs) and
capsular polysaccharides (CPS) whose occurrence is frequently overlooked. These
unique cell surface glycolipids make the OM an effective, selective barrier
against the permeation of toxic molecules such as antibiotics and bile salts
into the bacteria, which causes significant threats to public health. This
project seeks to acquire an understanding of structure and dynamics of the
bacterial OMs and their interactions with the OM proteins using start-of-the-art
molecular modeling and simulations. This project will also provide the basis for
a general approach to OM molecular modeling and simulation. In particular, this
project will raise the scientific literacy of the public through the educational
outreach, publication of research results and workshop
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide an in-depth and
unprecedented understanding on structural and dynamics information of the OMs
from various bacteria, interactions between proteins and OMs, and their
influences on solute permeation by establishing reliable computational methods
for all-atom modeling and simulation of various LPS/ECA/CPS-containing complex
OMs of Gram-negative bacteria and membrane proteins in various OMs. It also
seeks to foster synergistic scientific research and education on LPS/ECA/CPS
molecules and bacterial OMs by providing reliable and general computational
methods (through LPS/ECA/CPS Modelers and their incorporated into Membrane
Builder in CHARMM-GUI, www.charmm-gui.org) to students and researchers in the
simulation community and other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.