* 1810758
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: An Algorithmic Theory of Brain Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Nancy Lynch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Understanding how the brain works, as a computational device, is a central
challenge of modern neuroscience and AI. Different research communities approach
this challenge in different ways, including examining neural network structure
as a clue to computational function, using functional imaging to study neural
activation patterns, developing theory based on simplified models of neural
computation, and engineering of neural-inspired machine learning architectures.
This project will approach the problem using techniques from distributed
computing theory and other branches of theoretical computer science. This
project has the potential to improve our understanding of computation in the
brain, by identifying key problems that are solved in the brain and key
mechanisms that may be used to solve them. This work can also have impact on
theoretical computer science, by contributing a new and fruitful direction for
theoretical study. This collaboration between MIT and the Weizmann Institute in
Israel will increase the participation of women and minority participants in
this field and will seek to bridge the gap between computer scientists and
biology researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project develops an
algorithmic theory for brain networks, based on novel stochastic Spiking Neural
Network models with general interconnection patterns. It defines a collection of
abstract problems to be solved by these networks, inspired by problems that are
solved in actual brains, such as problems of focus, recognition, learning, and
memory. The project designs algorithms (networks) that solve the problems, and
analyze them in terms of static costs such as network size, and dynamic costs
such as time to converge to a correct solution. The investigators consider
tradeoffs between the various costs, and will prove corresponding lower bound
results. The models, problems, and solutions should be simple enough to enable
theoretical analysis, yet realistic enough to provide insight into the behavior
of real neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.