* 1810077
* The role of boundaries in 2D active nematics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 482,672.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Active matter seeks to
describe materials in which chemical energy is consumed at the nanoscale
resulting in motion at the macro scale. Examples include the motion of living
cells. Recent theories suggest that the motions of living cells are constrained
by physical laws to certain characteristic behaviors, and these same theories
raise the intriguing possibility that it is possible to engineer new materials
with functionalities that heretofore are only found in living organisms.
Currently, a lack of quantitative experiments to test theory is hampering
progress. This proposal seeks to rectify this imbalance by providing
quantitative comparison between theory and experiment in confined two-
dimensional active liquid crystals. These tests of theory and discovery of new
phenomena will propel the field forward leading to the creation of novel
materials, such as self-organizing engines and self-pumping
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Active matter research is at the forefront of the
field of soft matter, but a lack of quantitative experiments to test theory is
hampering progress. This proposal seeks to rectify this imbalance. Experimental
studies of confined 2D active nematic liquid crystals will be performed with the
goal to elucidate the role of boundary conditions in influencing structure and
dynamics. A model system, extensile microtubule bundles, will be employed
because of their relative simplicity and high degree of controllability. One
thrust will be to establish the microscopic mechanism by which microtubule
bundles extend and produce flow. This will be accomplished using combined
fluorescence and second harmonic generation microscopy. A second thrust will be
to investigate the function of boundary conditions on active nematics by
creating a wide variety of confined structures and quantitatively measure the
quantities necessary to compare theory and experiment. This will be accomplished
using photolithographic and microfluidic manufacturing methods and quantitative
light microscopy. A third thrust will be to compare experiment to theory using
finite element computation and a fourth thrust will be to engineer soft machines
based on confined active nematics that self-organize to perform work, such as
pumping of fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.