* 1810747
* Global Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jared Wunsch, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 226,000.00

The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics contain a parameter h known as
Planck's constant; the observed value of h is understood to be one of the
fundamental constants of our universe. Relationships between quantum-mechanical
systems and their classical counterparts can be explored by investigating how
the quantum-mechanical equations behave as the value of the parameter h tends to
zero in some sense. Pursuing this idea rigorously, however, involves subtleties.
Because h is not a dimensionless quantity, the "smallness" of values of the
parameter must be expressed in terms of other relevant quantities. This research
project aims to deepen understanding of relationships between quantum mechanics
and classical mechanics through rigorous mathematical analysis centered on the
limit when the Planck constant h tends to zero. The questions under study are of
great interest both to mathematicians and to
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project primarily concerns
stationary states of quantum systems. Global harmonic analysis is the use of the
long-time dynamics of the geodesic flow of a Riemannian manifold to understand
the high-frequency asymptotics of eigenfunctions. Two of the most important
goals of the project are (1) to analyze Lp norms of eigenfunctions and (2) to
analyze nodal sets and critical point sets. Making use of recent results
relating geometric control and restrictions of eigenfunctions to hypersurfaces,
the investigator aims to study nodal problems in non-ergodic situations and
possible relations to the fractal uncertainty principle. The project also
includes exploration of several other topics, including the numbers of nodal
domains of eigenfunctions on manifolds of higher dimension; Lp norms of
eigenfunctions and microlocal Kakeya-Nikodym norms and their relations to
analytic continuation to Grauert tubes; and the behavior of density of states of
spectral projections for various Hamiltonians across natural interfaces such as
energy surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.