* 1810116
* Ultrawide bandgap AlGaN ionizing radiation detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Asif Khan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 370,890.00

Radiation detectors are critically important for environmental controls and
monitoring of hazardous radioactive materials at airports and many others safety
critical locations. Advanced nuclear detection is a timely issue for national
security, nuclear power plants, and for military security. This project aims to
develop highly sensitive, compact nuclear detectors using aluminum gallium
nitride crystalline films produced using the same technology which was used for
blue-green-white light emitting diodes and it was awarded the 2014 Nobel Prize.
More recently an innovative extension of this technology using Aluminum Gallium
Nitride materials has led to ultraviolet LEDs for air and water purification and
power electronics for electric vehicles and advanced military radars. These
developments offer low-cost and high sensitivity performance, with the potential
of integrating functionalities such as lighting, ultraviolet detection, as well
as radio transmission on a single microchip. This project proposes material and
device innovations, to explore the use of Aluminum Gallium Nitride technology
for low-cost, compact and highly sensitive nuclear radiation detectors. The
challenge is the production of high quality material, which can withstand high
temperatures and harsh environments, such as in a nuclear power plant. The team
proposes to produce these materials and working electrical devices to benchmark
against existing higher cost, bulkier legacy technology. The proposed work will
lead to the education of at least 2 PhD students, 1 African American and 1
military veteran currently in the team's group, who will go into jobs in either
government research or advanced manufacturing. The proposed research will
further cement University of South Carolina?s track record of excellence in
Aluminum Gallium Nitride materials for harsh environment electronics. During the
PI's sabbatical at Morgan State University, a historically black university in
Baltimore, MD, the devices produced in this work will be integrated into senior
design projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team proposes to develop a low-noise,
high speed, ionizing radiation detector using ultra-wide bandgap aluminum
gallium nitride epitaxial layers on aluminum nitride/sapphire templates. This
ternary material is radiation hard and leads to devices with very low leakage
currents even in harsh environments. It allows for monolithic integration with
readout and power conditioning electronics, as well as other functionalities
such as ultraviolet light sources. The proposed detector, a 2-5?m thick channel
field effect phototransistor with a high internal current gain and low dark
current will be grown by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition. It will be
ideal for detecting pulses of radiation in Geiger mode, and eventually higher
penetration radiation using thicker absorbing layers. The program exploits the
shallow penetration deep ultraviolet light to improve materials development for
thicker layers for soft beta radiation from Nickel-63. The ability to use
monochromatic light enables characterization with spectral selectivity to the
bandgaps, not possible with broadband beta-illumination. The team's initial
experiments showed noise equivalent power &lt;5fW, although these transistors
had slow response times ~20s. Through a noise study, this was attributed to
charge trapping at the aluminum nitride template/channel growth interface. The
high current gain was partially a consequence of trapping induced
photoconductivity. The growth solutions consist of electrically isolating this
interface from the transistor channel, either with a thick strain engineered
layer and/or a graded back barrier layer. Thus, any crystal growth strategy or
device architecture that speeds up the device will lower photocurrent, but the
Lorentzian noise arising from slow traps will also be reduced. Thus the tradeoff
between current gain and speed, endemic to all detectors, is complicated by
noise considerations, leading to the central question: How far can NEP and
response time be decreased simultaneously by eliminating the influence of traps
Initial analyses indicate that Nano-second to micro-second response times are
possible, consistent with recombination times in direct gap semiconductors. The
capability of engineering thick channel transistor layers directly translates to
power electronics as well, as it enables the ability to block high
voltages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.