* 1810762
* LSAMP BD: University of Virginia, Virginia ? North Carolina Alliance (2018-2020)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kristin Morgan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion.
BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education
contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research
workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation." The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance site for this LSAMP BD activity is the University of Virginia (UVA),
one of the 12 partners included in the Virginia-North Carolina Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (VA-NC LSAMP). UVA, the lead institution for
the alliance, will host the first BD program for VA-NC LSAMP; providing
doctoral-level study for a cohort of 12 graduates from LSAMP undergraduate
programs. In addition to affording substantial financial support to enable
students to focus full time on doctoral course work and research, the project
provides an integrated set of activities designed to advance BD students toward
completion of doctoral level studies. Activities include: 1) a 3-week summer
bridge enrichment program; 2) professional development opportunities; 3)
training and preparation of applications for competitive graduate fellowships;
and 4) extracurricular mentoring support that prepares the students to become
STEM professionals. These activities address barriers that limit the increase of
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM fields, particularly
at the doctoral level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.