* 1810507
* Integrate high Z and low Z compound semiconductors for 60 keV spectrometry
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 12/31/2022
* USD 385,000.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The detection and identification of radioactive
isotopes is important for national security and medical imaging. Different
isotopes can be distinguished from one another by the energy of gamma rays that
they emit during radioactive decay. Efficient, high-resolution detection of
gamma rays requires semiconductors with high atomic number (Z). However, these
materials have low band-gaps and device based on such materials have high
electronic noise. A high electric field in the junction regions of such
detectors significantly increases this noise. Precision radiation detectors
therefore require significant cooling to reduce electronic noise. The extensive
cooling required can be both expensive and unreliable. The investigators propose
to achieve gamma-ray detection with high energy resolution in a compact package
at room temperature. These detectors will integrate a high-Z low band-gap
semiconductor with a low-Z, high band-gap semiconductor. The high-Z material
detects gamma rays efficiently and the low-Z material provides low electronic
noise in the high field region. This approach exploits the relative benefits of
the two materials. The team brings world-renowned expertise in growth of
semiconductor materials and fabrication of gamma-ray detectors to bear on the
challenges associated with this project. The multidisciplinary research team has
an established track record of investing in underrepresented minority graduate
students and undergraduate researchers, including women. The proposed work will
form the basis for a new program at UCLA in which students take part in cross-
disciplinary workshops and laboratory tours. This program aims to bridge the
gaps between material science, electrical engineering, and biomedical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental need exists for
compact, low-power and high-resolution radiation detectors that can operate near
room temperature to provide X-ray to gamma-ray spectroscopy for civil security,
radiation surveillance, and radiological imaging applications. By combining
world-renowned expertise in epitaxial growth and device fabrication of III-As/Sb
structures, sensing devices, and gamma-ray detection, this project plans to
achieve direct detection of 60 keV gamma-rays with energy resolution &lt;1% in a
compact package. A novel integration of high atomic number (Z) gamma-ray
absorbers with low-noise junction regions is proposed to construct an energy-
sensitive radiation detector that will exploit the relative benefits of the two
materials, to achieve high energy resolution gamma-ray detection with low
background noise. The technical approach is designed and organized to achieve
the concept of integrating gamma ray detector structures, and will deliver
comprehensive experimental investigations of material and device parameters that
are of fundamental importance to the field of X-ray and gamma-ray spectroscopy.
A team is brought together with a unique combination of experience and knowledge
to bear on the challenges associated with this project. The broader impacts
arise in part from the multidisciplinary nature of the research team, which has
an established track record of investing in underrepresented minority graduate
students and undergraduate researchers, including women. The proposed work will
form the basis for a new program at UCLA in which students take part in cross-
disciplinary workshops and laboratory tours aimed at bridging the gaps between
material science, electrical engineering, and biomedical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.