* 1810979
* Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of High-Dimensional Functionals in Causal Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Edward Kennedy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Causality is central to many of the most important questions in science and
policy: Which cancer treatments are most effective for which patients? Would
more strict gun laws result in fewer homicides? Causal inference is concerned
with formulating such questions mathematically, exploring whether answers can be
gleaned from data, and if so, determining how well and with what statistical
methods. Classical methods in causal inference tend to aim at simple summary
effects, such as how outcomes would change on average if a treatment were
applied to an entire population versus not at all. However, with big data,
investigators can ask more complicated questions, such as how treatment effects
vary with complex covariate information, or how outcome densities would change
with sequential treatments applied over many timepoints. In this project the PI
will develop flexible statistical methods for answering such questions without
imposing strong assumptions, and will study optimality, i.e., how well one can
possibly answer such questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The above questions can be
framed as high-dimensional functional estimation problems. The classical
approach here is to use strong parametric assumptions to reduce these problems
to finite-dimensional ones. This allows for standard methods and a deep
understanding of optimality, but when true parametric structure is unknown,
incorrect assumptions can result in sizable bias and irrelevant efficiency
bounds. In fact, little is known in the nonparametric case. Thus, the PI will
develop novel nonparametric estimators of high-dimensional causal functionals,
study their risk, provide confidence bands and inferential tools, and explore
minimax lower bounds. All methods will be made available in R software. This
proposal focuses on the foundational problems of (a) estimating counterfactual
densities and (b) heterogeneous treatment effects, in three prominent domains of
causal inference: (i) unconfounded point treatments, (ii) instrumental
variables, and (iii) time-varying treatments. In addition, the PI will establish
a general framework for bias-corrected estimation and inference for high-
dimensional functionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.