* 1810144
* Modeling and Analysis of Load Ensembles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ian Hiskens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2021
* USD 307,529.00

Power systems strive to maintain balance between electricity production and
consumption so that the system frequency remains close to its nominal value.
This has traditionally been achieved by varying generation to track changes in
the total load. Increasing reliance on renewable generation is, however,
challenging this operating strategy. Renewable generation is inherently variable
and offers only limited ability to assist in meeting the supply-demand balance.
Conceptually, this reduction in generation control can be compensated by
introducing fast-acting control of loads. The project will consider modeling and
control strategies for harnessing the potential of large numbers of small loads
(load ensembles) to assist in regulating the power system frequency. Of
particular interest are strategies that are non-disruptive, in the sense that
individual consumers are oblivious to changes in their loads, yet the aggregate
response plays a vital role in grid operation. Such aggregate load control is
appealing in that it facilitates significant expansion of renewable generation
by utilizing existing resources (loads) rather than requiring extensive (and
expensive) new infrastructure such as bulk energy storage. The research for
controlling aggregate loads would impact grid operations, increasing system
reliability and energy efficiency. The proposed work will include integrating
research results into courses and training of graduate students as well as
dissemination at workshops and conferences. In addition, technology transfer to
a load aggregator startup company will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore two forms of
aggregate models for load ensembles. The first captures the aggregate
flexibility across an ensemble of loads, quantifying the controllability that is
available from those loads. This can be thought of as building an equivalent
energy-storage (battery) type representation. The work will rely on zonotope and
homothet concepts to establish polytopic approximations of ensemble availability
and flexibility. The so-called bin model will also be considered as a means of
assessing ensemble dynamics and designing control schemes. Investigations will
consider the influence of noise and heterogeneity on the aggregate dynamics of
load ensembles. The project will develop systematic approaches for incorporating
those effects into the bin model, and will explore the error introduced by the
approximations inherent in the bin representation. Situations have been observed
where control of load ensembles results in undesirable, highly nonlinear
behavior such as sustained oscillations and bifurcations. Such effects arise due
to unanticipated synchronization of large numbers of participating loads. The
project will use of a hybrid (switched) dynamical systems framework to explore
these nonlinearities and develop strategies for circumventing such
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.