* 1810625
* Election Sciences Conference 2018: Madison, WI - July 26-27, 2018
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Charles Stewart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,988.00

Elections sciences is an emerging field of scholarship that focuses on the
systematic study of election administration and conduct. The aim of scholars in
this field is to identify problems and provide valuable data and performance
measures to assess and reform election systems to ensure the highest levels of
integrity and voter access. The Elections Sciences summer conference will bring
together a group of political scientists, statisticians, computer scientists,
and legal scholars interested in building and diversifying the field. The
conference complements scholarly efforts to identify the intellectual boundaries
of elections sciences, define primary research questions, create a network to
support junior scholars and graduate students, and develop curricular materials
for use in graduate and undergraduate education. The conference embodies NSF's
mission to broaden participation in science that benefits the national interest
and enhances security. The conference and the research that will come out of the
conference will help to assure that American elections are accepted as
legitimate, use safe and secure technology, and maximize public participation.

The Election Sciences summer conference complements a national effort led by
senior scholars in political science in partnership with selected scholars in
computer science, law, and public policy. The primary of these efforts is to
build and institutionalize election science as a field of study. Political
scientists a central role in helping to understand the problems in the American
election system that contributed to the election crisis of 2000. This work
helped to shape subsequent federal election reform legislation and contributed
research for the presidential commission established after the 2012 elections.
However, significant barriers to entry still exist for entry into the election
sciences field. For example, voter registration and voter history files present
challenging data and statistical inference problems. In addition, scholars need
to be trained to interact with elections officials, state legislators, and other
policy makers in a meaningful way. This conference will work to reduce these
barriers as well as others. This conference follows established models in our
field by offering a small focused summer conference targeted particularly at
younger scholars and graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.