* 1810890
* LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate at UMES
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,056,950.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on Ph.D. matriculation and
completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher
education contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022
Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce
underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES),
Maryland's historically black 1890 land grant institution, will be the host site
for the 2018-2020 University System of Maryland (USM) Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation Bridge to the Doctorate (LSAMP BD) Program. The
activities of UMES's program will provide diverse graduate students who are
LSAMP BD Fellows with research training in toxicology, food science, and marine
sciences. These are areas of science that do not traditionally engage students
from underrepresented groups. The BD Fellows Program at UMES will advance
knowledge, and understanding of graduate recruitment, retention, and persistence
of underrepresented students in STEM fields, with particular emphasis on STEM
research that takes advantage of UMES' coastal environment. UMES is uniquely
located on the eastern shore of Maryland which is near both the Chesapeake Bay
and the Atlantic Ocean. BD Fellows will obtain research experience in
specializations such as oceanography, environmental chemistry, fisheries and
marine ecology, microbiology, and physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.