* 1810270
* GOALI: Collaborative - Magnetoelectric Nanodevices for Wireless Repair of Neural Circuits Deep in the Brain
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Sakhrat Khizroev, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 450,000.00

The GOALI project at the intersection of engineering and medicine aims to
address the following gap in the broad area of neurodegenerative diseases.
Stimulation of the neural network by electric fields can repair the abnormal
neural activity responsible for various neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and many others. Further, recently it has been shown
that electric fields have fundamental effects on cell fate and neurogenesis.
However, the existing approaches such as (1) direct deep-brain stimulation (DBS)
by establishing direct electrical contact to the neural network and (2) less-
invasive indirect transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) don't provide spatial
and temporal resolutions required for adequate control of the neural network at
the cellular level to effectively cure these diseases using electricity, without
causing any devastating side effects. This project fills this gap by
implementing a nanotechnology approach, according to which magnetoelectric
nanoparticles (MENs) are used to combine the main advantages of electric and
magnetic fields to enable wirelessly controlled high-efficacy, high-specificity
and high-selectivity stimulation of selective regions in the brain to treat
specific neurodegenerative diseases without any side effects. The potential
applications are far-reaching into engineering electromagnetic and multiferroic
nanoparticle-driven systems which could impact the emerging field of
personalized precision medicine, cognitive neuroscience, neuroimaging, clinical
neurology, and psychiatry. The proposed system can help reverse engineer the
brain and thus open a pathway to fundamental understanding of the brain. An
important component of the project is to motivate underrepresented minorities to
pursue cross-disciplinary degrees at the intersection of engineering and
medicine. A special emphasis will be made to attract local K-12 and
undergraduate students to continue their research at FIU and Indiana University.

The GOALI proposal aims to conduct comprehensive studies to engineer
magnetoelectric nanoparticles (MENs) based system for wireless stimulation of
local regions deep in the brain to repair disease specific impediments. MENs can
bridge local intrinsic electric fields deep in the brain with magnetic fields
and thus enable an external control of local electric stimulation for repairing
neural circuits locally. Like traditional magnetic nanoparticles, MENs can be
used as image contrast agents in magnetic resonance imaging and navigated across
the blood-brain barrier via application of magnetic field gradients. In
addition, unlike traditional nanoparticles, MENs display an entirely new
property due to the presence of a non-zero magnetoelectric (ME) effect. The ME
effect, which exists due to coupled magnetostrictive and piezoelectric
components, allows to efficiently couple intrinsic electric fields deep in the
brain to magnetic fields which in turn can be wirelessly controlled from outside
the skull. Thus, MENs allow to use d.c. and a.c magnetic fields for separating
the two functions, (i) application of a d.c. magnetic field gradient for image-
guided navigation of MENs across BBB and into a disease-specific local region(s)
and (ii) application of an a.c. magnetic field to stimulate this local region(s)
locally via inducing local a.c. electric fields, respectively. Based on the
physics of metastable systems, using a system of electromagnets, the
nanoparticles can be effectively maintained in a quasi-diamagnetic state and
thus moved to any point deep in the brain for further local electric stimulation
via application of a.c. magnetic fields. Due to the ME effect, the image
provided by MENs not only contains structural information but also reflects a
local electric field due to the neuronal activity. All these effects will be
studied in vitro and in vivo using animal models to understand field-controlled
local effects of MENs on the underlying mechanisms of activation of neurons and
synapses, the cortical neuronal activity, neuronal excitability, and synaptic
transmission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.