* 1810498
* Improving Graph Literacy and Numeracy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Lace Padilla, Padilla                 Lace           M
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2019
* USD 57,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and is supported by
SBE's Perception, Action and Cognition program. The goal of the SPRF program is
to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Steven
Franconeri at Northwestern University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating ways to help people understand
visualizations of data. Accurately interpreting visualizations of data is vital
for success in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields.
Scientists depend on graphics to communicate and develop ideas about data.
Further, people use visualizations of data to make large-scale policy decisions,
such as where to allocate resources before a hurricane and more personal
decisions, such as which medical treatment to undergo. Given the widespread use
of visualizations and their global impact, it is important that everyone can use
visualizations of data effectively. Unfortunately, not all people can understand
visualizations of data easily. One-third of the US population exhibits low graph
literacy and numeracy, or the underdeveloped ability to work with graphically
presented information and numbers. Graph literacy and numeracy are two key
factors that contribute to visualization literacy. This work removes barriers
for disadvantaged students in STEM by identifying the causes of low
visualization literacy, and developing free and equitable resources to improve
visualization literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
determining the nature of the cognitive factors that produce difficulty in
reasoning with visualizations. In a recent review paper, Padilla and colleagues
proposed a cognitive model for how people make decisions with visualizations
(Padilla, Creem-Regehr, Hegarty, &amp; Stefanucci, 2018). Building on this
model, the current project seeks to identify cognitive components that lead to a
misunderstanding of visualizations for people with low visualization literacy.
These studies contribute new knowledge about how diverse groups of people
understand and use data visualizations, in addition to providing practical
recommendations for how to help people make their best possible decisions with
visualizations of data. The results of this work strengthen our basic
understanding of visualization cognition for people that have difficulty
understanding STEM graphics. This project also provides educators with
empirically tested methods for helping students with low visualization literacy
use and understand visualizations of data, thusly removing a barrier to success
in STEM for these disadvantaged populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.