* 1810079
* Enabling a Flexible, Non-disruptive Demand Control to Improve Grid Security &amp; Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Venkataramana Ajjarapu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2022
* USD 359,497.00

As the penetration of smart controllable loads in the distribution system has
been increasing, there has been a rising interest by utilities and ISOs to use
these devices to improve the overall grid performance. Thermostatic controllable
loads (TCLs) (heating, ventilation and air-conditioners (HVAC)) are rarely used
for directly handling stability and security related issues. In this project, we
systematically utilize the thermal storage of the HVAC systems to improve the
security of the grid over various time scales (5 sec - 2 hrs). While we will
concentrate on enhancing system stability, the proposed DR aggregation and
control methodology can be utilized for other services (emergency reserves,
spinning reserves, load shaping, etc.) in a manner that ensures the customer
comfort is not disrupted. The research results will be disseminated at relevant
conferences. Also, we plan to develop curriculum modules and short courses based
on the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniqueness of the Demand Response(DR)
aggregator with set-point control is that it reduces the control cost of DR
imposed by frequent switching and reduces the likelihood of involuntary service
interruption, enabling a more flexible, aggressive, and smooth demand control
for a broad range of applications. A time-varying Extended Markov Model (EMM) is
used in an online manner to control temperature set points of TCLs by taking
into account the customer discomfort. The EMM is complimented by a time varying
model predictive control (MPC) scheme to ensure effective control of TCLs to
follow the reference power. The proposed scheme effectively broadens the set of
available tools and resources to save the system at the onset of a severe event.
The proposed approach monitors real-time voltage stability margin (VSM) and
predicts VSM in a nonstationary operating environment and ensures that the
customer dissatisfaction is limited while ensuring voltage stability via demand
side control. The novel detection of the location and proportion of HVAC
stalling devices using phasor measurement units (PMUs) &amp; micro-PMUs within
2-5 seconds ensures that relevant devices are selected for DR control, leading
to an improvement in the short-term stability of the system. Also, to ensure
that the reconnection does not induce synchronization of TCLs, an MPC
formulation using EMMs is solved to determine the effective reconnection
scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.