* 1810196
* Fracture and  Transport Problems for Inhomogeneous Brittle Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Michael Marder, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 337,700.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education that brings theoretical materials research to bear on
understanding the physical processes that lead to materials fracture under
extreme conditions in the context of hydrofracturing and to contribute to
understanding the production of gas and oil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology
called hydrofracturing or fracking has been used for decades, but in its current
form it is just over ten years old. The impact of this technological development
upon the US has been enormous. The benefit to the US economy in the last 5 years
has been well over a trillion dollars, and the US has become the world's largest
oil and gas producer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Producing oil and gas from shales
appears to be paradoxical. Shales are some of the most impermeable materials
known. Nothing should flow through them. So how can they produce revolutionary
quantities of gas and oil? The answer is that the hydrofracture process
stimulates them, creating networks of cracks, and these cracks must be
distributed with fine enough spacing to make production
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the physical processes
leading to the network of cracks. Part of the study will concern how the cracks
form. Part of the study will concern how the network of cracks can be understood
using clues from the time history of gas produced at the surface. And part of
the study will concern how oil and water flow through very nonuniform
rock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain broad impacts from this work, the PI will
investigate ways to make the research actionable by examining factors that lead
to the most productive wells, and developing methods to predict performance of
wells, and gas and oil fields. The PI will also examine the implications of
these findings for transitions to renewable energy sources. The PI has numerous
opportunities to integrate the research with education and outreach. The PI
oversees a network of university programs that prepares over 600 high school
STEM teachers a year, oversees summer STEM camps serving hundreds of youth from
under-represented groups, and teaches a dual-enrollment physics class to over
5000 high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, and education to bear on
understanding the physical processes that lead to materials fracture under
extreme conditions in the context of hydrofracturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
shale revolution, which has propelled the US to the top of gas and oil-producing
countries, was built on largely empirical findings. The shale layers from which
gas and oil are produced have nanodarcy permeability, making it seem impossible
to produce economical quantities of hydrocarbons. The resolution of this problem
is that the hydrofracture stimulation process creates a fracture network where
the fractures have sufficient density to make transport
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate three areas in
particular. First, he will use a discrete element model coupling rock and fluid
to study the hydrofracture process, and study how fluid pressure leads to the
creation of a fracture network. Second, he will make use of Green's function
techniques familiar from the electron theory of solids to study the diffusion of
gas to complex networks, and thereby examine the connection between shape of the
network and the time history of production. Finally, he will use fluid finite
element modeling to study the flow of oil and water through highly inhomogeneous
geological environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain broad impacts from this
work, the PI will investigate ways to make the research actionable by examining
factors that lead to the most productive wells, and developing methods to
predict performance of wells and gas and oil fields. The PI will also examine
the implications of these findings for transitions to renewable energy sources.
The PI has numerous opportunities to integrate the research with education and
outreach. The PI oversees a network of university programs that prepares over
600 high school STEM teachers a year, oversees summer STEM camps serving
hundreds of youth from under-represented groups, and teaches a dual-enrollment
physics class to over 5000 high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.