* 1810540
* Shaping membrane biointerfaces: shape-adaptation in giant vesicles powered by osmotic stresses
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Atul Parikh, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 11/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in the environment such as
freezing or evaporation cause changes in the concentration of salt in the
environment of cells and exert stress on the cells. A physical measure of this
stress are changes in the osmotic pressure. If left unchecked, changes in the
osmotic pressure could cause an instantaneous flow of water out of the cell when
the concentration of salt in the cell environment increases and into the cell
when the concentration of salt decreases. In the former case the cell shrinks
due to dehydration; in the latter case, the cell swells, and may rupture and
die. To avoid these catastrophic outcomes, cells have evolved sophisticated
mechanisms to regulate their water content in response to changes in the osmotic
pressure caused by variations in their local environments. Primitive cells near
the dawn of life on Earth on the other hand are likely to have lacked the
mechanisms present in today's cells. This proposal makes use of minimal model
cells to examine simple mechanisms that could have helped primitive cells to
survive changes in osmotic pressure. The proposed research is also providing
design rules for synthetic cells capable of responding to chemical stimuli
(e.g., osmotic stress) from their environment. A working hypothesis of this
effort is that the flexible membrane of the primitive cell responds to osmotic
stress by changing its shape and internal organization. The effort integrates
fundamental scientific research with (1) education of both undergraduate and
graduate students through an interdisciplinary course on physical biology; (2)
engagement of underrepresented undergraduate students in STEM research through
the Vertically-Integrated-Program at UC Davis; (3) creating opportunities for
undergraduate students to participate in collaborative international research at
NTU, Singapore, Sorbonne, France; or Chalmers, Sweden; and (4) public
dissemination of science through general talks, interviews, and forums
surrounding the art and science of living matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research tests
the hypothesis that cell-sized giant vesicles consisting of lipids alone respond
to environmental osmotic stress by actively reorganizing the membrane components
and undergoing shape remodeling. The investigators seek to obtain a fundamental
understanding of how mechanical processes at the soft and flexible membrane
interfaces contribute to the balance between stability and adaptability of cells
subjected to environmental changes. A long-term expectation is that these
efforts will furnish fundamental design principles and experimental capabilities
to synthesize active, dynamic, and reconfigurable bio-inspired synthetic
compartments and interfaces that display stimuli-responsive behavior and
complex, emergent, and life-like functions. The proposed effort seeks to design
and construct molecularly tailored giant lipid vesicles that are synthetic cell-
sized compartments. These vesicles are subject to controlled osmotic stress,
including upshifts and downshifts of the osmotic pressure that take place
abruptly or gradually and to uniform or gradient perturbations. The structural
adaptability of the vesicles is evaluated by monitoring the molecular
redistributions and shape transitions in single vesicles and in ensembles of
vesicles primarily using time-resolved fluorescence microscopy. The researchers
also seek to create research, educational and outreach opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students that will foster their growth into skilled
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.