* 1810314
* Photoacoustic Imaging in Optically Diffusive Media Using Structured Illumination
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Todd Murray, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 365,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;Optical imaging of objects inside or behind turbid media is
exceptionally challenging. Multiple scattering scrambles the object information
and hides features from view. This project aims to develop and characterize a
technique for imaging deep inside of optically scattering media with
unprecedented spatial resolution. The approach combines photoacoustic imaging,
an emerging modality that uses light and ultrasound to image absorbing
structures within tissue, with structured illumination microscopy, an
established means of improving imaging resolution by spatially patterning the
illumination. Mathematical and experimental techniques are proposed that exploit
the optical speckle field that naturally emerges as light propagates through
scattering media to enhance the resolution of photoacoustic imaging such that it
approaches optical resolution, even deep within scattering media. The proposed
research aims to transform biomedical imaging, allowing physicians to see
through biological tissue to detect and diagnose disease states or conditions
with exceptional resolution. It also enables nondestructive testing applications
such as detecting structural defects in highly scattering polymer matrix
composites and ceramic samples. The interdisciplinary research effort will
support graduate students in applied mathematics and mechanical engineering and
provide training in engineering, applied mathematics, and biology. Undergraduate
researchers will also be supported for the duration of the project. An outreach
program to a local high school is proposed and the research results will be
incorporated into new and existing undergraduate
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal
is to develop an experimental technique and associated mathematical framework to
image inside of and through multiply scattering media using random speckle
illumination and photoacoustic detection. The goal is to achieve optical
resolution imaging in the multiple scattering regime. The speckle patterns that
naturally emerge as light propagates through diffuse media provide structured
illumination to an object placed behind a scattering wall. The photoacoustic
signal produced by such illumination is detected using a focused ultrasound
transducer. Blind structured illumination photoacoustic microscopy (BSIPAM)
offers a fundamentally new approach to imaging in turbid media, where image
resolution is enhanced by making use of speckle patterns that are a result of
the scattering process itself. BSIPAM exploits the fact that the photoacoustic
signal generated by an absorbing object subjected to pulsed laser illumination
is proportional to the product of the object optical absorption distribution and
the illumination pattern. In the case of non-uniform illumination by a random
speckle pattern, frequency mixing between the illumination and object encodes
the high spatial frequencies of the object in a low spatial frequency
photoacoustic response that can be detected with an ultrasound transducer.
Furthermore, if the photoacoustic response generated by multiple random speckle
patterns is recorded then there is sufficient information to reconstruct an
image of the object with a spatial resolution approaching the speckle size. This
project develops experimental techniques and reconstruction algorithms that
allow for optical resolution imaging at unprecedented depths within static and
dynamic diffusive media using the BSIPAM concept. The fundamental resolution
enhancement that can be achieved using BSIPAM is explored and the performance of
image reconstruction algorithms as a function of speckle size, imaging geometry,
number of speckle patterns, imaging depth, and signal to noise ratio are
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.