* 1810217
* Silyl Ether Metathesis for Universal Vitrimer Design
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Zhibin Guan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 465,284.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to develop a new method for producing dynamic materials made out of polymers
that can combine excellent mechanical properties and chemical stability with
good reprocessability and recyclability. Polymeric materials play an essential
role in addressing many technological challenges including alternative energy,
medical/health, and national security/competitiveness. Broadly defined,
polymeric materials are classified into two large categories: thermosets and
thermoplastics. Thermosets have their molecules permanently connected ("cross-
linked") and as a result have excellent mechanical properties, dimensional
stability, and resistance to chemicals and solvents. However, a critical
limitation of thermosets is that they cannot be reshaped, reprocessed, or
recycled since their molecules are permanently stitched together. In contrast,
thermoplastic polymers can be reshaped and reprocessed, but they normally have
lower mechanical strength, lower structural stability at elevated temperature,
and poorer chemical/solvent resistances. This research presents a new chemical
strategy that aims to combine the best attributes of both thermoplastics and
thermosets. Specifically, a universal strategy will be explored to introduce
plasticity, reprocessability and recyclability to various polymer networks and
composites through a new silicon-oxygen exchange reaction. Successful
demonstration of the proposed strategy could offer significant impact on new
materials development, polymer recycling and sustainability, and modern
processing technologies including additive manufacturing. This project will also
provide extensive opportunities to train graduate and undergraduate students,
including underrepresented groups in science. This project will also enable the
PI to work with the UCI Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA)
Program on a K-12 materials science/chemistry outreach effort with a module
focusing on dynamic/self-healing
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this research is to
investigate silyl ether metathesis as a new, robust, and universal dynamic
covalent chemistry for the design of dynamic polymeric materials. Permanently
cross-linked polymers (i.e., thermosets) have excellent mechanical properties,
creep resistance and dimensional stability, and chemical/solvent resistance.
However, a critical limitation of thermosets is that they cannot be reshaped,
reprocessed, or recycled by heat or with solvent. In contrast, thermoplastic
polymers can be reshaped and reprocessed, but they normally have lower
mechanical strength, lower structural stability at elevated temperature, and
poorer chemical/solvent resistances. This project describes a new chemical
strategy that aims to combine the excellent attributes of both thermoplastics
(reprocessability, recyclability) and thermosets (mechanical strength, creep and
solvent resistances). Specifically, a universal strategy is proposed to
introduce plasticity, reprocessability and recyclability to various polymer
networks and composites through a new silyl ether metathesis reaction. First,
the general applicability of silyl ether metathesis will be investigated for
vitrimers made of common commodity polymers (Aim 1). Aim 2 details plans for the
synthesis of vitrimers from multiple polymers through dynamic reactive blending.
This provides a simple way to tailor and improve vitrimer properties. The
dynamic mechanical properties of the resulting vitrimers will be carefully
investigated and correlated with the structures. Finally, the proposed strategy
is extended to the design of inorganic/organic composite vitrimers through silyl
ether metathesis between inorganic surfaces and organic polymer matrices (Aim
3). Similarly, structure-property studies will be conducted for the composite
vitrimers. Successful demonstration of the proposed strategy could offer
significant impact on new materials development, polymer recycling and
sustainability, and modern technologies including additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.