* 1810989
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Tracy Misiewicz, Misiewicz               Tracy          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. With more than 50 percent of known species found on just six
percent of the Earth's surface, tropical rainforests are famous for their
incredible biodiversity. Still, little is actually known about how these species
originate. In large part, this gap in our knowledge exists because the bulk of
evolution research focuses on plants and animals from temperate regions. As a
result, we know little about species formation in the most species rich area on
Earth. This project will investigate factors that drive tropical tree evolution
and contribute to our basic understanding of how species form. The fellow will
receive training in genomic data collection and analysis and will foster the
next generation of scientists through mentoring. In order to increase the
retention of post-graduate women in STEM fields the fellow will also organize
panel discussions to provide insight on navigating a science career while
balancing family and also to introduce students to non-academic careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tropical tree, Protium subserratum, exhibits
genetic, morphological, and defense chemistry differences associated with
different soil habitats across the Amazon. Adaptation to different soils thus
appears to be driving diversification within the group, and herbivore pressure
may further strengthen selection across habitat boundaries. This project will
integrate morphological, spectral, ecological, geographic and genomic data from
herbarium collections to understand lineage diversification within P.
subserratum. The evolutionary history of the species will be reconstructed using
methods that account for historic and contemporary processes to test whether
habitat specialization onto different soils evolved multiple times across the
Amazon or whether habitat specialization onto each soil type arose once and was
followed by subsequent dispersal. The hypotheses that habitat shifts explain the
observed patterns of phenotypic differentiation and that genetic and phenotypic
differentiation are correlated will be tested using comparative phylogenetic
methods and estimates of genetic structure and gene flow. Finally, the
hypothesis that herbivore pressure is strengthening selection across soil
boundaries will be investigated by testing for signatures of selection in genes
from the terpene synthase and flavonoid gene pathways. The fellow will develop
expertise in phylogenomic, population genomic and comparative genomic analyses.
The fellow will also organize panel presentations to increase participation of
women in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.