* 1810194
* Multi-Scale Self-Assembled Structure and Properties in Polymeric Molecular Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Louis Madsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 738,607.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charged polymers form the basis of
solid materials that can be used to conduct lithium ions in a battery
electrolyte, or used to purify salt water or other liquids. Normally, charged
polymers are very flexible and do not have strong mechanical properties. This
project involves a solid material formed from a mixture of a very rigid and
strong charged polymer (similar to Kevlar(R)) and an ionic liquid (also known as
a molten salt). This new material, which is called a molecular ionic composite
(MIC), combines the best properties of solids and liquids. MIC materials are
stiff and non-flammable solids and yet they can conduct ions like lithium and
sodium with very low resistance, as if the ions were in a liquid. The properties
of MICs can also be widely tailored for potential use in different applications
such as water purifiers, electromechanical sensors, or artificial muscles. This
project will combine cutting edge research tools such as nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and X-ray analyses, materials science theories, and
computational molecular simulations in order to build fundamental understanding
of how MIC materials work. By combining such interdisciplinary knowledge and
insights, these researchers will work to create new designs for MIC materials
for devices such as safer, cheaper, and more lightweight lithium batteries. This
project shows promise for feeding into advanced battery materials technology,
thus enabling a potential new avenue for US business impact on the $20B global
battery market. Students and collaborators involved in this project will gain
new knowledge about these novel polymeric conductors, and this new knowledge
will be integrated into polymer science classes on the Virginia Tech campus and
propagated to K-12 children and their parents in an educational outreach program
based in Southwest Virginia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at a non-flammable solid with
the modulus of poly(methyl methacrylate), but where a high density of ions
inside move as if they were in a liquid. It builds on the discovery of a new
class of polymeric ion conductors that are termed molecular ionic composites
(MICs). The prototypical MICs, formed from a rigid-rod anion-containing polymer
and an ionic liquid (IL), exhibit the following special combination of tunable
properties: ionic conductivity up to 8 mS/cm, widely tunable elastic modulus
(0.01&amp;#8722;3 GPa), and thermal stability up to 300 degrees C. MICs show
promise for allowing use of metal electrodes in lithium and sodium batteries,
potentially enabling higher energy density as well as battery operation over a
wide temperature range and with inherent fire resistance. While these materials
display impressive properties, researchers are only beginning to understand the
origins of why such fast ion transport is commensurate with such a stiff and
robust material matrix. This project combines fundamental polymer analyses
involving nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), X-ray scattering, and microscopy
with molecular dynamics simulations and theories of conduction and oriented
matter. Better understanding of the fundamental nature of MICs could feed into
design of new compositions to meet desired requirements for battery electrolytes
or other molecular separations applications. Students and collaborators involved
in this project will gain new knowledge about these novel polymeric conductors,
and this new knowledge will be integrated into polymer science classes on the
Virginia Tech campus and propagated to K-12 children and their parents in an
educational outreach program based in Southwest
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.