* 1810692
* Moduli Problems in Contact Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Joanna Nelson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2018
* USD 64,643.00

Symplectic and contact structures first arose in the study of classical
mechanical systems, allowing one to describe the time evolution of both simple
and complex systems such as springs, planetary motion, and wave propagation. The
equations of motion in classical mechanics are determined by the notion of a
conserved quantity, energy. A related quantity is action, which is minimized by
solutions to the equations of motion. For a closed system, such as the Kepler
problem whose solutions describe paths of planets orbiting the sun, the energy
is the sum of the kinetic and potential energy in the system, and the action is
given by the (minimized) mean value of kinetic minus potential energy.
Symplectic and contact structures emerge as we investigate these systems by
unpacking the information hidden in the notions of energy and action.
Understanding the evolution and distinguishing transformations of these systems
led to the development of global invariants of symplectic and contact manifolds.

The PI plans to continue her work in providing foundations and applications for
contact invariants stemming from nonequivariant and (circle) equivariant
constructions of contact homology. Contact homology is built out of closed
orbits of Reeb vector fields and counts of solutions to a nonlinear Cauchy-
Riemann equation which interpolates between closed Reeb orbits. Reeb vector
fields are Hamiltonian-like vector fields, whose flow lines are solutions to
Hamilton's equations of motion, as they conserve energy. Closed Reeb orbits are
of particular interest because they can be used to describe the motion of a
planet orbiting a star, the closed trajectories of a satellite, and other local
distance minimizing "loops." Contact homology can be used to better distinguish
contact structures on a given smooth manifold and to extract dynamical
information pertaining to the possible Reeb vector fields which can be
associated to a fixed contact structure. The PI's work has shown that these
invariants capture more phenomena than previously expected. She also plans to
study additional structural properties of these contact and related symplectic
invariants, Legendrian knots in closed contact manifolds, dynamics of Seifert
fiber spaces, and symplectic embeddings. The PI plans to continue her outreach
programs which have increased the access and success of underrepresented
students and faculty in mathematics as well as foster greater interest in
geometry and topology amongst local high school students and undergraduates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.