* 1810506
* A terahertz spectrometer on a chip, at the thermodynamical limits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,056.00

Terahertz spectrometry offers a platform for long-distance and non-destructive
detection of trace chemicals and gases, explosives, pathogens, and biological
agents. These molecules and hazardous agents have unique absorption spectra in
the terahertz frequencies, enabling identification of concealed hazardous
substances from remote distances. Heterodyne spectrometers are at the frontier
for high spectral resolution terahertz spectrometry. Achieved through a number
of different techniques such as nonlinear frequency mixing in Schottky diodes,
superconductor-insulator-superconductor structures, or hot electron bolometers,
they have linewidth-to-center frequency ratios down to one part in a million.
These state-of-the-art heterodyne spectrometers and mixers, however, are bulky
(weighing tens of kilograms), are bounded by electronic noise far from the
fundamental noise limits, and often require cryogenic cooling to reach
appreciable sensitivities. This project proposes a chip-scale terahertz
spectrometer based on modular integration of a chip-scale laser frequency comb
with a chip-scale photomixer. The laser frequency comb consists of discrete
optical frequency lines, widely tunable over an octave. The photomixer is based
on a plasmonically-enhanced absorbing substrate, directly coupled to a terahertz
antenna to collect the incident terahertz radiation. The proposed single-chip
terahertz receiver has spectrometry bandwidth of 1-8 THz with spectral
resolution better than a kHz, and operates close to the thermodynamical noise
limits. The high-performance, low-cost, and compact terahertz spectrometer
brings valuable applications in space sciences, biological analysis,
environmental studies, pharmaceuticals, and industrial quality control. The
proposed scientific efforts are coupled with an outreach and education plan.
This involves outreach to underrepresented high-school students and teachers,
improvements to the graduate and undergraduate curriculum, and outreach to the
general public with focus on underrepresented women and minority students in
summer research experiences for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed advancement on the heterodyne chip-scale spectrometer consists of three
cross-related Thrusts. In Thrust 1, the project will demonstrate an on-chip
frequency comb oscillator with wide tuning range of 1-8 THz and comb line-to-
line non-uniformity at 0.2 parts per quadrillion when referenced to the optical
carrier. In Thrust 2, the project will develop an on-chip integrated pump laser
and amplifier, for heterogeneous integration with the photomixer and frequency
comb. In Thrust 3, the project will demonstrate the integrated chip-scale
heterodyne receiver based on an antenna-coupled plasmonic photomixer. The team
seeks to measure a heterodyne photomixer with double-sideband noise
sensitivities close to the fundamental bound. The frequency-agile approach is
enabled by their recent preliminary studies and measurements close to or at the
thermodynamical noise limits. The proposed terahertz spectrometry architecture
and scientific Thrusts can transform the platform of terahertz waves for
atmospheric studies, space explorations, and safety-industrial-environmental
quality control systems. The scientific Thrusts are integrated with educational
outreach and cross-disciplinary training efforts. This three-year project will
educate a new generation of scientists at the interface of precision chip-scale
frequency combs and plasmonic photomixers for transformative terahertz
spectrometry near the fundamental bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.