* 1810975
* Cluster Validation Without Model Assumptiions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Zaid Harchaoui, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 275,000.00

This project uses tools from optimization and statistics to put in the hands of
practitioners a suite of methods to validate the results of clustering.
Clustering is the task of grouping a set of objects in such a way that objects
in the same group (called a cluster) are more similar (in some sense) to each
other than to those in other groups. The methods to be developed will recognize
the cases when the data is well clustered and, in these cases, will provide a
"certificate of stability" guaranteeing this. This research will develop
validation methods for several widely used clustering paradigms (such as
K-means, Spectral Clustering, finite Mixture Models) in realistic data
scenarios. These methods will be integrated and disseminated with the big data
open source platform megaman, developed and maintained by the group of PI
Meila.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach is based on the notions of
good and stable clustering. ``Good'' means that clustering C fits the data well,
according to the current clustering paradigm. ``Stable'' means that the only
clusterings that fit well are small perturbations of C. This can only happen
when C captures structure present in the data. While goodness can be easily
checked in practice, stability is not a property that can be verified directly.
The core of this project is to find conditions on the data and C that guarantee
stability AND are practically verifyable. Such results are known as stability
results. The project outlines two novel approaches to this goal. The first
approach is based on using convex relaxations to the original clustering
problem. The second approach is based on ``recycling'' existing theoretical
results proved under assumptions about the data generating model. Often, the
proof of such a result contains the elements of a model free stability proof.
Thus, this project will be using existing statistical theory in a novel way.
Among convex relaxations for clustering, the relaxations to a Semi-Definite
Program (SDP) are especially promising. Therefore, ways to accelerate the
validation algorithms by exploiting the special structure of the SDPs will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.