* 1810923
* The Role of Mentorship in Persistence in Informal STEM Programs for Under-represented Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mizuko Ito, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,229,260.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This AISL project
investigates how informal programs can broaden participation by building social
capital in STEM for youth from underrepresented groups. The project integrates
social network analysis with research on informal learning, and draws on a
framework to connect learning across a variety of sectors. It builds on evidence
that sponsorship of youth interest, affinity-based mentorship, and brokering
connections to other settings and opportunities can build social capital and
support interest and persistence in STEM. It represents a strategic and timely
investment into research that solidifies these emerging insights from research
and practice, conducting focused investigation into relational supports for STEM
interests that are particularly well suited to informal
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is guided by two research questions:
(1) What forms of social capital are tied to persistence in and connecting
across informal STEM programs for youth from underrepresented groups? (2) What
program features--specifically sponsorship, mentorship, and brokering--grow
these social supports for persistence in and connecting across informal STEM
programs for underserved youth? These questions are addressed through a mixed
methods 18-month cross-sectional study of 200 students in three informal
programs in Orange County, California that offer project-based engineering and
coding programs, support mentorship, and focus on groups underrepresented in
STEM. The sample will include three age categories, capturing the transition to
high school, persistence during high school, and transition to college and
career. Teens will be interviewed three times at 6-month intervals, spanning
these transitions. The goal of this research and effort is to determine if
social capital plays an extra ordinary role in learning by this
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.