* 1810932
* Collaborative Research: Automated observations of phytoplankton communities from open water moorings
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Uwe Send, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2020
* USD 230,106.00

Phytoplankton are a diverse group of microscopic organism living near the ocean
surface. They play essential role in marine food webs and global biogeochemical
cycles. The Imaging FlowCytobot(IFCB) has been used for a number of years but
because of the high power requirements deployment has been limited to these
types of nearshore sites with power and internet connection. This EAGER proposal
will test deploy the Imaging FlowCytobot on an open ocean mooring.

The ability to determine the composition and temporal dynamics of phytoplankton
communities is important but traditional methods for collecting samples is time
consuming. The Imaging FlowCytobot (IFCB) was developed at WHOI as a submersible
flow cytometer that can resolve particles in the 10-150 micrometer size range,
including critical phytoplankton groups such as diatoms, dinoflagellates, and
coccolithophores, and can capture up to 30,000 high resolution images per hour.
To date IFCB?s have been deployed at coastal fixed structures (piers, tower)
with power, internet, and regular maintenance. This EAGER proposal will expand
the operational capabilities of IFCB by testing it on an open ocean mooring. If
successful, a new generation of autonomous plankton samplers could be deployed
in geographically diverse locations throughout the global ocean in ecologically
and biogeochemically significant locations far from the coastlines. This project
will fund a graduate student from SIO who will be trained to operate and
maintain the IFCB, as well as analyze data using machine learning tools and
image analysis software.