* 1810838
* Modeling Molecular Aggregate Photophysics in Free Space and in Optical Microcavities
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2022
* USD 313,530.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on how light is absorbed or emitted from semiconductor
materials made of organic molecules. The most familiar semiconductor is probably
silicon which is used in microelectronics and the chips inside modern computers.
However,semiconductors based on organic molecules continue to make inroads into
commercial devices, such as organic light-emitting diodes or OLEDs. Thin organic
films can be driven electrically to emit light or can be used to convert solar
energy into electrical energy. The PI and his research team will investigate the
fundamental processes in organic crystals or aggregates when they absorb and
emit light. The PI will also investigate how absorbed energy is transported
between molecules which is similar to how plants transport energy during the
process of photosynthesis. The research team will conduct a theoretical
investigation by solving equations based on quantum mechanics which describe how
organic molecules respond to light. The equations will be solved using
sophisticated computer algorithms. The PI will also investigate the effect of
enclosing a thin organic film in a very small "micro" cavity formed by two
reflecting mirrors separated by a tiny distance equal to about a wave length of
light. A microcavity enhances the interaction between light and the enclosed
molecules and can dramatically alter the behavior of the enclosed organic film,
allowing one to better control its optical properties. The proposed activities
will also enhance research infrastructure through domestic and international
collaborations involving Professor Libai Huang at Purdue University, who will
employ state-or-the-art experimental techniques to probe energy transport in
organic films, and Dr. Felipe Herrera at the University of Santiago, Chile, who
will assist in the theoretical investigations of organic microcavities. Overall,
this research effort should contribute to a blueprint for the next generation of
electronic devices based on organic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education on how light
is absorbed or emitted from semiconductor materials made of organic molecules.
Solid phases of pi-conjugated molecules and polymers continue to receive
widespread attention as semiconducting materials in field effect transistors,
light emitting diodes, and solar cells. However, despite the more than five
decades of intensive experimental and theoretical research following Kasha's
pioneering work on H- and J-aggregates, there remain important questions
regarding the nature of the photo-excitations in molecular aggregates and how
the optical response is related to crystal packing and morphology. The PI and
his research team have recently extended Kasha's model, which is predicated
entirely on long-range Coulombic coupling, to include short-range (super-
exchange) coupling arising from intermolecular charge-transfer in packing
arrangements hosting close intermolecular contacts. Although the model can
predict with quantitative accuracy details of the absorption spectral line
shape, it is limited in its ability to describe energy transport, as it does not
account for excimers, which are commonly encountered in many dye aggregates and
crystals. Excimers, which can trap energy and limit transport, arise when an
optically-excited state couples strongly to an intermolecular coordinate. Hence,
a primary goal of the PI's research activity is to expand the post-Kasha model
to include excimers. The approach is based on a multi-particle representation of
a Holstein-style Hamiltonian which is superior to most others in that it treats
all the important physical processes including exciton coupling, the mixing
between Frenkel and charge-transfer excitons, exciton-vibrational coupling, and
exciton-photon coupling, on equal footing. The essentially exact treatment of
physical observables within a large phase space enhances the likelihood for
discovering new and potentially useful physical phenomena. With quantitative
reproductions of both the absorption and photoluminescence spectra in hand,
predictions of the efficiency of exciton transport will be made. The Huang Group
at Purdue will provide the experimental validation by conducting femtosecond-
resolved transport measurements of several perylene diimide (PDI) derivatives
with varying degrees of excimer emission. In another thrust, the PI will
investigate the behavior of organic materials inside optical microcavities,
where a strong cavity field can be used to control the mixing between material
eigenstates. Of particular interest is the possibility of modulating the mixing
between Frenkel and charge-transfer excitons, thereby controlling the formation
of excimers. In addition, the fundamental photophysical properties of the
recently discovered "dark" polaritons - composite quasiparticles consisting of a
mixture of electronic, photonic and vibrational degrees of freedom - will be
explored in collaboration with Felipe Herrera at the University of Santiago,
Chile. The analyses will be based on Holstein-style Hamiltonians for free-space
and cavity-confined molecular aggregates represented in a multi-particle basis
set sufficient for obtaining highly accurate spectral and transport observables.
Overall, the project has the potential to significantly advance our
understanding of i) the relationship between molecular aggregate properties,
particularly photophysics and transport, and packing morphology; ii) the way
microcavity coupling can be exploited as a means for controlling super-exchange
coupling and excimer formation in pi-stacks and iii) novel types of polaritons
involving all three degrees of freedom, electronic, vibrational, and
photonic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported through the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in
the Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.