* 1810041
* Collaborative Research: Non-Conventional Etching and MOCVD Regrowth for Beta-GaO/AlGaO 3D HEMTs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Hongping Zhao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2022
* USD 171,494.00

Gallium oxide represents a promising semiconductor material for electronic
devices concerning size scaling and performance enhancement especially for
applications in high voltage, high temperature, and high frequency components.
Both materials development and device fabrication based on this new
semiconductor material is still at its infancy. This project explores the
material growth and device processing to achieve a highly scalable radio
frequency device with performance beyond the current device technology based on
other semiconductor materials such as silicon, gallium nitride or silicon
carbide. This project seeks to address the rising challenges in the etching and
material growth process due to the complex atomic structure of this oxide
semiconductor. Understanding of the fundamental etching mechanisms and materials
growth process is critical to fully utilize the advantages offered by this
emerging material system. A successful execution of this research is expected to
provide a knowledge foundation to electronics industry with positive impacts on
the US economy. The research is integrated with educational activities and
outreach to benefit the broader community. The proposed education plans focus on
integration of research and education, curriculum development, and student
training. The results obtained from the proposed research will provide inspiring
teaching materials and laboratory projects, to provide training of our next
generation workforce for embracing emerging technologies. This project trains
two graduate students in the areas of advanced semiconductor materials
synthesis, material characterization, and device design and fabrication. The
principal investigators (PIs) are strongly committed to promoting the
participation of underrepresented groups including women in science and
engineering, by creating an inclusive environment, active mentoring, and leading
by examples. The proposed outreach activities focus on high school girls and
teachers. Both PIs will continue to actively lead or be involved in existing
education and outreach programs including the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experience for Teachers (RET) programs, local
and IEEE Women in Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gallium oxide
(Ga2O3; GaO), with high breakdown field strength, represents an emerging
ultrawide bandgap semiconductor beyond silicon carbide and gallium nitride. The
goal of the proposed research is to demonstrate a three-dimensional (3D)
GaO/AlGaO high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) using a 3D channel formed by
a non-conventional damage-free anisotropic etching technique (meta-assisted
chemical etch; MacEtch) followed by metalorganic chemical vapor deposition
(MOCVD) epitaxial regrowth of AlGaO. The scope of the research includes: i)
realizing high aspect ratio Ga2O3 3D channel structures using the non-
destructive MacEtch technology; ii) developing MOCVD growth, doping, and
regrowth of AlGaO on the MacEtch-produced non-planar Ga2O3 structures; iii)
characterizing the MacEtched Ga2O3 surfaces and the regrown GaO/AlGaO hetero-
interfaces chemically, structurally, optically, and electrically; and iv)
demonstrating GaO/AlGaO HEMTs with non-planar 3D channels. The proposed
GaO/AlGaO HEMT structure, with the non-planar 3D topology and the complex
monoclinic crystal structure, provides a unique platform to explore the crystal
orientation dependent etching, growth rate, AlGaO composition, GaO/AlGaO
interface defects, and dopant/impurity incorporation. The intellectual
significance of the project will establish fundamental understanding of the
carrier generation and mass transport properties in MacEtch of Ga2O3 as a
function of metal catalyst pattern and its alignment with surface orientation,
crystal doping concentration, and ultra-violet light illumination wavelength and
intensity, as well as the etching mechanism for wide bandgap oxide
semiconductors in general. Surface and interface characterization will provide
insights in the contributing and limiting factors in vacancy and other defects
related traps and establish control process for different device architecture
requirements. Beyond the proposed program, the platform and innovative concepts
to be explored can also be used for many other types of devices for size scaling
and performance enhancement, including optoelectronics devices such as solar
blind ultraviolet (UV) detectors and high temperature flame
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.