* 1810390
* Ultrasonically Levitated Granular Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2021
* USD 473,404.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The better understanding of granular matter, a
class of materials comprised of large numbers of particles that collide and
aggregate, is important for a wide range of industrial processes as well as
natural phenomena, including the very beginning of planet formation from
interstellar dust. The project introduces a new experimental platform, in which
small particles are levitated acoustically, their arrangement can be manipulated
under computer control, and their interactions can be measured with precision.
The detailed investigation of such interactions among particles addresses many
fundamental problems in physics and materials science, and improved knowledge
about aggregate formation opens new opportunities for better control of
industrial processes that involve the handling of fine particles. The project
trains one graduate student, one postdoctoral scholar, and several undergraduate
students, introduces them to forefront issues in materials research, and
involves them in science outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on sub-millimeter scale particles, which
can easily become charged and as a result exhibit a rich interplay of short-
range contact forces and longer-ranged electrostatic forces. To measure these
forces with precision while providing a means for controlled particle
manipulation, ultrasonic levitation generates a stable environment in which
gravity is balanced by acoustic pressure so that minute particle-particle
interactions become observable. A special aspect is the implementation of a
sound pressure field that can be changed in real time under computer control.
This enables experiments that previously have not been possible, such as the
measurement of charge transfer during repeated particle-particle collisions.
Suitable acoustic potentials also can produce lattices of particles of the same
charge polarity, similar to Coulomb crystals in dusty plasmas. Importantly,
ensembles of macroscopic particles are easily driven into the strongly
interacting regime, where the interaction potential far exceeds the ambient
thermal energy. Two thrusts of the project develop a programmable acoustic
cavity for multi-particle trapping and manipulation, and investigate the
collective behavior of systems comprised of large numbers of levitated
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.