* 1810428
* A Ultra Efficient Composite Modularized Power Delivery Architecture for Solar Farm and Data Center
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Dong Cao, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the electricity usage of the data
centers in the US is about 2% of all the electricity consumed, which is about 75
billion kWh. About 20% of electricity used in the data center has been wasted
and becomes heat in the power delivery stage. The successful implementation of
the proposed power delivery architecture is able to significantly reduce the
data-center electricity consumption, which can reduce the electricity bills
around 750 million annually. It can also increase the power delivery density on
the computer motherboard, it could lead to about 50% footprint reduction of the
whole data center facility. This concept can also enable more efficient and
cheaper power delivery for solar farms and electric vehicles. This project will
support the new course development utilizing wide bandgap power semiconductor
devices, and train the future power electronic application engineers through lab
modules, and various senior design projects. This project will also help to
increase the K-12 students and the native America students interests in the
energy efficiency and renewable energy area through various outreach programs,
such as high school STEM day, nurturing American tribal undergraduate research
and education, and governor schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed effort is to develop a composite modular power delivery architecture
that is able to fully leverage the benefits of the wide bandgap power
semiconductor devices and to support the future ultra high density power
delivery applications, such as data center, solar farm, electric vehicle,
electric grid modernization etc. It will also help enable the future 3D
integrated power delivery. The proposed new architecture includes the following
features, such as 1) modularized structure that each module only process high
voltage side low current and low side voltage, 2) achieving soft-switching for
all the switches, 3) achieving voltage fine regulation with minimal effort
through partial power processing voltage regulation module, 4) leveraging the
high frequency wide bandgap devices, 5) applicable to all power conversion
structures e.g. DC-DC, DC-AC, AC-DC, AC-AC, 6) and achieving fault tolerance and
agile reconfiguration features. The tasks of the project include, 1) Generate a
universal time-domain analytical model for the proposed composite power delivery
architecture for analysis, design, and comparison. 2) develop an adaptive
switching control strategy and the resonant impedance network model to accomdate
device and component tolerance for different operation conditions. 3) Develop a
system level small signal model and an optimal module transition control
strategy for the operation and smooth transition including start-up and fault
ride through bypass. 4) Investigate and develop the minimal power processed
voltage regulation module topology, control strategy for output DC voltage fine
regulation, or sinusoid AC voltage generation for grid connected application. 5)
Validate the proposed concept with above features through a series of DC-DC
converter and DC-AC inverter hardware prototypes utilizing wide bandgap power
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.