* 1810541
* Spin torque devices driven by tailored spin currents
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Igor Barsukov, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

Spin electronics has the potential to revolutionize information technologies by
providing energy-efficient magnetic devices for storage, processing, and
transmission of information. Many of the existing and proposed devices rely on
spin torques which are used to control magnetization dynamics and to manipulate
magnetic states of nanoscale devices. The prominent examples are magnetic
switching and spin torque oscillators. Spin torque oscillators can be used to
create local microwave fields assisting the magnetic writing in hard drives.
Furthermore, they can transmit information by emitting spin waves into a
magnonic waveguide. Such oscillators exhibit a rich palette of nonlinear
phenomena that makes them particularly attractive device candidates within the
emerging paradigm of neuromorphic computing. The central prerequisite for the
design and realization of spin torque devices is the energy-efficient generation
of customized spin torques. Spin torques are exerted by spin currents injected
into a magnetic device element. Currently, the major bottlenecks for the
development of next generation devices are limitations to the polarization
direction of pure spin currents and ohmic heating. The proposed research
addresses these challenges, aiming to advance existing and to spark novel device
concepts. The objective is to overcome the polarization constraints for pure
spin currents and to utilize thermal effects for the generation of customizable
spin torques. In the course of this research, graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in state-of-the-art experimental skills of device
fabrications, material characterization, and magnetic spectroscopy. The proposal
contains an outreach component that targets local school teachers who will
receive training in electromagnetism and spintronics concepts. Moreover, an
outreach program for a local science and arts event will be developed and
presented to the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach utilizes
spin-orbit torques in metallic ferromagnets (such as anomalous Hall effect and
planar Hall effect) and furthermore investigates thermal spin injection via spin
Seebeck effect in coupled two-ferromagnet systems. It is planned to fabricate
nanowire devices from bilayers consisting of an insulating ferrimagnet and a
metallic ferromagnet, where the latter serves as spin injector. Spin torque
ferromagnetic resonance measurements will be carried out to assess spin dynamics
in these coupled spin systems and to investigate the spin torques due to the
spin-orbit and thermal effects. Furthermore, spin injectors with perpendicular
and oblique spin polarizations will be engineered and implemented in novel spin-
electronic applications, such as perpendicular spin torque oscillators, spin
superfluid conveyors, and antiferromagnetic planar switches. The research will
result in engineering concepts for spin-charge and spin-heat transducers and
stimulate the development of novel magneto-electronic devices. It will,
furthermore, provide incentive experimental data for further development of
fundamental concepts in the areas of spin-orbitronics and spin-caloritronics.
The devices developed in the course of the proposed research will serve the
proof-of-concept and prototypical purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.