* 1810964
* Rossbypalooza 2018: A Student-led Workshop on Understanding Climate through Simple Models; Chicago, Illinois; June 11-23, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This grant supports a workshop for graduate students interested in the use of
models of varying levels of complexity to understand the climate system. The
workshop is named in honor of Carl-Gustaf Rossby, an early pioneer of
atmospheric science and department chair at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in computing technology have enabled
development of comprehensive climate models which use high resolution and
include sophisticated representations of a large number of climate processes.
Such models can achieve a high degree of realism but only at the expense of
great complexity, which limits their use for understanding climate system
behaviors. Simple models are of course easier to understand, but such models can
fundamentally misrepresent the system if they are simplified in ways that remove
or disable key processes. The task of choosing or developing models at the right
level of complexity, or at appropriately varying levels of complexity, is thus a
key challenge in climate research. Climate scientists grapple with this
challenge on a daily basis, yet it is not systematically addressed in the
standard graduate school curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop gives
students an opportunity to learn modeling strategies involving simple and
intermediate complexity models, choosing configurations appropriate for specific
problems and applications. The workshop is conducted through a combination of
classroom lectures showcasing classical models and configurations that have led
to important insights into the climate system, and hands-on research in a small
group setting. The workshop has intellectual merit as it addresses the important
question of how one uses a model to arrive at understanding. It has broader
impacts by training the next generation of scientists in a key methodology of
the discipline. This grant covers the participation of 19 graduate students (out
of a total of 30) selected through a competitive
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.