* 1810769
* RAPID: Timely Assessment of Water Quality to Reveal the Potential Ecological and Health Impact of Hurricanes at Puerto Rico
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Akram Alshawabkeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2018
* USD 98,515.00

CBET - 1810769 Gu, April&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Back-to-back hurricanes in Puerto
Rico have caused much of the sewage treatment infrastructure on the island to be
non-operational. As a result, raw sewage and other contaminants have been
released into coastal waters, streams, and rivers. Understanding the impact of
catastrophic events like hurricanes on water distribution systems requires rapid
data acquisition soon after the event. The goal of this project is to provide
water quality toxicity data to assess the recovery process in Puerto Rico's
drinking water supply and surface water. This will be done using novel state-of-
the-art toxicity assays developed by the research team. The results of this
research will provide a one-of-a-kind opportunity to quantify risks to public
health during recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will apply next-
generation, toxicogenomics-enabled in vitro assays for timely and informative
water quality monitoring, coupled with strain-resolved metagenomic data to
identify risks originating from the presence of host of microbial pathogens. The
results have the potential to lead to a paradigm shift in water remediation
efficacy assessment from older methods that frequently suffer from bias and
limited chemical and microbiological information. This will provide timely and
useful information needed to facilitate containment and response strategies
development and, to help inform the public and government of any potential
ecological and health impacts associated the recent extreme weather events.