* 1810974
* LSAMP BD: Florida International University FGLSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Maurice Edington, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Florida Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP)
is establishing a 2018-2020 Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) site at Florida
International University (FIU) to increase the number of LSAMP doctoral degree
awardees. The program will train the BD fellows to a doctoral degree and
encourage them to transition into a career in academia to serve as a role model
for other students. FIU, has a proven record of recruiting, retaining and
graduating minority students in STEM. The FGLSAMP-FIU site addresses the
National Challenge of "increasing the participation and success of
underrepresented minorities in S&amp;E contributes and to the health of the
nation by expanding the S&amp;E talent pool, enhancing innovation, and improving
the nation's global economic leadership."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIU proposes a
multi-faceted, student-centered initiative that will leverage the past successes
of FGLSAMP in fostering high academic achievement amongst underrepresented
students in STEM, and the "best practices" of fifteen prior FGLSAMP BD cohorts
at FIU, FSU, UF, and USF that have supported over 200 minority graduate
students. The objectives of the proposed program are: 1) recruit and place LSAMP
undergraduates into STEM PhD programs at FIU, 2) ensure successful dissertation
research and training for all BD fellows; 3) provide structured professional
development activities to develop a strong learning community, support network
of "like-minded" minority scholars, and promote their successful retention in a
STEM doctoral program; 4) educate fellows for the global STEM workforce through
extended national lab and international research experiences, 5) provide guided
mentoring for the success of BD fellows, and 6) engage BD fellows in K-12
outreach, teaching, and near-peer mentoring of LSAMP undergraduates that will
enable them to inspire the next generation of minority scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.