* 1810468
* RESEARCH-PGR:  SECRETome Project: Systematic Evaluation of CellulaR ExporT from plant cells
* BIO,IOS
* 06/30/2017,07/31/2019
* Julia Bailey-Serres, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 2,360,435.00

In multicellular organisms, some cells specialize in secretory functions.
Examples of secretory cells include certain vascular cells that secrete
nutrients for distribution, epidermal cells that export protective compounds,
nectaries that secrete solutes to reward pollinators, tapetal cells that nourish
reproductive cells, and seed coat cells that secrete nutrients to fill seeds.
Pathogens apparently tap into nutrient resources by manipulating nutrient
secretion systems. Despite the importance of secretory cells, the understanding
of these cells and biological processes is limited. This project seeks to
identify the fundamental mechanisms of secretory cells, to permit the
enhancement of crop quality and yield, of the interaction of plants with other
organisms, and of stress tolerance. The project team combines expertise in the
genome-wide analysis of individual cell types (Bailey-Serres, &amp; Girke, UC
Riverside), membrane transport processes (Frommer, Carnegie, Stanford) and
genome editing (Yang, Iowa State U). The project is expected to provide new
tools and information of value for agriculture. Concepts and resources developed
by the project will be integrated into classes at 2-year institutions with
substantial enrollments of underserved students. A public website, blog and
forum will provide discussion of genome editing technologies, with the
participation of experts and local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SECRETome project seeks to identify specific components and regulatory
mechanisms of the varied functions of plant secretory cells. To enable an
evaluation of gene function within individual cells and tissues, imaging,
ribosome-mRNA complex capture, gene editing and informatics will be employed in
an integrated fashion. A comparative approach will be enabled through the
analysis of both the crop rice and the reference plant Arabidopsis. Specific
aims include (1) the profiling of ribosome-associated transcripts (translatomes)
of key secretory cell types with prominent roles in secretion or nursing of
neighboring cells in the two species, in the context of two developmental
processes and two biotic interactions, (2) the identification of characteristic
gene expression patterns and networks for specific secretory cell-types to
facilitate selection of candidate genes for functional studies, and (3) the
validation and characterization of secretory cell-specific promoters and
candidate gene functions, including subcellular location, biochemistry, and
reverse-genetic phenotype. The secretory cell-specific promoters will be
valuable for other studies (e.g., to control genes for cell-specific processes
that enhance pathogen defense, beneficial microbial interactions, fertility or
seed quality). The results will provide broad new insights into the intersection
between cell function, development and biotic interactions. The project will
produce public resources and discourse forums regarding genomic editing with the
engagement of undergraduate students.