* 1810159
* Modeling the Stages of Pronoun Acquisition
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Lisa Pearl, Forsythe                Hannah
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2020
* USD 166,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Science of Learning program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Lisa Pearl at the University
of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating children's understanding of pronouns. Pronouns
are highly dependent on both grammatical information and contextual information,
making them an ideal test case in which to study children's developing ability
to integrate multiple pieces of information. Linguists have fairly well-
developed theories about how pronominal morphology, pronominal form, and
discourse connectives contribute individually to deciding what a pronoun refers
to, but far less is understood about how these pieces of information are
combined in the mind of the listener, and even less is known about how the child
listener decides which pieces of information to prioritize. The question is
further complicated by the fact that some of these cues are probabilistic,
meaning that they favor but do not require certain pronoun interpretations, and
by the fact that their abundance in the input varies across different dialects
of the same language. Understanding how children's cue integration mechanism
works and how it reacts to statistical variation can inform theories of language
change and cognitive development. It can also be useful for diagnosing atypical
development and inform efforts at improving school readiness through
interventions in the quantity and quality of children's input.

This project encompasses a series of coordinated experimental, corpus, and
computational modeling studies. Phase 1 uses experimental and corpus methods to
pinpoint the age at which children first become sensitive to three specific
cues. (i) Verbal agreement morphology, (ii) intra-clausal semantic relations or
discourse relations, and (iii) pronominal form (null vs. overt pronouns), have
all been found to influence pronoun interpretation in Spanish. Phase 2 addresses
the question of cue integration by tracking how children rank these cues
relative to one another across ages 3, 4, and 5, using experimental methods.
Phase 3 addresses the question of how children can potentially extract these
rankings from their input, and whether inter-dialectal differences in the input
lead to different ranking outcomes. Corpus work will first determine the
distribution of each cue in the input that children receive. Next, a
computational model will be used to estimate the weight assigned to each of
these cues, based on their distribution in the input and children's observed
ranking behavior from Phase 2. This model will provide a precise, quantifiable
proposal for how children weight each cue and how these weights change over the
course of development. The novelty of this approach lies in bringing together
established insights from different theoretical domains (morphosyntax, discourse
pragmatics, sociolinguistics) to show how they can not only coexist but also
interact in the mind of the learner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.