* 1810759
* LSAMP BD: North Carolina State University Preparing Researchers of the Future (PROF) NC-LSAMP
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Ashleigh Wright, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM&lt;br/&gt;disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska
Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity
is to increase the quantity and competitiveness of STEM&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students from historically underrepresented minority populations, with emphasis
on STEM doctoral matriculation and completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2018-2020 North Carolina LSAMP (NC-LSAMP) BD program will recruit twelve
(12)alumni from LSAMP institutions nationwide for STEM postbaccalaureate studies
at North Carolina State University Student support in the form of stipends and
cost of education are provided for two years for each student. The institution
commits to assisting the students financially through completion of the STEM
doctoral program. NCSU's strategy focuses on the student and develops a
comprehensive supportive program that will increase the student's confidence in
being a strong and productive STEM researcher; increases the student's
connection to their research advisor; increases their ability to assess and
contribute towards their research topic; increases their connection to the
university and surrounding community; and, increases their overall well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project activities adds new knowledge to the
literature related to the impact of proximal influences on the persistence of
minority graduate students. In addition, the proposal will add new insights into
strategies that lead to positive outcomes during the interactions within the
different proximal influences. At the conclusion of this program, the BD
participants will be armed with robust and resilient strategies that will allow
them to maintain their persistence through the Ph.D. degree. Our faculty will be
instructed in new mentoring techniques to help improve their interactions with
their graduate students. Our study will be the first to explore the impact of an
advisory panel for each graduate student to improve the overall well-being of
the graduate student and their persistence through the graduate
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluative activities will assess outcomes of
students' accomplishments relating to retention, degree completion, and career
progress. Social psychological outcomes related to career goals and expectations
related to STEM identity development will also be assessed. Outcomes will be
disseminated broadly through the institution's website, scholarly journals, and
presentations at STEM professional conferences. These efforts will increase the
diversity of STEM academic leadership and contribute to the growing literature
on broadening participation in STEM at the graduate and post-graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.