* 1810869
* Examining the Dynamics of Rainbands and Secondary Eyewall Formation in Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Fuqing Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 521,620.00

Hurricane size and intensity can be affected by changes in the inner core of a
storm. One of the dramatic changes is the development of a secondary eyewall.
Despite the importance of the secondary eyewall, competing theories exist
regarding how they develop and their interactions with hurricane rainbands. This
project will use a combination of observations from hurricane reconnaissance
aircraft and the latest in numerical modeling to fill a critical gap in
scientific understanding of tropical cyclone evolution. The main societal impact
from the award would be through improved tropical cyclone forecasts, especially
in the crucial hours before landfall. The project will also help to train the
next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to
study the dynamics behind the transition of tropical cyclone inner core
rainbands into a secondary eyewall. The researchers contend that current
theories for secondary eyewall formation (SEF) do not explain the exact
dynamical pathway that connects rainbands to SEF. To make progress on this
topic, the team will combine observational analysis and numerical modeling. The
observational analysis will include data from a total of 38 SEF events that were
well sampled by the NOAA P-3 Hurricane Hunter aircraft over the past two
decades. The modeling aspect will focus on more recent events, such as Harvey,
Irma, and Maria, making use of the Penn State Weather Research Forecasting -
Ensemble Kalman Filter (WRF-EnKF) system. The main objectives of the project are
to: (1) Identify and characterize coherent rainband features that occurred in
observations prior to secondary eyewall formation and compare to those rainbands
in storms that did not develop secondary eyewalls, (2) Examine the rainband
features leading to secondary eyewall formation in real-case model simulations
and compare to those in observations, (3) Explore the ubiquity and
predictability of rainband dynamics that lead to secondary eyewalls through
systematic ensemble sensitivity experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.