* 1810898
* LSAMP BD:  University of Texas at El Paso - University of Texas System LSAMP
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM)disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree.

The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(UT LSAMP) will host a Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) program at the University of
Texas at El Paso (UTEP), a Hispanic-serving institution and the lead institution
of the Alliance. Twelve fellows from historically underrepresented minority
(URM) groups in STEM disciplines and from the LSAMP alumni pool from across the
nation will be selected to participate in the two-year program.

The proposed project builds on experiences gathered by the UT System LSAMP on
the development of successful and replicable strategies to ensure that large
numbers of URM students graduate with undergraduate degrees in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and complete STEM doctoral
degrees. The project at UTEP, in particular, builds on a proven mentoring model
developed and tested with prior BD cohorts within the UT System LSAMP community.
It promotes the maturation of the students' research and professional skills,
values, and attitudes. The project results will further diversify the nation's
STEM workforce. It will enable the replication of promising practices in STEM
graduate education at emerging research universities for students with profiles
similar to those participating in this alliance of institutions. Since 2003, the
alliance has supported 118 diverse BD participants pursuing STEM M. S. or Ph.D.
degrees.

Evaluative efforts will determine which interventions are needed for qualified
students from underrepresented minority groups to successfully transition from
their undergraduate STEM disciplines to the completion of a Ph.D. program in
their field of study, at rates comparable to or exceeding those of all similarly
qualified students. Outcomes will be disseminated nationally and internationally
through professional research conferences, scholarly journals, institutional
websites, and social media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.