* 1810774
* Realistic Simulations of the Intergalactic Medium: The Search for Missing Physics - Part 2
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 10/31/2019
* USD 7,750.00

The intergalactic medium (IGM) is the hot, X-ray emitting gas that permeates the
space between galaxies. Currently, standard numerical simulation cannot match
several key observational features of the IGM. The mismatch between the
simulations and observation data is much too large to be caused by observational
errors, and is seen in multiple comparisons using different statistics, and by
different groups. This project proposes to resolve this open question in
astrophysics by running very high resolution simulations on the Blue Waters
supercomputer to make more accurate and robust estimates of the IGM.
Furthermore, the simulations and codes will be publicly available to allow
others to make their own estimates from existing or new
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will simulate the hydrogen Lyman
alpha forest (LYAF) using the newly developed extreme scale branch of the Enzo
called Enzo-P. Enzo-P implements the rich suite of physics models from the
widely used Enzo community code on top of a new, highly scalable AMR
infrastructure called Cello. Both Enzo-P and Cello have been developed by the
PIs group at UCSD. The combination of Enzo-P and Cello will permit for the first
time the use of AMR throughout a large cosmological volume, removing the
existing tradeoff between large volume statistics and high local resolution that
characterized previous Enzo simulations. The project will apply this new
capability to carry out simulations of the LAF with sufficiently high resolution
to capture the gaseous halos of galaxies which contribute significantly to
intergalactic absorption, while at the same time surveying a statistically
significant volume of the universe. Moreover, the project will construct
synthetic LYAF spectra and analyze their statistical properties to see whether
the inclusion of high column density absorbers in the model improves agreement
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.