* 1810447
* Online Learning-based Real-time Control of Unknown Autonomous Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,999.00

Many emerging autonomous systems, e.g., robots in unstructured environments, are
too complex to be accurately modeled. There are unknown model parameters,
partial state observations, or a drift in system characteristics. This makes the
problem of system identification and control quite challenging. Real-time
adaptation is needed for optimal and resilient operation. It is well-known that
the classical adaptive con-trol approach of system identification and `certainty
equivalent' control in the feedback-loop doesn't work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, we introduce a new paradigm of 'Learning-to-Control' unknown
Autonomous Systems based on the newly developing approach of Thompson/Posterior
sampling-based online learning. We will focus on discrete state space models of
Markov decision processes (MDPs). We will first develop a posterior sampling-
inspired algorithms for online learning-based control with real-time adaptation
for MDP models with partial observation of the system state. We note that such
approaches may be inter-preted to provide just the right amount of randomization
for optimally trading off exploration and exploi-tation that is needed for
online learning of the optimal policy at the fastest rate. We will then extend
this to the setting where the system parameter may be varying or drifting with
time. We will then develop such algorithms for more relevant but also more
complicated system models - stochastic hybrid systems, that have both discrete
and continuous states. The developed algorithms will be extensively validated in
sim-ulation experiments in the classical control and robotics environments in
OpenAI Gym. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the research lies in
its contribution to the 'Science of Autonomous Systems' by development of
foundations of online learning-based real-time control and adaptation for
autonomous systems by addressing fundamental questions about separation of
parameter estimation, state estima-tion and control for various stochastic
system models, particularly when model parameters must be learnt from data. The
broader impacts will include impact on the smart grid, autonomous robotics, and
medical CPS devices via dissemination of research results, training of a female
PhD student and a K-12 STEM outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.