* 1810040
* Elucidating the Mechanisms of Irradiation Induced Softening in Nanocrystalline BCC Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Predrag Krstic, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,965.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Coupled extremes of high stresses and
irradiation necessitate new materials design methodologies for enhancing
strength and radiation tolerance through precise control over material
structure. Over the past two decades, nanocrystalline metals that contain a
large fraction of internal interfaces have been pursued to address the
performance limitations of traditional engineering alloys. These unique
materials exhibit significant improvements in mechanical properties such as
strength and wear resistance, but under certain irradiation conditions, develop
internal defects that degrade these properties and limit their technological
utility for extreme environment applications. Using an integrated computational
and experimental framework, this research will build a fundamental understanding
of the mechanisms responsible for such property degradations, specifically
characterizing the intricate defect networks that produce softening and
hardening in nanocrystalline metals under irradiation. Technologically, new
insights into the impact of irradiation on the mechanical performance of
nanocrystalline metals will foster innovations in materials design for extreme
environments to advance next-generation nuclear technologies as safe,
sustainable energy sources with drastically reduced environmental impacts. The
integration of research activities into educational initiatives will advance the
engagement of underrepresented students in materials science and provide
curriculum enrichment for engineering majors through the establishment of a new
materials science and engineering major at Stony Brook University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;This research will
elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the transition from softening to
hardening in nanocrystalline body centered cubic (BCC) metals containing helium
irradiation defects. The guiding hypothesis is nanoscale helium defects
aggregated in grain boundaries act as stress concentrations that reduce the
energetic barrier for grain boundary mediated dislocation nucleation, which in
turn manifests as a softening effect that ultimately competes with classical
irradiation hardening. The research team will combine atomistic simulations with
in situ mechanical testing experiments and nanoindentation to explore the
influence of helium irradiation defects on the fundamental deformation processes
in the nanocrystalline BCC metals tungsten and iron. The competition between
classical irradiation hardening found in coarse-grained polycrystalline metals
and softening prevalent in nanocrystalline materials will also be explored by
considering the coupling of intragranular defect loop damage with grain boundary
defects in the deformation behavior. The manifestation of these mechanisms in
the mechanical response will be quantified and used to build mechanism-property
maps on the basis of collective interactions of deformation mechanisms with
irradiation defects. From this research, the team will gain a new understanding
of radiation effects and their implications for the mechanical performance of
nanocrystalline BCC metals. A fundamental understanding of competing mechanisms
due to coupled defect states will foster new innovations for combating
mechanical property degradation from irradiation damage, thereby providing
opportunities for interface engineering through synergistic alloying-by-design
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.