* 1810266
* Bipolar Spintronic Devices with Two-Dimensional Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Igor Zutic, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,804.00

Semiconductor devices in which the recombination of carriers (electrons and
oppositely charged holes) leads to the emission of light (photons) play an
increasingly important role. Advances in light emitting diodes (LEDs),
recognized by the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics, demonstrate many advantages over
conventional light bulbs, including lower power consumption, longer lifetime,
smaller size, and reduced environmental concerns. While in LEDs and lasers the
focus is on the emission wavelength and intensity, their utility can be
significantly enhanced by also harnessing the polarization of the emitted light.
Akin to a preferred hand use in humans (left vs right), the polarization of
light can display handedness (left vs right or clockwise vs counterclockwise).
This preference is also inherent to many otherwise identical molecules and can
signal different biological functions. The polarization-sensitive detection can
be used for biomedical diagnosis, including an early detection of cancer. The
proposed research investigates polarization control in light emitting diodes and
lasers to improve their detection sensitivity as well as enable a much faster
operation and lower power consumption. The principle behind this polarization
control is the conservation of the total angular momentum when it is converted
between different subsystems, such as carriers and photons. In a simple
mechanical manifestation, the conservation of angular momentum causes the
rotational frequency of ice skaters to increase when their arms are pulled
closer to their spinning bodies. In light emitting devices the angular momentum
of carriers is associated with their spin that is analogous to a child's top
spinning in the clockwise or counterclockwise direction. Through transfer of
angular momentum of spin-polarized carriers that preferentially spin in one
these directions, the emitted light becomes polarized. The proposed work will
provide a closely integrated educational and outreach efforts, as well as
develop resources to study spintronics, including Spintronics Handbook: Spin
Transport and Magnetism, 2nd Edition, co-edited by the PI. To address a
deficiency in the secondary education in which a vast majority of public school
students have minimal or no exposure to physical sciences that subsequently
deters them from considering careers in science or engineering, the PI will
organize Summer Workshops: Light Emitting Diodes and Lasers. The topics will
include light diffraction, wavelength measurement, polarization properties of
lasers, and modification of laser output. As a part of the annual SPIE:
Optics+Photonics Conference, the PI will organize Symposia to bridge the gap
between the spintronics and optics communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success
of practical spintronic devices operating at room temperature is largely limited
to unipolar devices where spin-polarized electrons are responsible for
magnetoresistive effects implemented in spinvalves. Despite their remarkable
success for magnetic storage and sensing, such spin valves are of limited use
for advanced signal processing and digital logic. It would therefore be
important to assess if there are alternative paths to realize potentially
transformative spin-based devices, beyond magnetoresistance. Two paths towards
superior light emitting devices are sought: (1) using conventional
semiconductors and (2) using novel van der Waals materials that can be made
atomically thin. In (1) it is predicted that silicon as the dominant material
for conventional electronic, but with poor optical properties, could also lead
to the robust light emission and thereby provide unexplored opportunities for
silicon optoelectronics. In (2) an atomically-thin active region enables
reduction in size and the emission of light is achieved at a fraction of the
power consumed in conventional counterparts. In contrast to the common approach
for spin-based devices that aims to increase the carrier spin relaxation time,
it is predicted that short spin relaxation time supports ultrafast changes in
the polarization of the emitted light (&gt; 200 GHz at 300 K) and thereby
enables ultrafast optical communication. Theoretical predictions will be closely
supported through experimental collaborations to ensure their
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.