* 1810587
* Informal Learning Pathways through Mapathons for Military and Veteran Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Dennis Patterson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 299,689.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for STEM learning in a variety of settings. Many
military veterans who seek to transition to higher education or workforce
pathways find it challenging to translate the skills they acquired during
service to civilian STEM settings and the modern day workforce. Yet many
returning veterans have significant experience with STEM fields, including
mapping and geospatial technologies, because of their unique functions and
service assignments. Such geospatial skills are useful for location-aware
industries, citizen science and public services. At the same time, military and
veteran families have been largely overlooked as an important public audience
for focused informal STEM learning. Informal learning events called "mapathons"
which enlists participants to mapping exercises and create geospatial data on
open platforms that address authentic needs in their communities and the broader
society at large. When seeking to further their education upon returning from
service, veterans' typical options have included some form of formal higher
education. Mapathons may be a feasible bridging activity that (a) recognizes
veterans' unique, valuable, and in-demand STEM skills and (b) supports lifelong
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot research seeks to understand how
informal learning experiences such as mapathons are viable pathways for veterans
to transition to the civilian workforce. The conceptual approach pays attention
to the realities of the life course of military and veteran families, especially
building upon theories of change related to transitions to include a spatial
component. The foundation of the project's intellectual merit is its explicit
inclusion and sensitivity to place, scale, and spatial behavior, building
directly from findings of prior NSF-funded projects and the evidence base for
informal learning pathways. The research will contribute to knowledge about
workforce development by addressing the questions: (1) To what extent do
veterans recognize that their extant skills acquired, in military settings, are
translatable to civilian STEM settings?; (2) How can informal learning
experiences help a diverse veteran population increase awareness of the
translatability of geospatial workforce competencies, build confidence in
technology skills, and motivate interest to pursue formal studies in STEM fields
in general?; and (3) What pathways do which veterans favor when they could
pursue formal STEM higher education learning among an array of choices online or
at regional sites, and why? The study will engage 320 participants at 8 sites
across Texas; employ in-depth surveys and interviews; and use spatial analysis
to elicit insights about the research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Military
and veteran families include a significant number of people from group typically
underrepresented in STEM fields. Supporting more veterans to transition
successfully to higher education pathways or careers in STEM is a vital service
to the nation. This study on informal to formal pathways for veterans will
include an innovative understanding of the importance of place in meaning-making
and in the reality of choices they consider during the transitions of their life
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.