* 1810168
* Dynamic tuning of barrier properties of biogels using weakly adhesive third-party crosslinkers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Samuel Lai, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 501,654.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels, composed of a network of
fibers suspended in an aqueous environment, are ubiquitous in living systems.
Hydrogels not only offer unique structural and mechanical properties essential
for numerous physiological functions, but also serve as a barrier against
foreign species. Current methods to tune the ability of biological hydrogels
(biogels) to function as a physical barrier typically rely on either changing
the spacing between the fibers, or by tuning the molecular composition of the
fibers. However, both methods have important limitations. Here, we would explore
the use of third-party molecules that can crosslink foreign species to the
matrix by binding tightly to the foreign species while binding lightly to the
matrix fibers. We will study a variety of biogels to identify the specific
molecules that the crosslinkers can bind to on the fibers. We will also explore
improving the potency of the crosslinkers by tuning its interactions with the
fibers and/or its ability to crosslink foreign species. Finally, we will develop
mathematical theory and computational model that can account for the
experimental observations. Altogether, these studies should help us
substantially advance a novel approach to changing the effectiveness of biogels
to serve as a barrier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods to tune the barrier properties of
biological hydrogels (biogels) typically involve either stimuli-induced bulk
changes to the mesh spacings of the matrix, and/or covalent modification of the
matrix elements. These methods greatly limit the ability to dynamically tune the
barrier properties of biogels against diverse species. In this proposal, we will
elucidate a third strategy, based on harnessing adaptive third-party
crosslinkers that can interact weakly with matrix elements and bind specifically
to foreign epitopes to tune the barrier properties of biogels against nano-sized
particles and active bodies with molecular specificity. In particular, we will
focus on utilizing antibodies (Ab), which we have recently discovered can
interact transiently with mucins and laminin via N-glycans on its Fc domain, as
model third party crosslinkers. In Aim 1, we will explore the interactions of Ab
with a variety of biogels; the systemic screening will allow us to gain
molecular insights into the specific elements on biogel matrix that mediate the
interactions with Ab. In Aim 2, we will explore whether tuning Ab affinity to
matrix constituents, or improving the ability of Ab to agglutinate, will result
in more effective immobilizing of active species in biogels. Finally, in Aim 3,
we will develop a comprehensive theoretical framework and computational model of
the experimental observations. Successful completion of the proposed studies
will substantially improve our understanding of this novel strategy to tune the
barrier properties of biogels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.