* 1810767
* Nanostructure Engineering Is Another Approach Toward Membrane-Active Antimicrobials with Desirable Activity and Selectivity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Hongjun Liang, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,931.00

Abstract # DMR ? 1810767&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antibiotic-resistant superbugs that elude one or more
traditional antibiotics are causing a public health crisis. Membrane-active
antimicrobials represent a new family of promising antibiotic materials to
address this crisis. They include a wide variety of small molecules, polymers,
polypeptides, self-assembled structures, and organic-inorganic hybrid materials
that kill bacteria by disrupting bacterial membranes. Since this mode of damage
does not target specific biosynthetic pathways, the possibility of inducing
bacterial resistance is greatly reduced. However, most current designs of
membrane-active antimicrobials are not ready for applications yet because their
hydrophobicity believed to be indispensable for breaking bacterial membranes
also damages mammalian cells, which gives rise to their unacceptable toxicity. A
critical but poorly understood question is how to design hydrophilic membrane-
active antimicrobials that kill bacteria specifically without having to breach
the hydrophobic cell membrane in general. Recent discovery of various membrane-
active antibiotic nanomaterials suggests that nanostructure engineering could be
another approach to develop membrane-active antimicrobials. The objective of
this award is to adapt materials engineering, chemistry, and biological tools
for the development of hydrophilic nanostructured antibiotic materials, and to
elucidate the role of nanostructures on bacterial membrane remodeling. The
successful outcomes of this award will pave the way for a potential paradigm
shift to develop novel antibiotic materials with desirable activity,
selectivity, and biocompatibility to fight bacterial resistance. Integrated with
the research activities is a multi-tiered antimicrobial education program that
will bring broad societal awareness on antibiotic resistance, and train next
generation of scientists on the development of new antibiotic materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this award is to adapt materials engineering, chemistry, and
biological tools for the development of nanostructured membrane-active
antibiotic materials (i.e., "nanoantibiotics"), and to elucidate the role of
nanostructures on bacterial membrane remodeling. The central hypothesis is that
hydrophilic linear-chain polymers that do not breach the hydrophobic membrane
interior but have poor antimicrobial activity can be transformed into potent
antibiotic materials with high selectivity when assembled into nanostructures.
This award will identify the role of multivalent interactions that drive this
transformation, elucidate how nanostructure itself helps regulate antimicrobial
activity and selectivity, and determine the feasibility of triple selectivity in
the design of nanoantibiotics that will disintegrate and become inactive in
response to environmental stimuli. This award will help open a door to transform
diverse hydrophilic polymers that have excellent biocompatibility but weak
antibiotic activity into potent nanostructured antibiotic materials. It will
also reveal how to use physical dimensions of nanostructured membrane-active
antibiotic materials as a simple tool to tune their activity and selectivity,
potentially recruiting the latest development in both the bottom-up and top-down
nanostructure engineering into antibiotic designs. Finally, it will examine a
prototypical design of nanoantibiotics with dismantling "switch", shedding light
on how to turn off antimicrobial activity "on demand" by disassembling
antibiotic nanostructures after their service, hence reducing the prolonged
presence of residue antibiotics in natural habitats that not only helps bacteria
develop resistance, but also adversely impacts the ecosystems. This award will
provide abundant training opportunities for postdoc, graduate and undergraduate
students, and K12 participants in the interdisciplinary area of biology,
chemistry, and materials science and engineering, support educational
development on membrane-active antibiotic materials, and promote broad societal
awareness on antibiotic resistance and antibiotic materials to diverse
participants at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.