* 1810485
* Magnetic Assembly of Deformable Colloids for Responsive Photonic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Yadong Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, Prof.
Yadong Yin and his students at the University of California Riverside develop
novel photonic structures. Photonic structures consist of patterns of particles,
smaller than the wavelength of light, that are artificially bound together in
ordered arrangements. In this case, the optical properties of the photonic
structures can be changed in response to mechanical pressure or external
magnetic fields. To build such responsive structures, the team explores methods
for making magnetic colloidal particles that can deform their shapes when they
interact with each other, and then study how these particles come together and
assemble into ordered structures. These shape-deformable magnetic colloidal
particles can assemble into unusual structures that display interesting
responsive optical properties which cannot be achieved with conventional solid
particles. This project enhances the understanding of how soft colloidal
particles interact with each other in solution, how they assemble into large-
scale structures, and how they respond to external magnetic fields. The project
is also technologically important as it will enable the fabrication of novel
optical materials with rapid and significant optical changes to external
stimuli, such as magnetic fields and mechanical forces. The resulting materials
may find great use in practical applications that may have a very positive
impact on the society, including novel visual displays, colorimetric pressure
sensors, and anti-counterfeiting devices. The project also expands research-
based learning beyond the University of California Riverside campus by
attracting K-12 and undergraduate students especially those from
underrepresented groups from local schools and community colleges to the
proposed research. Besides hosting summer research experience programs at the
University of California Riverside, the PI has a partnership with colleagues in
local community colleges to carry out relevant research in their laboratories in
order to provide more students with opportunities to be exposed to cutting-edge
research. Students involved in this research have the opportunity to interact
with industrial partners to learn the skills needed in the workplace. The
participating high school students are encouraged to use their research results
to compete in science fairs so as to broadly disseminate the research outcomes
and promote their interests in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this project,
funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, Prof. Yadong Yin and his group at the University of
California Riverside, develop deformable superparamagnetic colloidal particles
for the fabrication of novel stimuli-responsive photonic structures. These
shape-deformable magnetic colloidal particles represent a class of unexplored
nanostructured materials that may display very different assembly behaviors from
their solid counterparts. They serve as novel building blocks for constructing
periodic structures with unusual structures/symmetries and novel tuning
mechanisms that cannot be achieved with solid particles. The specific aims of
the project include: 1) Developing effective approaches for the synthesis of
uniform shape-deformable superparamagnetic colloidal particles; 2) Studying
their shape deformation in response to external magnetic fields and revealing
the mechanism governing the interactions of soft colloidal magnetic particles;
3) Studying the assembly of the deformable colloids into long-range ordered
structures under external magnetic fields; 4) Fabricating various types of
magnetically responsive photonic structures with the shape-deformable particles,
characterizing their responsive photonic properties, and exploring opportunities
for broad optical tuning range and high response rate especially in the 3D
crystalline form; 5) Fabricating responsive photonic structures in solid film
and exploring their practical applications such as anti-counterfeiting and
colorimetric pressure sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.