* 1810025
* A Spatial-Historical Analysis of Agricultural and Protected Land
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Jessica Pouchet, Pouchet                 Jessica
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 74,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and supported by SBE's
Cultural Anthropology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Mark Hauser at Northwestern
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist conducting a spatial-historical analysis of agricultural and protected
lands. Through an investigation of landscape changes in a biodiversity hotspot
over the last 75 years, this research generates knowledge about 1) the emergence
and effects of inequalities in areas marked by conservation and 2) the ways
people respond to conservation in their decisions about land and forest use. As
economic hardship and land shortages worsen, it is likely that human pressures
on the forest will increase. The research offers an understanding of the broader
trends that make life difficult for both people and the forest, which is
knowledge that can improve current U.S. efforts to support conservation and
development. In addition, this project involves researchers and undergraduate
research assistants from underrepresented groups in STEM.

The project maps the phenomenon by which families no longer have enough land to
provide for their basic needs through the largely agricultural means available
to them. Specifically, it documents the material record using techniques
borrowed from survey archaeology, including GPS-based transect walks; aerial
photography, and archival research. The project builds on ethnographic findings
to map patterns of population density, land tenure, and land use (crop planting)
along the borders of the protected area. The project uses these methods to
identify the connections among the establishment of protected areas, population
growth, decisions about land, and socio-economic inequality. Moreover, this
research produces maps that serve as a bridge between insights from ethnography,
archival research, rigorous social theory, and the conservation sciences. Human
dimensions of natural resource management is a growing subfield in the
environmental sciences, and this project fits squarely into that
interdisciplinary endeavor. While conservation scientists have recognized the
importance of social research for decades, however, attempts to generate
knowledge about human-environment relationships that successfully integrate
ecological and social understandings continue to encounter hurdles. This project
directly works to overcome those hurdles through a synergistic,
multidisciplinary collaboration. It offers a holistic understanding of the
broader political-ecological trends shaping prosperity of both the people and
the protected forest. The project thus advances knowledge on conservation and
natural resources by creating avenues for linguistic, sociocultural,
archaeological, and ecological collaboration at the theoretical, methodological,
and dissemination stages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.