* 1810582
* NeTS: Small: Incentivizing Internet-Scale Web Mining with Webcoin
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Aleksandar Kuzmanovic, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Four major search engines hold a unique position in enabling the use of the
Internet, as they alone direct over 98% of Internet users to the content they
seek, using proprietary indices. While the contribution of these companies is
undeniable, their design is necessarily affected by their economic interests,
which may or may not align with those of the users, raising concerns regarding
their effect on the availability of information around the globe. One of the key
barriers that hinders the proliferation of a larger number of search engines is
the daunting, multi-billion-dollar-worth task of crawling and indexing the
exabyte-scale Web space. Hence, this task is carried out by a small number of
players capable of committing substantial resources to conduct 24/7 Web crawling
and indexing. Despite prior efforts to democratize this space, i.e., promote the
use of a distributed, objective and unbiased index instead, the use of such
distributed systems has not become common. This is mostly due to inferior
results associated with small Web indices used by such systems, induced by the
lack of economic incentives for participation in distributed Web crawling, or
because of the small-scale nature of the communities of users interested in
collaborative Web indexing. This project seeks to show that generating
incentives to create an up-to-date, organically-generated Web index, widely
available to the "masses," is the way to democratize the search engine space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To generate sustainable incentives for user participation,
this project utilizes Bitcoin's principles, yet forces miners to crawl and index
the Web instead of conducting purposeless computations, as in Bitcoin. This
project features Webcoin, a novel distributed digital currency which
crowdsources networking tasks and rewards users for conducting Web crawling,
scraping, and indexing, while providing the same security guarantees as Bitcoin.
Webcoin's novelty, focus, and unique contribution lies in being the first to
incentivize networking tasks, rather than computational tasks or personal
content, to produce Google-scale Web indices within days. The key goal of this
project is to design, implement, and evaluate Webcoin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to make a significant
impact by removing the key barrier that hinders the proliferation of novel
search engines, empowering the people to create such systems without significant
initial costs. If successful, the proposed system will enable bias-free search,
thus enhancing human liberties and promoting a free and open society. The PI
plans to design and disseminate Webcoin as open-source software. Moreover,
Webcoin's design principles could prove useful in domains beyond networking, in
incentivizing user participation and in verifying user contributions, at scale.
Education is an integral part of the project, and the PI plans to leverage
existing institutional and special programs to recruit students from
underrepresented groups into the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.