* 1810700
* Collapsing in Differential Geometry and the Einstein Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Lott, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,112.00

A geometric flow is a controlled way to smoothly deform a geometric object, such
as a curve or a surface, or a 3-dimensional slice of spacetime equipped with a
metric that measures length and angles. This project is about the Einstein flow,
which deforms such slices in a way that, when the slices are stacked up, the
result is 4-dimensional solution of the vacuum Einstein equations, the
fundamental equations that govern our universe. Deducing something about the
future (or past) state of the universe from information about the present is of
evident interest in cosmology, and pose a very challenging mathematical problem.
In this project, the investigator will focus on the asymptotic (or long-term)
behavior of spacetimes, in the "cosmological" setting where the slices are
compact (i.e., they wrap back on themselves, like the surface of a balloon, no
matter how large their size). In this context, even if the spacetime does not
develop singularities (e.g., a black hole), the spatial slices can
asymptotically collapse, meaning that their volumes become smaller than a naive
rescaling argument would suggest. Recently, the investigator adapted techniques
from Riemannian geometry (and in particular the study of collapsing solutions of
the Ricci flow) to give new information about expanding vacuum spacetimes. Part
of this project will be to build on these results and obtain more precise
results about the future asymptotics of these spacetimes. Another component of
this project will be the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars. Results of this project will also be disseminated to the public via
journal publications, conferences, and posting to online mathematics
archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collapsing in differential geometry is the
phenomenon that a sequence of Riemannian manifolds can converge to a lower
dimensional space in the Gromov-Hausdorff topology. The research in this
proposal will extend collapsing methods, both within differential geometry and
within geometric flows. In recent work, the investigator adapted collapsing
techniques to give new information about the future asymptotics of expanding
Einstein flows. One feature was the avoidance of any a priori symmetry
assumptions; instead, continuous symmetries appeared in the collapsing limit.
The proposed research will extend this in various ways. One direction is a more
concrete understanding of the asymptotics of expanding vacuum solutions. A
second direction is the asymptotics of shrinking Einstein flows, which are
relevant for spacetime singularities. In addition, the investigator will work on
problems in differential geometry and geometric flows such as collapsing with a
lower bound on the curvature operator, and the behavior of scalar curvature
lower bounds under metric convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.