* 1810563
* Geoarchaeological Evidence of Landscape Change
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Arlene Rosen, Damick                  Alison
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry, or private sector, and government.
SPRF awards involve two year of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctroal Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Posdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions tat advance their
respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Arlene Rosen and
the University of Texas-Austin, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist conducting a geoarchaeological investigation of the
multi-scalar impacts of farming systems on the landscapes of northern New Mexico
upon the introduction of those systems as part of the Spanish colonial project
of the 16th-19th centuries CE. The late pre-colonial and colonial Southwest was
marked by a series of dramatic multi-decadal drought episodes that profoundly
affected outcomes. The "Columbian Exchange" of technologies, plants, animals,
and diseases from Spanish colonists to the North American Southwest has had
profound impact on the history of the region. However, very little research has
been conducted to produce empirical data documenting the geomorphological
changes to the land.

This project identifies and tests three models for landscape change in the
Southwest under Spanish colonization. It will produce the first direct analysis
of geoarchaeological and microbotanical data from sediments systematically
sampled from geological sections adjacent to and downstream from known
agricultural areas of two colonial settlements and one Pueblo settlement under
colonial influence in the Rio Grande River Valley region of northern New Mexico:
Dixon, Cuyumunge, and Picuris Pueblo, respectively. Sediment sections such as
these preserve evidence for landscape processes over time, such as sediment
transportation (erosional patterns), salinization of sediments (indicating
irrigation regimes, land stability, and therefore human mobility patterns),
water table levels (indicative of erosive land use practice or damming), and
organic content (to assess what kinds of environments were present, including
aridification episodes). Studying these sections will allow the researcher of
this project to assess how land processes changed in relation to the other
changes introduced over the course of colonization in northern New Mexico, and
to assess how people responded to their changing landscape. It is particularly
notable that this project is in cooperation with two projects in the region that
are being hosted by local descendent communities for the first time - the
participation of these descendent communities will enhance the accessibility to
sampling areas, the contextual knowledge of the data and history, and the
broader contribution to community heritage interests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.