* 1810368
* Situational Risk Factors and Decision Making in Police Officers
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Phillip Goff, Swencionis              Jillian        K
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/28/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Phillip Atiba
Goff at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the psychology of how
situations shape police officers' decisions and actions when interacting with
community residents in the field. Police officers' core role competencies
require them to maintain control, and also to maintain their own legitimacy,
during interactions with residents that can be challenging for everyone
involved. This project investigates how chronic situations within American
patrol policing impacts core role competencies, and subsequent decisions to use
force. This project expands and refines scientific theories of when, how, and
for whom status and identity correspond with aggression and violence. This
research also seeks to benefit society through its findings, contact with
officers and residents, and mentorship of undergraduate research
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how situational
vulnerabilities, social status, and social identity predict the per-interaction
rate of force in officer-resident interactions. To do so, the investigators will
conduct surveys of officers in police agencies across seven U.S. cities, and
link officers' survey responses with data describing officers' actual behavior
in interactions with residents in the field, including pedestrian and vehicle
stops and use of force. This approach enables the investigators to test
relationships between situational vulnerabilities and use of force, with
situational factors as moderators. To understand the chronic situations of
policing from community residents' perspectives, the investigators will also
conduct representative surveys of residents in three U.S. cities. These methods
also enable controls for neighborhood-level factors, including arrest rates,
racial segregation, and income inequality. Together, these studies begin to
design a science of chronic situations in powerful institutions within embedded,
dynamic social contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.