* 1810965
* RAPID:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Interaction between genotype and acquired environmental modifications during coral responses to extreme climatic events  Irma and Maria
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Alberto Sabat, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2019
* USD 31,198.00

After the impact of two consecutive category 5 hurricanes in less than a month,
Puerto Rico is (for a narrow window of time) the world's best natural laboratory
to study the effects of extreme weather episodes on coral reefs and the
mechanisms underlying coral acclimatory responses to global change. This project
leverages this opportunity, and the research team's previous work in the area,
to understand how coral existing genetic variation interacts with acquired
environmental modifications (i.e., microbiome and epigenome) during intra- and
trans-generational responses to extreme climatic events. For this purpose, coral
and Symbiodinium genotypes, bacterial diversity and epigenomic modifications
will be directly examined, exploring their role in coral demographic and
physiological recovery and the inheritance of epigenomic signatures linked to
stress acclimatization. This work will be accomplished by a multi-institutional
team, providing much needed answers to questions concerning the mechanisms by
which foundational species acclimatize to rapidly changing environmental
conditions. By better understanding the mechanisms contributing to stress
responses, the researchers hope to learn how long lived sessile organisms may
adapt or acclimatize to a extreme events. Established resources at Florida
International University, the University of Puerto Rico, and Pennsylvania State
University will be used to recruit and engage graduate and undergraduate
students from under-represented groups in science in the research. The research
team will work closely with Puerto Rican agencies and local resource managers to
communicate management and conservation applications from the research.

The increasing frequency and intensity of altered storm regimes will contribute
to significantly reducing coral population sizes in the next few decades. While
it is known that environmentally acquired modifications can influence coral
health and physiology, their precise role and interaction with coral existing
genetic variation to promote phenotypic plasticity remain one of the central
gaps in our understanding of metazoan ecology and evolution. This project will
be the first investigation into the interaction between coral genetic variation
and two different types of environmentally acquired modifications (epigenome and
microbiome) during intra- and trans-generational responses to high-energy
storms. The proposed research will determine a) if modifications in epigenetic
signatures and bacterial diversity are dependent on specific associations
between coral host and Symbiodinium genotypes, b) if those modifications promote
differential physiological and demographic performance during post-hurricane
recovery, and c) if epigenomic modifications acquired by progenitors are
transmitted to their offspring. Two graduate students and 2 REU undergraduates
will be engaged in this research. The research team will work closely with
Puerto Rico agencies, convene monthly conference calls, and provide regular
updates about this work to local resource managers. A formal evaluation protocol
will be used to assess implementation and progress of the proposed educational
and scientific activities (following NSF user-friendly handbook for project
evaluation). Results and metadata will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications, scientific meetings, reports and using online repositories. Raw
data will be provided upon request.