* 1810732
* Center for Advancing the Societal Impacts of Research
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Diane Rover, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,171,393.00

The Center for Advancing the Societal Impacts of Research (CASIR) will advance
the rigor, relevance, and practice of broader impacts (BI) by (a) cultivating
and strengthening the existent and emerging BI expert community; (b) building
capacity of researchers and educators to enhance and articulate the broader
impacts of their work; and (c) creating socio-technical infrastructure able to
adapt to stakeholder needs as BI continues to grow and evolve. CASIR builds on
the foundational work of the National Alliance for Broader Impacts and will
advance the practice of translating scientific research for public understanding
and meet the growing demand for innovative BI training and resources.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center will develop resources and provide
professional development to diverse audiences across multiple institution types
and settings, including research-intensive universities, minority-serving
institutions, technical and community colleges, and primarily undergraduate
institutions in the jurisdictions of the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research. CASIR will directly enhance BI capacity at the individual,
departmental, institutional, and national levels. Particular focus will be given
to individual researchers and institutions representing and serving
traditionally under-served populations. In addition, CASIR will facilitate
dialogue and collaboration around evidence-based approaches to enhancing,
evaluating, and documenting research impacts. Overall, the work will be valuable
to the community of researchers driving discovery, the community of
professionals who provide BI support and collaboration with researchers, and the
public which stands to benefit from research and education projects that are
well-designed and executed in a way that enhances their broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-wide support for this Center augments the
Foundation's current efforts to educate research communities about the
importance of the broader impacts criterion in the review process and to
communicate the societal benefits of fundamental science and engineering
research. CASIR's emphasis on documentation, evidence, and best practices will
support an evidence-building approach to investing in discovery and innovation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of Integrative
Activities (OIA) and the following Directorates: Biological Sciences (BIO),
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), Geosciences (GEO), Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.