* 1810273
* Engineering efficient contacts for organic electronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Oana Jurchescu, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are a novel class of materials
that can enable new technologies. Their device applications could impact
industries such as energy, transportation, communications and medicine. For such
a sweeping revolution to occur, there are performance limits to be overcome. A
large number of organic semiconductors with high carrier mobility, a measure of
how quickly electrons move through a material, have been made. However, charge
injection into organic semiconductors remains a bottleneck to the development of
high performance devices. The project will confront this challenge through an
integrated approach combining experiment and modelling. The goal of this project
is to develop methods to describe charge injection into organic semiconductors
and reduce the impact of contacts. These insights can then be used to create
innovative device designs. This project will significantly advance the field of
organic semiconductor devices, possibly leading to applications that are
currently impossible. This project will expose students to state-of the-art
semiconductor processing and characterization and prepare them for employment in
modern manufacturing. The PI is a dedicated mentor and will offer research
opportunities to students in the laboratory setting and integrate research into
the classroom. She will also reach out to local high-schools, community
colleges, universities, and children's museums. She will continue her efforts to
attract and retain under-represented minority students in science by
participating in special events organized at conferences and on campus, running
campaigns in local schools, and actively participating in formal and informal
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors
provide an opportunity to augment silicon electronics in non-traditional areas
such as clothing, electronic paper, flexible and rollable applications, or bio-
integrated applications. With the recent development of very high mobility
compounds, the field faces a great challenge: a direct consequence of lowering
the resistance of the active electronic layer is that now the contribution of
the contact resistance becomes significant. Innovation in device design for
reducing the impact of contacts on device performance is urgently needed. The
goals of this project are to engineer better devices through minimizing or
eliminating the contact effects and to develop a methodology for accurate
determination the charge carrier mobility in the presence of severe contact
effects. A set of experiments and modelling tasks were designed to allow for a
better understanding of charge injection and transport in organic
semiconductors, a rigorous device parameter extraction and a drastic reduction
in the contact resistance to a level where intrinsic mobility is accessible even
for the very high mobility materials. The proposed research is designed to spark
new technologies and propel organic semiconductors to ubiquitous electronics
that are currently inaccessible. The project will provide an excellent venue for
educating students in a diverse and multidisciplinary environment and exposing
them to state-of the-art semiconductor processing and characterization
techniques. The PI is a dedicated teacher and mentor, and she will actively be
involved in each stage of the project besides her students. She will seek
different opportunities to provide her students funding necessary to visit
national labs and other university labs. Her group will reach out to local high-
schools and community colleges, and host visiting students. The PI will dedicate
a conscious effort to raising awareness for diversity and inclusion in STEM,
through the conferences she is organizing, university and department events, and
effectively leading her own research group embedded in these
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.