* 1810310
* Investigating quantum critical and topological dynamics in f-electron materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 650,314.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Lanthanide- and actinide-based materials comprise a rich
reservoir of new and novel properties of fundamental scientific interest and
potential applications in current and future technologies. These f-electron
quantum materials are found in the periodic table of the elements starting with
lanthanum and actinium. Here we search for new quantum materials based on
lanthanide and actinide elements. This specifically includes materials
containing cerium, praseodymium, samarium, europium, ytterbium and uranium.
Detailed investigations of the physical properties and underlying physics will
be pursued with the primary goal of characterizing the striking phenomena of
fundamental interest and relevance to technology. These studies are expected to
yield new materials that will advance technological applications. This includes
thermoelectric cooling and electrical power generation, magnetocaloric
refrigeration, magnetic sensors, magnetic information storage, quantum
computing, and high temperature superconductivity for electronics, magnetic
resonance imaging, and the generation, transmission, and storage of electrical
energy. This program contributes to the education and training of postdoctoral
scholars and graduate and undergraduate students, some of which are from
underrepresented groups. The PI's and their group members are involved in
community outreach activities, including laboratory tours for high school and
undergraduate students, science demonstrations at local elementary schools, and
popular lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: Lanthanide- and
actinide-based f-electron quantum materials comprise a rich reservoir of
correlated electron phases and phenomena, including valence fluctuations, heavy
fermion behavior, Kondo insulator behavior, quantum criticality, non-Fermi
liquid behavior, metal-insulator transitions, unconventional superconductivity,
magnetic and charge order, and topological phenomena. Competing interactions can
be "tuned" by varying non-thermal control parameters such as chemical
composition, pressure, and magnetic field, leading to complex phase diagrams
containing a multitude of these correlated electron phases and phenomena. Of
particular interest are unconventional superconductivity, exotic magnetic phases
and non-Fermi liquid behavior in low temperature physical properties that occur
in the vicinity of a quantum critical point where a second order phase
transition (usually, antiferromagnetic) is suppressed to 0 K. The objectives of
the proposed research are to characterize these extraordinary phases and
phenomena, determine the conditions under which they are formed, identify
underlying microscopic mechanisms, and test appropriate theories. The approach
involves materials synthesis (particularly single crystals) and measurement of
the transport, thermal, and magnetic properties of these materials as a function
of temperature, composition and magnetic field. This is complemented with
quasiparticle dynamics measurements using ultrafast optical spectroscopy,
providing a powerful means to interrogate and temporally disentangle charge,
spin, lattice, and orbital degrees of freedom. A broad range of correlated
f-electron materials such as filled skutterudite compounds and the Kondo
insulator samarium boride, a candidate for a correlated electron topological
insulator, and its alloys will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.