* 1810252
* OP: MEMS-driven photonic metamaterials: dynamic wavefront tailoring with reconfigurable metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Xin Zhang, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 362,119.00

Part A:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop tunable metamaterials driven by
integrated microelectromechanical system (MEMS) actuators for dynamic control of
terahertz and infrared light. Photonic metamaterials have proven to be a
powerful tool to manipulate light propagation. However, there is an existing
challenge concerning the development of random access metamaterials with on-
demand effective properties. In order to overcome this grand challenge, MEMS
actuators will be integrated with metamaterial unit cells, enabling on-demand
light manipulation. The physics of phase control, design of unit cells,
micro-/nanofabrication, and system integration schemes will be investigated to
realize metamaterial devices that can manipulate the wavefront of terahertz and
infrared light as desired, enabling, for example, dynamic beam steering and
tunable focusing. The metamaterial devices that will be developed are
multifunctional, compact, and dynamically tunable, offering significant
potential in comparison to conventional optical devices. The success of this
project will boost the development of opto-electronic systems in areas such as
spectroscopy, high-resolution imaging, and light detection and ranging (LiDAR),
which are widely used in healthcare and national security and defense. This
project provides a platform to educate young researchers, including women and
underrepresented minorities, fostering their passion in fundamental optics and
photonics research and applied engineering
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part B:&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials have
revolutionized electromagnetism during the past decade resulting in myriad new
phenomena including cloaking, negative refractive index, and tunable
electromagnetic composites. The goal of this project is to develop dynamically
reconfigurable metamaterials to manipulate the wavefront of terahertz and
infrared light, which is enabled by integrating MEMS actuators in metamaterial
unit cells. For efficient wavefront manipulation, the key is to achieve full-
span phase coverage with constant amplitude in the response of metamaterial unit
cells. However, the amplitude and phase response of the majority of metamaterial
designs are bounded, making it challenging to achieve high-efficiency wavefront
manipulation. In the proposed work, the coupling effect between the metamaterial
layer and a ground plane or two layers of metamaterials will be studied to
design structures that can modulate the phase response with little effect on the
amplitude response, i.e. decoupling amplitude and phase modulation. Fabrication
processes will be developed to construct metamaterial devices based on both
surface and bulk micro-/nanomachining techniques. The integration of
metamaterial unit cells and MEMS actuators will be investigated and optimized to
make each unit cell accessible individually by employing advanced MEMS
integration and packaging techniques including three-dimensional wire routing,
through silicon vias (TSVs) and flip chip bonding. Finally, tunable metamaterial
devices exhibiting multifunctionality will be demonstrated to manipulate
terahertz and infrared light. This includes dynamic beam steering and focusing,
which cannot be achieved with state-of-the-art techniques, for a variety of
applications, such as spectroscopy, imaging, and
LiDAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.