* 1810202
* Targeted Coordination of Dynamic Populations: Fundamentals, Computational Methods, and Emerging Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Complex systems that consist of populations of isolated or interacting dynamical
components are prevalent in nature and human society. Notable examples of such
systems include neural circuitry in the brain, metabolic chemical reaction
systems in biology, and electrical power distribution, and traffic control
systems in engineering. Tackling control and estimation tasks not only for one
dynamical system but a whole population of a vast number of nearly identical
dynamical units has thus emerged as a recurrent theme in numerous scientific and
engineering areas, and the capability of precise targeted coordination and
estimation of dynamic populations would open the floodgate to rapid and
significant advancements in a diverse array of cutting-edge applications. The
fundamental difficulty in dealing with dynamic populations is that control and
observation can only be implemented at the population level, i.e., through
broadcasting a single input signal to all the systems in the population, and
through receiving aggregated measurements of the systems in the population,
respectively, and there is a substantial lack of principled control and
observation strategies for this new class of population systems. As a result,
population-based technologies remain far from reaching their full potential.
This research aims to establish a general and coherent theoretical and
computational framework for the various emerging applications that critically
rely on a targeted coordination of large populations of dynamical systems, and
thereby close the current gap between theory and practice in the emerging
applied problems concerned with population systems. The proposed investigation
will promise new contributions to systems theory, control engineering, and
biomedical and quantum technologies, and will in turn enhance the infrastructure
for research and education across these disciplines. Concerted effort will be
made to attract underrepresented groups and women to the research program and to
engage the public and pre-college K-12 students in scientific research through
the Institute for School Partnerships at Washington
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will systematically investigate
fundamental questions of controllability with respect to a broadcast signal, as
well as observability with respect to aggregated measurements of the systems in
the population and develop optimal control strategies that will enable a
targeted coordination of dynamical structures in populations. By bridging formal
systems theory, ensemble control techniques, applied algebra and geometry with
computational engineering, general and versatile frameworks for population
control will be formulated. Specifically, the control analyses and designs will
be carried through by leveraging highly non-obvious yet fundamentally intimate
links to different domains, including polynomial approximation for
controllability and mathematical tomography for observability. The exploration
of these novel connections will broaden the range of the theoretical and
computational efforts for understanding the mechanisms and collective behavior
of complex population systems and networks. Moreover, the developed theoretical
and computational methods will be applied to analyze and control dynamic
behaviors in population systems, including inducing synchronization patterns,
decoding spatial and temporal information in complex networks, and revealing
driving mechanisms of heterogeneous responses in cancer cell signaling
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.