* 1810256
* Cross-layer Adaptive Rate/Resolution Design for Energy-Aware Acquisition of Spectrally Sparse Signals Leveraging Spin-based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ronald DeMara, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 457,711.00

Cross-layer Adaptive Rate/Resolution Sampling Leveraging Spin-based Devices for
Sensing and Communication Systems&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will devise
an adaptive framework for efficient data acquisition of spectrally sparse
signals to enhance the sampling accuracy while reducing the energy consumption
demands of future sensing and communication systems that are ubiquitous and
vital to our modern and connected society. Novel adaptive sampling and
reconstruction techniques will be designed concomitantly with a spin-based
hardware approach to minimize the overall cost of data acquisition and
transmission for applicability in a wide-range of communication systems and a
large and important class of spectrally sparse signals, which arise in many
applications such as cognitive radio networks, radar, and emerging spectrum-
aware communication systems. Thus, this project will serve national interests of
advancing vital technologies of communication systems with improved energy-
efficiency and increased circuit density. Educational materials for
undergraduate and graduate course modules will be created and disseminated, as
well as an interactive website to engage and attract high school students to
studies and careers in the field, including a diverse cohort of underrepresented
and women learners. Broad dissemination through nano-device library webpages
will be used to increase the impact while supplementing the publication of
research outcomes via high-quality scholarly journals and conferences, and
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-disciplinary effort will be used to
develop a systematic approach that bridges the gap between advanced theoretical
research in signal processing/compressive sensing and innovative circuit designs
that leverage the signal processing, memory, and thresholding capabilities
inherent in emerging spin-based devices. The first research thrust focuses on
investigating the tradeoffs between Sampling Rate (SR) and Quantization
Resolution (QR) in the context of quantized compressive sensing (CS), under
power and bandwidth constraints using dynamic optimization of SR and QR in an
online manner. The energy consumption, hardware limitations, and specifics of
the underlying sampler and quantizer will be optimized. Computationally-
efficient signal reconstruction algorithms are investigated to reconstruct the
original signal back from its non-uniform (in terms of sampling rate and
quantization depth) quantized CS measurements. In the second research thrust,
the investigators will research and design an Intermittent Spin-based Adaptive
Quantizer which utilizes Voltage-Controlled Magnetic Anisotropy Magnetic Tunnel
Junction (VCMA-MTJ) devices to provide fast SR and adaptive QR in a novel
energy-efficient fashion. Expected contributions include: 1) A novel framework
for efficient and intelligent sensing through integration of resource
allocation, quantized CS, and adaptable spin-based devices will be developed; 2)
SR and QR trade-offs under resource constraints are utilized to attain an
energy-aware adaptive SR/QR optimization framework which is integrated with
VCMA-MTJ devices; 3) Novel sampling and reconstruction algorithms will be
developed in context of adaptive quantized CS; 4) VCMA-MTJ circuits will be
designed to realize faster and more energy-efficient sampling and signal
processing; 5) Spin-based lookup table and encoder circuits using new switching
strategies will be designed; 6) The energy consumption of VCMA-MTJs will be
analyzed and the derived energy equation will be utilized for SR/QR
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.