* 1810280
* Influence of Solute Incorporation Mechanisms on the Properties of Highly Mismatched Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Rachel Goldman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2024
* USD 884,999.00

Non-technical Description: Highly mismatched alloys are materials that contain
chemical elements with very different atomic sizes and different ability to
attract nearby electrons. When a few atoms with larger or smaller sizes are
added to an alloy, its electrical and optical properties often change
dramatically. The goal of this research is to examine the impact of the atoms'
local surroundings on the electronic and optical properties of alloy films and
multi-layer structures, with an eye towards engineering structures for
temperature-insensitive lasers, high-selectivity spin valves, and high
efficiency photovoltaics. The project provides training to graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, engaging them in collaborations with
investigators from several universities and laboratories throughout the world.
The new knowledge acquired is broadly disseminated through publications and
presentations, and graduate and undergraduate curriculum development. Outreach
activities emphasize the mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project is focused on
fundamental understanding of solute incorporation mechanisms and their influence
on the electronic states, transport, and optoelectronic properties of highly
mismatched alloys. The primary goal of the project is to develop a predictive
framework for the influence of substitutional N and Bi atoms, as well as N-As,
N-N, or N-Bi pairs, on the properties of both random and ordered GaAs(BiN) alloy
films and heterostructures. The GaAs(BiN) alloys are prepared on a variety of
substrates using plasma-assisted molecular-beam epitaxy, followed by post-
epitaxy rapid-thermal annealing sequences. The interplay between surface
reconstruction, surface stress and local electronic states is monitored in real-
time using in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction, multi-beam
optical stress sensing and scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy. The alloy
stoichiometry and local atomic environments are examined using atom-probe
tomography and novel channeling ion beam analyses. To determine the correlations
between solute incorporation mechanisms and electronic states, the experimental
transport and spectroscopic data is compared with both atomistic and density-
functional theory computations. In addition to determining the composition
dependence of band offsets of quaternary alloys with respect to GaAs, signatures
for nested versus staggered band offsets are examined using scanning tunneling
spectroscopy and time-resolved photoluminescence. The project at the University
of Michigan involves collaborations with scientists at national laboratories and
international universities, providing broad range of opportunities for the
participating students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.