* 1810720
* Understanding the Hardening Mechanisms Associated with Short-Range Atom Clusters in High Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Ting Zhu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2023
* USD 331,802.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on mechanical behaviors of metallic materials. Metals and
alloys are the workhorse materials for the manufacturing industry and structural
applications. This is mainly because they have a good balance of strength, a
metal's resistance to deformation and failure, and ductility, a metal's ability
to undergo irreversible deformation before rupture. Usually there is a strength-
ductility tradeoff, a gain in strength in a material is inevitably accompanied
by a sacrifice in ductility. High entropy alloys are a new class of materials
that contain nearly equal numbers of atoms of five or more different elements.
Their unconventional concentrated multiple element compositions hold promise for
achieving an exceptional combination of strength and ductility. However, the
fundamental mechanisms that control the strength and ductility in high entropy
alloys down to the atomic scale remain largely unexplored. This project focuses
on investigation of the microscopic deformation mechanisms in high entropy
alloys. Effects of the composition fluctuations on deformation processes
mediated by defects in the periodic arrangement of atoms in the alloy will be
studied by computer simulations on the scale of atoms; the results will be
further compared with experiments. The physical insights gained will be
important for guiding the future development of new high entropy alloys with a
superior strength-ductility combination. The project will foster collaborations
between theory and experiment. Educational activities will offer opportunities
to introduce students to computer modeling techniques for simulating materials
and to inspire students to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to advance the
fundamental understanding of deformation mechanisms in high entropy alloys.
Strength and ductility are among the most important mechanical properties of
metals and alloys for engineering applications. High entropy alloys contain high
concentrations of five or more different elements in near equiatomic
proportions. The mechanisms controlling the strength and ductility of high
entropy alloys remain poorly understood. This project is focused on
understanding the mechanistic role of short-range clusters in the strain
hardening and tensile ductility of face-centered cubic high entropy alloys.
Multi-component interatomic potentials will be used to perform molecular
dynamics and atomistic reaction pathway simulations for studying the dislocation
pinning and cross-slip processes mediated by short-range clusters. Effects of
stress, temperature, cluster size and density will be investigated. The modeling
results will be compared with experimental characterizations of dislocation
mechanisms and deformation microstructures. The insights gained are important
for harnessing the short-range clusters to achieve a superior strength-ductility
combination in high entropy alloys. The project will introduce advanced modeling
techniques to students. The research results will be incorporated into a high-
school course module as well as a graduate course on micromechanics.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the research. These educational
activities are aimed to inspire students to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.