* 1810453
* Development of tunnel field effect optoelectronic devices based on stacked 2D crystals with clean interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ming Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 373,944.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Optical communication is based on converting electrical
signals into optical signals by optoelectronic devices such as lasers and
photodiodes. Devices based on conventional semiconductors such as silicon are
reaching the ultimate limits for performance. New materials and structures are
required to advance the state of the art. The discovery of graphene, a two-
dimensional (2D) layer of carbon, shows how new electronic properties emerge
when a bulk material is thinned down to a single layer. Other 2D materials
include boron nitride, black phosphorous, and transition metal dichalcogenides.
Different 2D materials can be assembled one layer at a time into vertically
stacked thin films. Such heterostructures can achieve functions and performance
not possible with a single material. The interface between different 2D
materials is critical to maintaining the unique properties that make them
attractive for device applications. The principal investigator will use a newly
developed clean-transfer method to prepare 2D heterostructure materials with
clean interfaces. A custom-built scanning probe microscope with nanometer-scale
light sources at the tip will be used to study the optical and electronic
properties of devices with unprecedented resolution. Results from this project
will enrich the understanding of these materials and accelerate the development
of nanoscale optoelectronics. This interdisciplinary project will integrate
research into education of graduate and undergraduate students in material
science, engineering, and nanomanufacturing. This project will also seek to
broaden participation in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
combine novel 2D-heterostructure material preparation techniques, near-field
scanning optics microscopy and near-field scanning photocurrent microscopy to
investigate the fundamental optoelectronic properties and photocarrier behaviors
in van der Waals material-based heterostructures. The photocurrent imaging with
high spatial resolution, below 10nm, can reveal rich physics in nanoscale
features. These include local pn-junctions, domain boundaries, edges, dopants,
and strains. Imaging such features can significantly improve the understanding
and enhance the control of the electronic and photonic properties of this new
material system. The objectives of this project are to: (1) demonstrate a
prototype tapping-mode near-field scanning photocurrent microscopy to
investigate heterostructure devices, (2) improve the spatial resolution of
scanning photocurrent imaging technique to sub-10nm level, and (3) study the
photoresponsivity of vertically-stacked heterostructures based on graphene,
boron nitrides, transmission metal dichalcogenides such as WSe2, MoS2, and
MoSe2, and (4) develop fundamental understanding of the roles of nanoscale
features, such as edge terminations and interlayer defect formation on the
optoelectronic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.