* 1810514
* Understanding How Reaction Kinetics and Morphology Affect Photomechanical Molecular Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2025
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 645,088.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Solid-State and
Materials Chemistry Program of the Division of Materials Research, Professor
Christopher Bardeen of the University of California, Riverside is using a
combination of novel chemical methods and characterization techniques to take
organic crystals closer to practical applications. Organic crystals composed of
light-sensitive molecules can undergo a variety of light-induced shape changes
such as bending, twisting, and coiling. These materials could have application
across a broad range of fields spanning from engineering to medicine to cell
biology, by making it possible to create microdevices powered by light. One
example of such a device would be a light-powered swimmer for microsurgery or
drug delivery. The application of these photomechanical materials is hampered by
a limited understanding of how they work and how their performance can be
optimized. The PI will address these challenges by controlling important
parameters like molecular structure and crystal shape, while designing new
optical experiments to examine how the light-induced changes occur inside the
crystals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The creation of
stable photoreactive molecules is a prerequisite for better performing
materials. One phase of the research concentrates on making new molecules to
make crystalline structures that can survive exposure to air and solvents. For
example, the use of fluorine substitution will raise the molecular oxidation
potential and may also enhance crystal plasticity. Molecular crystals can also
exhibit nonlinear spatio-temporal reaction kinetics that can lead to
autocatalysis, enhanced mechanical response, and oscillatory motion under
steady-state illumination. Oscillatory motion can potentially be harnessed to
provide locomotion for micro-swimmers. Along with new theoretical approaches, a
novel standing-wave fluorescence experiment will be developed to directly probe
the nonlinear reaction kinetics in single crystals. Finally, both bottom-up
solution growth and top-down laser cutting will be used to create crystals with
well-defined orientations and shapes. By controlling both crystal shape and the
orientation of the strain tensor with respect to that shape, a detailed
investigation into how both variables determine the crystal's response to light
will become possible. The broader impacts of this work include potential
societal impacts resulting from new materials that transform photons into
mechanical motion and enable new devices. Participating graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training in spectroscopy, materials
characterization, and data analysis that will enable them to contribute in
economically important areas like photonics. The PI will also continue ongoing
outreach efforts at Taft Elementary School that impact hundreds of
underrepresented minority students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.