* 1810305
* Pursuit of Quantum Spin Liquids in Exfoliated Anti-Ferromagnetic Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Erik Henriksen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 406,431.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Conducting materials display a host of fascinating
properties, but remarkable behavior can persist even when conduction ceases. For
example, electrons can behave roughly like small bar magnets, and one may
roughly imagine the material as composed of arrays of magnets, fixed in place
but each rotating in response to all the others. Usually this results in
alignement of the magnets with their neighbors. In extremely rare cases, quantum
mechanics inhibits the alignment of these electron magnets so their motion
remains fluid; such a "quantum spin liquid" is one of the most highly sought
after phenomena in modern condensed matter research and may hold the key to
understanding potentially groundbreaking technologies like room temperature
superconductivity. Recently, a quantum spin liquid has been proposed in a bulk
material made of layered sheets of ruthenium chloride where the ruthenium atoms
- each surrounded by many chlorines - support the magnetic behavior. Here,
isolated individual flakes of this layered material (down to only one layer
thick) are used to study the quantum spin liquid using techniques from the field
of 2D physics. To build intuition for the physics of magnetism, a table-top
system of freely rotating bar magnets is used as a demonstration in introductory
physics courses. Finally, this work supports outreach programs to African-
American middle and high school aged girls in the St. Louis area through a
collaboration between the principal investigator and faculty in the Brown School
of Social Work.

Technical Abstract: Quantum spin liquids, as an ensemble of spins frustrated
from achieving an ordered state, with dynamics dominated by quantum
fluctuations, are an intriguing and highly sought after phase of magnetic
quantum matter. The two-dimensional Kitaev quantum spin liquid (QSL) has
recently been observed in the layered antiferromagnet RuCl3. This work focuses
on exfoliation of RuCl3 flakes to few and single-layer systems seeking to
stabilize the QSL by removing interlayer interactions. Several important
milestones along the way will lead to new methods of investigating quantum
magnetism, focusing in particular on antiferromagnetic proximity effects in
layered devices. In particular the usual techniques to explore magnetism are
extremely difficult to apply to microscopic samples, so a new set of probes is
under development in which flakes of RuCl3, along with other antiferromagnetic
materials of interest, are placed on graphene, with the goal of inducing a
proximity effect in graphene. The electronic properties of graphene are impacted
by the presence of antiferromagnetic exchange and readily explored via
electronic transport (quantum Hall effects and non-local transport), optical
(infrared magnetospectroscopy), and thermodynamic probes (electronic
compressibility and magnetization). An electronic method of measuring
magnetization in microscopic flakes is employed, opening a new window on
thermodynamic physics of microscopic systems. The link between structure and
magnetism is explored through studying a variety of heterostructure devices
where the type, thickness, and stacking order of the layers is varied to control
interlayer magnetic couplings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.