* 1810067
* Nanoplasmonics-Enhanced CMOS Fluorescence Sensors for Lens-Free Multiplexed Biomolecular Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Li-Jing Cheng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 382,992.00

Early and accurate disease diagnosis plays a decisive role in effective clinical
treatment, especially at the point of care when an immediate treatment decision
most needs to be made. The canonical biomarker test format for point-of-care
(POC) applications is the lateral flow assay based on paper test strips which is
cheap, disposable, easy to use and requires no additional hardware. However, the
advantages are obtained at the expense of low sensitivity and limited
quantitative measurement results. Gold standards for genetic detection and
immunoassays utilize fluorescence-based detection, which offers low detection
limit, high reliability, and capability of multiplexed analysis. While highly-
accurate, fluorescence detection typically requires multiple optical components,
making instrumentation bulky and costly for POC tests. The goal of this project
is to develop a new POC testing platform that combines the benefits of high-
sensitivity and quantitative analysis of fluorescence-based assays, and the
simplicity, portability, and cost-effectiveness of lateral flow tests. The
platform utilizes optical metamaterials-integrated photodiode array circuits to
convert the enhanced fluorescence sensing signals into amplified electrical
readouts to achieve sensitive detection without optical components. The lens-
free design promises device miniaturization and facilitates the on-chip
integration of microfluidic devices for lateral flow tests. The project fosters
the development of a diverse science and engineering workforce with a deep
understanding of optics at nanoscales, biosensing technology, and circuit
integration. The result of the project will lead to a scalable solution that
enables a sensitive, self-contained, quantitative lateral flow assay. This
leverages the power and economies of scale of modern silicon integrated
circuits, built up over the previous fifty years for high-performance
computation and imaging, for a low-cost, bioelectronic sensing
application.&lt;br/&gt;The key to the success of the proposed approach is to
generate enhanced fluorescence and directional light emission by managing the
coupling between the fluorescent reporters (fluorophores or quantum dots) on
biological probes and the resonance of an optical metamaterial (Aim1). The
optical metamaterials composed of metal and dielectric nanostructures exploit
surface plasmons to control light. The composition of the metamaterial will be
engineered to regulate the spontaneous emission rate of proximate fluorescent
reporters and thus boost their emission intensity. Also, the structure of the
metamaterial is designed to narrow the radiation pattern of light emission that
allows guiding the light toward the photodetector for efficient optical
detection. The project explores novel nanofabrication methods based on
nanoparticle assembly and thin-film depositions to create large-area
nanostructures for the optical metamaterials without sophisticated lithography.
Monolithic integration of the metamaterial structures onto photodetector array
integrated circuit (IC) substrate allows for detection of metamaterial enhanced
fluorescence without optical lenses (Aim 2). A custom CMOS photodetector array
IC also provides on-chip signal processing and digitization of all sensors in
parallel with a simple, digital readout. A multiplexed sensor will be achieved
through addressable functionalization of probe arrays on the integrated sensor
substrate. Packaging of the sensor IC with microfluidic delivery using a
coplanar wafer-level molding technique will result in a sensitive, miniaturized
fluorescence detection platform for POC testing (Aim 3). The proposed work will
elucidate the fundamentals of light-matter interactions at nanoscales, create
new biosensing technologies, and design guidelines for integration of optical
nanostructures, microfluidics, and CMOS ICs for a broad set of future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.