* 1810913
* Submanifolds and Foliations in Riemannian Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Marco Radeschi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 154,750.00

Differential geometry is the study of the geometry of spaces. Sometimes these
spaces exist as physical objects such as the surface of planet or a cell, or the
universe itself; sometimes they appear as abstract spaces in applied situations,
such as the set of all possible states of a physical system, the set of possible
configurations of a machine, or the set of strategies of a group of players in
the stock market. In these situations, it is often important to find and study
the properties of objects inside these spaces that are optimal in some sense:
for example, the shortest way to move between two configurations, or the surface
that minimizes area or surface tension. Sometimes these geometric sub-objects
come in families (e.g., foliations that slice the space into thin pieces), and
it is important to study not just each of these pieces by itself, but the whole
family as a unique entity. This project will study several instances of these
important and very natural objects, and draw new bridges between these geometric
concepts and other more abstract areas of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of the project is to study certain structures of Riemannian manifolds
such as singular Riemannian foliations and closed minimal submanifolds, and
relate them to the geometry and topology of the ambient space. In the study of
singular Riemannian foliations, the main focus will be on laying new theoretical
ground (e.g., continuing the development of an invariant theory in this context)
and applying these concepts in different areas, such as producing new manifolds
with positive and non-negative curvature, or exhibiting new immersed minimal
hypersurfaces in round spheres and projective spaces. In the study of closed
minimal submanifolds, the main focus will be on the index of such objects,
especially in the two extreme cases of closed geodesics and minimal
hypersurfaces. The PI will continue working on a conjecture of Berger on
manifolds with all geodesics closed, and on a conjecture of Marques-Neves-Schoen
on minimal hypersurfaces in manifolds with positive Ricci curvature. In the
first case, the plan is to improve the understanding of the equivariant Morse
theory on the free loop space of spaces with all geodesics closed. In the second
case, the PI will continue to develop tools such as virtual immersions, recently
developed by the PI, which could have independent
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.