* 1810925
* Study on Order-of-Addition Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Dennis Lin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

In many experiments, a number of reactants are added into the system
sequentially rather than simultaneously. The formation, e.g., the
amount/size/purity of the reaction products often depend on the order-of-
addition (OofA) of different reactants. The OofA experiment can be traced back
to Fisher (1937), where a lady was able to distinguish (by tasting) from whether
the tea or the milk was first added to the cup. This is probably the first
popular OofA experiment. In general, there are m required components and one
hopes to determine the optimal sequence for adding these m components one after
another. Knowing the optimal addition order of components related in production
is crucial. Note that there are m! possible orders to be compared-for the tea-
tasting example, there are m!=2!=2 possible orders. However, it is often
unaffordable to test all the m! treatments, and the design problem arises (for
example, when m = 10, m! is about 3.6 millions). Although it is somewhat
primitive in Statistics, the OofA effect is frequently mentioned in many areas
during the past decades. This includes bio-chemistry (Shinohara and Ogawa 1998),
food science (Jourdain et al. 2009), nutritional science (Karim et al. 2000),
and pharmaceutical science (Rajaonarivony et al. 1993), just to name a few. As
the order-of-addition effect occurs in all kinds of real experiments as well as
computer experiments, successful outcomes of this project can be directly used
in many different areas, such as chemistry and biology. Furthermore, the
proposed problems provide a golden opportunity for fundamental academic studies
in other subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI plans to
establish the fundamental theory of evaluating OofA designs. The PI also plans
to construct classes of OofA designs, under different requirements of design
efficiency and experimental budget. From the mathematical point of view, the
OofA design is to select a subset of the symmetric group formed by all the m!
permutations, and some research topics in group theories or combinatorics may
arise thereby. For example, if a pairwise-order (PWO) model is assumed, there
are m(m-1)/2 parameters to be estimated, and thus only m(m-1)/2+1 runs are
needed (instead of m! runs). More advanced models are proposed and will be
investigated as well. A fruitful application of computer science is anticipated,
because the computational complexity for finding efficient OofA designs
tremendously increases as m becomes large. The proposed approach on OofA
experiment, although known in many fields, is a novel and new study in
Statistics - it is very different in fundamental work for most prior research in
this area, with high potential practical values. Many case studies and
applications provide an early indication of the potential success of the
proposed study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.