* 1810119
* Design and growth of high entropy oxides with tailored ionic dynamics for memory and computing applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Jamie Phillips, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 425,000.00

Nontechnical Description: New materials that offer tailored electronic as well
as ionic characteristics can fundamentally impact how electronic devices and
circuits are designed and built. This project brings together both
experimentalists and theorists to explore a new class of oxide material that
offers well-controlled coupled electronic/ionic effects for the development of
new memory and logic devices. Through fundamental theory analysis and
experimental innovations, materials that do not exist naturally can be
systematically designed, synthesized and utilized. The techniques developed in
this project offer new toolboxes for fundamental materials design and research,
and enable new device applications. This project provides comprehensive
educational and training opportunities for graduate students and undergraduates.
The team plans to incorporate knowledge and techniques developed during research
into core technical courses in materials science and electrical engineering
disciplines, and disseminate research results to the general public through
publications, summer camps, class visits and online exhibits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Previous studies on resistive
switching memory devices are limited by oxide materials that are currently
available. In this project, the team proposes to significantly broaden the
parameter space of candidate materials that can lead to new material
compositions and optimized device performance, by taking advantage of the
concept that entropy can be used to stabilize new oxide phases. The
multidiscipline team offers complementary expertise in theory, materials
science, film growth and device engineering and aims to perform systematic study
on high-entropy oxides and their applications in emerging electronic devices.
The theoretical studies, including design of the high-entropy oxides with
desired composition and stoichiometry, prediction of the kinetic (ionic hopping
energy barrier and hopping distance) and thermodynamic (oxygen vacancy charge
state) parameters, and transport and device-level modeling, provides guidance
for the tightly integrated experimental studies including systematic materials
synthesis, characterizations and device demonstrations and measurements to
extract the relevant material parameters and verify the device performance. The
synergistic co-development of these tasks not only enhances the likelihood of
success of the proposed project, but also builds the foundation for other tasks
where new, engineered materials can be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.