* 1810457
* Infants' Emerging Functional Specialization in Bilingual Language Acquisition and Attentional Processes
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Janet Werker, Arredondo               Maria          M
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Richard N.
Aslin at Haskins Laboratories and Dr. Janet F. Werker at University of British
Columbia, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist,
investigating how early bilingual experiences shape the mind and brain during
infancy. Recent years have featured a sudden increase in global migration and
growth of multilingual communities. Language acquisition is the greatest
predictor of success in school and later life. The research proposed here aims
to examine how early bilingual experiences impact language outcomes, early
cognition and brain development. The findings (1) will advance our understanding
of how being raised bilingual prepares an infant for later learning, (2) could
ultimately inform educational practices for young learners as well as policy
practices that revolve around language resources and needs, and (3) aid in the
design of effective educational pedagogies for linguistically diverse
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive and neural development arises partly
from everyday learning experiences, including language acquisition. Infants
acquire language effortlessly, yet bilingual babies must learn twice as many
words. To successfully acquire their languages, bilingual babies must
differentiate each language, track its features, and keep these representations
separate. However, the doubling of linguistic contexts may impose an increased
demand on attentional mechanisms that support bilinguals' management of their
languages. Thus, some suggest that a bilingual environment should heighten and
improve attentional control mechanisms (i.e., the ability to focus selectively
and cast out unnecessary information). One way to examine how early bilingual
experiences impact cognition is by establishing the developmental nature of
these changes, while infants are beginning to distinguish their languages and
whether this experience alters the plasticity of brain networks and consequently
behavior. The present project examines whether managing two languages during
infancy alters attentional mechanisms, and supports language outcomes. It is
hypothesized that as bilingual infants gain proficiency at distinguishing their
languages, their brain responses and behavior for attentional control will also
show different developmental patterns than monolingual infants. Ninety infants
will participate in a session at 6- and 9-months. Infants will include 30
monolingual English learning, 30 bilingual English-Chinese learning, and 30
bilingual English-other language learning. Parents will complete questionnaires
on their child's language experiences, vocabulary knowledge, and a behavioral
report on attentional control; these forms will also be mailed to parents when
children are 12-, 18- and 24-months old. The study will use functional Near-
Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) to measure brain activity, and eye-tracking
technology to measure infants' performance. Infants will sit on their parents'
lap while completing a visuo-spatial attentional control task and a language-
discrimination task. The study's methodology is innovative, as it incorporates
neuroimaging and eye-tracking techniques simultaneously, as part of a
longitudinal brain-behavior approach with young infants. Thus, it will introduce
innovative methods linking neuroimaging and behavioral data to better
characterize infant capabilities. More broadly, this work will inform
developmental theories on how early life experiences, such as bilingualism,
impact early cognition and brain plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.