* 1810995
* LSAMP BTD: Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate Cohort XIII (2018-2020) Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Karen Butler-Purry, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives,
American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to
increase the quantity and quality of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion.
BD programs implemented in the nation's institutions of higher education
contribute to addressing one of the objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic
Plan, namely, to foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research
workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation. The
vision of this grant is to provide a national model to produce underrepresented
scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station will be
the host site for the 2018-2020 Texas A&amp;M University System Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (TAMUS LSAMP) Bridge to the Doctorate
Program. Twelve first-time graduate students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM will be selected as BD Fellows. The Fellows will be
nurtured for two years as a cohort community benefiting from a program of
academic and personal development activities and social support, to sustain
their commitment and success to their degree programs and advancement toward
doctoral programs by the end of their second year. The BD students, with
differing STEM disciplines and a common purpose, will share coordinated
resources and intellectually enriching group activities with each other, and
with the larger population of STEM, minority and other graduate students at
Texas A&amp;M, to the benefit of all. The TAMUS LSAMP BD project at Texas
A&amp;M will enhance the infrastructure of research and education by advancing
pursuit of graduate and doctoral STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.