* 1810197
* Accounting for Climb and Cross-slip in the Crystal Plasticity of Non-Cubic Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sean Agnew, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 412,568.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Metal alloys with atypical crystal structures (atomic
arrangements) exhibit key properties that enable them to be employed in a wide
range of advanced technologies that contribute to environmental protection
(lead-free tin-based solders); energy conservation through transportation weight
reduction (magnesium (Mg) and titanium alloys); and energy production via
nuclear technology (zirconium alloys). The current research focuses on
lightweight Mg metal deformation, which is of interest to the automotive,
aerospace, and defense industries. The research (including both experimental
activities and computational modeling) provides insights into improved design
and manufacture for these applications. Students involved in this research find
employment within the materials, automotive or aerospace manufacturing sectors,
and some go on to research careers which serve the nation's interests in energy,
defense, or education. An outreach program seeks to develop enthusiasm for
materials science, and science and engineering more generally in local
elementary school students in Charlottesville and the surrounding rural area.
Within this program, the role of strong, yet light-weight materials is
demonstrated in efficient transportation - from the Wright brothers' first
flight to modern vehicles, like Tesla electric cars and drones.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of the proposed research
is to determine the degree to which dislocation climb and cross-slip accommodate
strain during the polycrystal plasticity of non-cubic metals. Lightweight Mg and
its alloys are selected for this study because of the world-wide interest in
increasing the efficiency of transportation as well as the scientific
convenience that the near-thermo-elastic isotropy of Mg crystals simplifies the
analysis of plastic anisotropy. Textured samples of pure Mg and commercial
alloys will be tested under creep and stress-relaxation conditions along
different directions with respect to the initial texture. While there is already
published data for these materials, a controversy regarding the roles of cross-
slip and climb remains. Quantitative accounting for the effect of initial
texture, various dislocation types (with a, c, and c+a Burgers vectors), as well
as the evolution of the dislocation substructure (largely unstudied in non-cubic
materials) will settle the issue. The approach is multi-scale, addressing the
macroscale, mesoscale and microscale. MACROSCALE creep and stress relaxation
experiments are performed on textured polycrystalline samples, and texture
evolution and strain anisotropy are measured on samples crept to significant
strain levels. The results of macroscale experiments guide selection of specific
stress and temperature conditions to explore with meso- and micro-scale
characterization. A new technique known as in situ high energy X-ray diffraction
(HEXD) reveals the MESOSCALE distribution of full stress tensors and dislocation
contents (including the densities of different types, Burgers vector and line
direction) within individual grains of a polycrystal. Information that was
previously relegated to single crystal experiments or very small numbers of
grains in a polycrystal has only recently become available for statistically
significant numbers (hundreds) of grains within polycrystals, and a new
polycrystal plasticity model, which accounts for dislocation climb, is used to
interpret the HEXD data. Finally, X-ray diffraction line profile analysis and
transmission electron microscopy (including in situ straining) experiments
elucidate the MICROSCALE dislocation densities, reveal critical dislocation
configurations and their kinetic descriptions in terms of specific thermally
activated unit processes. The interpretation of the results is aided by discrete
dislocation dynamics (DDD) simulation, used to explore the effects of these
dislocation ensembles and how they recover. Graduate students are trained in
advanced experimental characterization and modeling techniques. With guidance,
undergraduate students also perform some of the experiments and analyses,
especially at the macroscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.