* 1810476
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Role of Extending, Expanding, and Emergent Groups in Relief Distribution Efforts in the Aftermath of Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Johanna Amaya Leal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Responding to large disasters and catastrophes is an extremely difficult
endeavor. This challenge is a direct consequence of the devastating effects that
disasters can produce on societies. These effects impact all facets of the
socio-technical processes at the core of modern life. Disaster mitigation,
preparedness, and response plans must be improved to minimize vulnerabilities,
and to ensure that what is known can be leveraged to improve the effectiveness
of future efforts. Disaster logistics should be a whole-society effort, where
the civic and public sectors participate to minimize the negative impacts of
disasters. Disaster researchers have already established that the civic society
plays a major role in all aspects of the response to extreme events, from search
and rescue and relief distribution, to rebuilding efforts. They are often
credited with being the first respondents due to their proximity to the impacted
area. These groups are a very heterogeneous collection of formal and informal
organizations with different structures and levels of expertise in disaster
response. Previous field work has also shown that the civic society can provide
effective response to their communities by means of leveraging their connections
to access logistical resources and efficiently respond to the disaster.
Frequently, these groups delivered relief supplies faster, and more effectively,
than any of the large relief organizations. On the other hand, the activities of
some groups can prove troublesome, such as the gathering of donations of non-
priority supplies. The reality is that the majority of the donations that arrive
at a disaster site are non-priority goods that severely complicate disaster
response efforts. The main goal of this project is to identify lessons, both
positive and negative, that the disaster community should learn from the
experiences of the civic society during the responses to Hurricanes Harvey,
Irma, and Maria. Identifying these lessons will help future disaster responders
to conduct more effective operations, and reduce the impacts of disasters on
local communities, the economy, and the environment. This project studies the
socio-technical factors that hamper the integration of Non-Established Relief
Groups (NERGs) efforts and that of relief efforts that come from the outside to
help. In addition, the research provides crucial knowledge about the role that
NERGs play in the humanitarian logistics, and about how best to structure the
interactions among the established groups, the official response and the NERGs,
for maximum effectiveness. The data collected about the difficulties of relief
groups to deliver supplies will help identify mechanisms to prevent these
problems from happening in future disasters. The research documents the logistic
structures that emerge in support of relief/early recovery efforts after a major
extreme event and enable future model development based on these different
relief approaches. The findings enhance theoretical understandings of
organizations participating in these extreme event environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on both formal and informal
mechanisms through which NERGs identify, gather, deliver, and distribute relief
items. Data collection includes short and informal as well as in-depth
interviews with individuals involved in the logistics efforts, at all levels of
action (e.g., international, national, re-gional, local, and community levels),
from NERGs, and at all levels of power. In order to gain better understandings
about the motivations behind physical donations, the team creates a directory of
donation drives taking place across the US to support the relief efforts. The
goal is to conduct longitudinal tracking of their operations, and perform in-
depth studies of how these efforts are created, their evolution, and their
decision-making patterns. This effort serves as the basis for more in-depth
behavioral research. The researchers promote multidisciplinary collaboration,
engages undergraduate and graduate students,and disseminate and integrate
research findings into disaster courses. Improving humanitarian logistics
operations can reduce human suffering and loss of life in
disasters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.