* 1810463
* Diffusion of Guests, Dopants, and Impurity Atoms Through Open Cage Allotropes of Si and Related Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Reuben Collins, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 425,466.00

Non-technical Description: There is a great need for development of next
generation materials, derived from earth abundant elements, that would
revolutionize the electronics industry for future generations of devices
including computer chips, lasers, and detectors. Silicon is the second most
abundant element on the Earth's crust and the most technologically significant.
Many exotic forms of silicon, which exhibit caged or tunnel crystalline
structures, hold the promise of high efficiency and low cost disruptive
electronic and photonic properties that would push silicon to a new level. These
exotic silicon structures, however, tend to form around ionic guest atoms. Their
potential can be only realized with complete ionic guest removal. This research
project addresses this vital requirement by elucidating the fundamental
diffusion and mobility pathways for guest ions in silicon caged/tunnel
structures and unraveling the complexities of the mechanistic pathways to guest
diffusion. The research will create a fundamental understanding of ionic motion
in open silicon structures that has not been achieved to-date. Closely
integrated with the research are strong education and outreach programs to
provide significant training and mentoring opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate and underrepresented groups in materials science, including summer
workshops and internship programs for undergraduate and high school students,
and community outreach. The team also collaborates with the Rocky Mountain Camp
for Dyslexic Kids to provide summer camps developed for students with dyslexia
who have interest in and aptitude for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Many exotic
forms of earth abundant silicon are theoretically predicted to have properties,
such as a direct bandgap, that would revolutionize electronics and photonics
industries. This potential has not been realized and the key limitation is the
critical requirement of complete removal of the guest atoms around which these
open crystal structures form. The ultimate goal of this project is to elucidate
the ionic and atomic diffusional pathways and mobility of alkali and alkaline
earth ions, inert guest atoms, and dopants in silicon caged and tunnel
structures. Although there have been a number of exotic forms of silicon
investigated via theory, simulation, and small-scale synthesis, a fundamental
knowledge of the guest diffusion/mobility mechanisms is severely lacking. The
major barrier that prohibits guest diffusion/mobility studies is the inability
to produce sufficient quantities of phase pure material in thin-film, powder and
bulk form. This barrier can be overcome by synthesis approach undertaken by the
research team, allowing the research to explore: which guest diffusion pathways
are preferable, i.e., via small or large cages, five-fold or six-fold rings of
cages; the role of non-idealities, like vacancies, or impurities, and how
partial occupancy and ion-ion interaction create unusual diffusion/solubility
kinetics; the effect of charged versus neutral species and electron donation on
diffusion. The research efforts include: synthesis and development of thin films
and powders (on the grams-scale) of phase pure silicon allotropes with well-
defined diffusive properties; investigation of macroscopic diffusion through the
crystalline lattice of thin films of silicon allotropes; exploring the guest
location/environment and dynamics, the defect impurities, and intrinsic defects
in both films and powders. Key techniques include: time-of-flight secondary ion
mass spectroscopy, electron spin resonance, and solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.