* 1810282
* PIC: Hybrid Silicon Electronic-Photonic Integrated Neuromorphic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stefan Preble, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 523,053.00

Neuromorphic computing is a sub-field of artificial intelligence that implements
physical architectures inspired by the learning processes in the brain. There
have been significant efforts to realize neural network architectures using
electronic integrated circuit technology. However, electronic-only hardware is
not suitable for high bandwidth applications critical to a modern information
world. In contrast, the internet is powered by photonic technologies (lasers,
electro-optic modulator and photodetectors) because of light's high bandwidth,
speed and low energy consumption. Consequently, this project aims to realize
high performance neural networks that utilize light. These photonic neural
networks will be integrated on a photonic chip in order to realize scalable and
efficient architectures. However, in order to build neural networks that
transcend today's state-of-art, it is necessary to also leverage electronics due
to the challenges surrounding photonic memory and amplification, both of which
are key to realizing a general purpose neural network. This hybrid approach,
where electronics and photonics would be integrated together, enables the
investigation of the broadest class of problems. In addition to these research
aims, this project is an interdisciplinary activity that will provide technical
training for future science and engineering professionals. There will be
outreach activities that bring the research to K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students. Students from underrepresented backgrounds will be actively engaged by
providing lab visits with hands-on activities. Lastly, the education initiatives
of AIM Photonics Academy will be leveraged to disseminate the research in the
project. Overall this project will impact the broader community with
applications in autonomous systems, vision systems, information networks,
cybersecurity, robotics and other high bandwidth
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address two
fundamental questions, i) How can photonics maximize functionality in the
compute domains?, ii) What neuromorphic algorithms can solve a broad class of
problems using photonics?&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
demonstrate hybrid silicon electronic-photonic integrated neuromorphic networks.
The proposed paradigm leverages the power of optical interference to realize
high performance neuromorphic computing networks. Photonic implementations of
neural networks offer the inherent advantage that light can easily perform
computational tasks that are traditionally challenging to do in electronic-only
implementations (e.g. a Fourier transform can be done optically by simply
passing light through a lens). The underlying integrated photonic-electronic
network proposed here utilizes a Multimode interference coupler as a neural core
(Neuro-MMI) in order to realize interference between multiple inputs and outputs
in a compact footprint. The principal investigators propose to realize
reconfigurability of the weights in the neural network wrapped around the MMI
core. The Neuro-MMI core will be integrated with optoelectronic nonlinear
thresholding circuits (along with electronic memory) to realize different
classes of neural networks (feed forward neural networks and recurrent neural
networks). Active Neuro-MMI's will be studied to realize on-chip learning and
new learning rules will be investigated that are inherent for these topologies.
Furthermore, the use of wavelength division multiplexing will be explored to
achieve dense connectivity and parallelism in order to maximize the performance
of the networks. One unique feature of the proposed hybrid photonic-electronic
network is the reconfigurability to switch between feed forward and recurrent
neural networks on a single chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.