* 1810992
* Montana Models: Connecting Local and Disciplinary Practices through University-Community Partnerships
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* David Thomas, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,039,137.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The three-year project, Montana Models: Connecting Local and Disciplinary
Practices through University-Community Partnerships, focuses on creating,
implementing, and studying several learning outcomes associated with youth
engagement in mathematical modeling contexts. The project builds on existing
partnerships between the state's two research universities and Montana 4-H to
target outreach to rural youth and bring them into a network of people who can
inspire, support, and sustain STEM learning. Middle school and high school
students from rural communities will be invited to a university campus for a
residential modeling-based summer program l focused on mathematics and
mathematical modeling. Activities at the summer program are designed to engage
them in problems relevant to their own backgrounds and experiences and to honor
their local funds of knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
Montana Models is to use mathematical modeling as a mechanism for bringing
everyday mathematical practices already present in rural communities into
contact with disciplinary practices. The project focuses on the following
research questions: (1) What are the everyday mathematical practices in Montana
communities? (2) How can everyday mathematical practices be leveraged and
brought into contact with disciplinary practices in service of mathematizing
meaningful questions within the community? (3) How do youth identify and get
identified with respect to mathematics and with respect to their role in the
world? (4) How does participation in project activities affect participants'
knowledge of mathematical practices and content? The project uses social design
experimentation, a hybrid research methodology which combines the traditions of
design-based research with forms of inquiry that involve collaboration among
participants, researchers, and other stakeholders, such as critical ethnography.
Data sources include field notes from ethnographic observations, interviews,
videos of students engaging in modeling activities, artifacts that show their
mathematical work, and results from the Attitudes Towards Mathematics Inventory.
Through its collaboration with 4-H, Montana Models targets outreach to rural
youth across the state, especially those from groups that are typically
underrepresented in STEM fields. The project is poised to impact ways in which
formal and informal educators understand the knowledge bases that are already
present in rural communities and how those bases may inform, support, and
sustain STEM learning. Findings and deliverables will be disseminated through a
public-facing website and through the 4-H infrastructure. This infrastructure
includes Montana 4-H's Clover Communication Contest that will allow
participating youth to showcase their projects. Research findings will be shared
through local and national conferences and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.