* 1810584
* Probing the Fossils of the Local Group using Petascale Adaptive Mesh Galaxy Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 13,950.00

The goal of this project is to unlock fundamental breakthroughs in galaxy
formation with large-scale numerical simulations on the Blue Waters
supercomputer. These simulations will resolve the smallest building blocks of
galaxies and their star formation histories, allowing for direct measurements of
the consequences of the numerical calculations. The complexity of the included
physics will lead to the creation of rich data sets that address many key issues
relating to star formation histories, chemical evolution, early galaxy assembly,
and the observable properties of galaxies. Furthermore, the simulation data
produced during the course of this project, as well as a wide range of other
data products, will be made publicly available for use by the broader
astrophysical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will answer several
pressing, observational motivated questions about low-mass and metal-poor
galaxies by using the Blue Waters supercomputer to perform a suite of
sophisticated, high dynamic range adaptive mesh simulations of cosmological
structure formation. These simulations will probe the early history of the Local
Group of galaxies in great detail, and will directly connect the largest of
these early galaxies to their relics, which can be found among the present-day
Local Group dwarf galaxies. The project will address four specific questions
about galaxy formation: 1. What are the key physical mechanisms that control
galaxy formation at the earliest epochs, and how do they differ from the ones in
larger galaxies forming at later times? 2. If the seeds of supermassive black
holes form from the first generation of stars, how do they grow over the first
billion years of cosmic evolution? 3. What are the physical characteristics of
the remnants of early galaxy formation in the Local Group, and what information
about their formation is retained by the stellar populations of those galaxies?
4. What are the unique observational signatures of the earliest galaxies, both
at high redshift and the present day? The team contains experts in galaxy
formation and high performance computing, as well as the use of a sophisticated
numerical tool, specifically the Enzo code. The Enzo code that has been
demonstrated to scale and perform well on the Blue Waters supercomputer. The
project will apply the simulations to the interpretation of measurements of both
local and distant galaxies from current astronomical surveys, and to motivate
future observational campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.