* 1810855
* Predicting Coastal Deltaic Change on a Global Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Robert Spencer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2022
* USD 213,540.00

Coastal erosion is expected to be a major Earth-surface hazard in the 21st
century, in part because sea-level rise, river damming, and land-use changes
will affect the sediment budget of river deltas. Predictions of coastal change
are critical for both long-term coastal management and the assessment of future
coastal hazards, particularly in relation to climate change. This project will
highlight where and how fast deltas are expected to be drowned by sea-level
rise, eroded by waves into spits and barrier islands, or shaped by tides into
alluvial estuaries. Such a unified, global picture can also be used to assess
how uncertain future scenarios, driven by for example carbon emissions, will
affect coastal change. To achieve broader impacts the investigators will
collaborate with Deltares and the United Nations to reach decision makers on a
local and global scale by developing the Delta Forecast tool, a new interactive
web-based map that will highlight projected changes to river deltas. This tool
will accompany a white paper on future deltaic change published with the United
Nations University. All model codes and data will be made available to the
scientific community in a public repository. This research will support one
postdoctoral researcher, one graduate student, and one undergraduate student.
The project will set up international and interdisciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;River deltas form when sediments from a
river are deposited close to the river mouth. Deltas exist in a wide variety of
shapes and sizes partly because ocean waves, tides, and sea-level fluctuations
move sediments within the coastal zone. This variability has made it challenging
to predict future coastal erosion and deposition around river deltas. This
project will create a global computer model of river delta change to: (i)
predict modern river delta shape by calculating sediment movement due to the
river, ocean waves, tides, and sea-level fluctuations, and to (ii), incorporate
predictions of changes to these forces and assess future river delta
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.