* 1811119
* Convergent Learning from Divergent Perspectives:  Interdisciplinary Collaborations in Informal Science Communication
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Arnab Nandi, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,206,073.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Innovations in Development project will develop a collaborative program to
connect and prepare researchers from divergent disciplines to communicate
science to publics of all ages in three distinct informal environments: pop-ups
at community events, experiential learning with problem solving events for
youth, and presentations at a science museum. It will study the effects of this
program on the identity and motivations of STEM researchers and evaluate the
short and medium-term outcomes for public audiences. Project partners include,
The STEAM Factory, OHI/O Informal Learning in Tech Program, and the Center of
Science and Industry (COSI) all located in Columbus,
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this project are as follows. 1)
Develop a collaborative program that connects and prepares researchers from
divergent disciplines to creatively and effectively communicate science to
people of all ages. 2) Evaluate the short and medium-term learning outcomes
across different informal learning settings. 3) Study the effect of this
collaborative program on the motivations and identify of the researchers. The
specific research question is: In what ways do researchers motivations and
identities further develop because of these collaborative experiences with
divergent perspectives? A mixed method approach will be used. Data will be
collected and analyzed from 3 cohorts of researchers who implement programs in
different informal learning settings. A series of pre- and post interviews with
scientists will be designed to answer the research question above. Interviews
will be grounded in self-determination theory. Later reflective surveys will
serve as triangulation for the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.