* 1811244
* I-Corps: Quantum hardware package for fully-secure long-distance data transfer
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Eden Figueroa, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to translate
quantum communication technological breakthroughs into real-life applications.
This goal will bring significant social and economic impacts as quantum
communication has the potential to revolutionize the global telecommunication
industry. Commercially, this vision provides countless opportunities to interact
with a broad spectrum of entities such as telecom companies, financial firms,
defense agencies and banking corporations. It is predicted that advanced quantum
technologies driven by quantum information processing will revolutionize
traditional communication methods by enabling the ultimate security for the
transmission of cryptography keys, based on the fundamental laws of quantum
mechanics which facilitate detecting any eavesdropping attempt on the encoded
key.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is devoted to developing portable
modular hardware necessary to build a protected cryptographic network immune to
known attacks. This technology is designed to overcome the main challenge of
operation over extended distances of thousands of kilometers, as required to
establish secure communication networks between cities and countries. The team
has successfully designed and built commercialization-friendly quantum devices
including quantum light sources, characterization units, and quantum memories
aimed to store and transform quantum information in a manner needed for secure
communication. These devices are room temperature operational and do not require
cumbersome and expensive infrastructure, thus being ready for outside of the
laboratory operation. This quantum toolbox is currently being used in different
international locations as a test-bed of important capabilities, such as
entanglement distribution, ultrafast operations, and satellite communication
compatibility.