* 1811605
* GPU-Enabled General Relativistic Simulations of Misaligned Black Hole Accretion Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Alexander Chekhovskoy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 10/31/2019
* USD 17,979.00

A black hole accretion disk is a structure formed by diffused materials in
orbital motion around a black hole (BH). From observations, the presence of
tilted accretion disks around a BH is detected in some systems. However, the
physics of accretion disks is poorly understood. This project will run very
large scale simulations on the Blue Waters supercomputer to improve our
fundamental understanding of BH accretion disks. Results of the proposed
simulations will address long-standing questions in the way supermassive black
holes consume and expel gas, and thereby exert feedback on their environment.
These results will allow the physics community to gain first-principles
understanding of disk physics in typical tilted BH accretion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas falling into a BH from large distances is
unaware of BH spin direction, and misalignment between the accretion disk and BH
spin is expected to be common. However, the physics of tilted disks is poorly
understood, even for the "standard", geometrically thin, radiatively efficient
accretion disks that power active galactic nuclei known as quasars and thought
to provide the best observational tests of general relativity and disk physics.
In particular, it is still not understood how the curved space-time of a
spinning black hole imprints itself on the structure of the tilted disks. This
project will make use of the fact that, at their core, BH accretion disks are
well-described by the general relativistic magnetohydrodynamics (GRMHD)
equations of motion. By carrying out direct GRMHD simulations of tilted thin and
thick disks, the project will obtain the first-principles understanding of disk
physics in typical, tilted BH accretion systems. To surmount the prohibitively
expensive nature of these simulations, the project has constructed the first
GPU-accelerated GRMHD code, H-AMR, which is capable of adaptive mesh refinement
and is ideally suited for the Blue Waters
supercomputer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.