* 1811424
* Transforming Outdoor Places into Learning Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Heather Zimmerman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,568,509.00

This project develops and examines place-based learning using mobile augmented
reality experiences for rural families where museums and science centers are
scarce yet where natural resources are rich with outdoor trails, parks, and
forestlands. The collaborative research team, with members from rural libraries,
outdoor learning centers, learning scientists at Penn State University, and
rural communities in Pennsylvania, will develop augmented reality and mobile
learning resources for families and children aged from 4 to 12. The goal is to
help people see what is not visible in real-time in order to learn about life
and earth sciences based on local watersheds, trees, and seasonal cycles that
are familiar and relevant to rural communities. To accomplish this goal, the
project team will create scientifically meaningful experiences for rural
families and children in their out-of-school time through three iterations of
research and design. Although there is evidence that augmented reality can
support learning, little empirical research has been conducted to determine what
makes one type of augmented learning experience more effective than others in
outdoor learning spaces. This project will produce research findings on the
utility of augmented reality for science learning with families and youths
outdoors. This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a four-year design-based research
study, researchers will investigate three research questions. (1) How can
outdoor learning experiences be enhanced with augmented reality and digital
resources in ways that make science more visible and interesting?; (2) How do
different forms of augmentations on trails and in gardens support science
learning? 3) What social roles do children and parents play in supporting each
other's science learning and connections to rural communities? Data collection
includes video-recordings of children and families in the outdoors, learning
analytics of people's behavior, and interviews with rural families. The
project's research design will allow for the development of theory, which
supports rural families learning science within and about their communities. At
the end of the project, the team will offer generalizable design principles for
technologically-enhanced informal learning for outdoor displays, gardens, and
trails.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.