* 1811858
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Use of Material Culture to Trace Historic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Ana Navas Mendez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 25,074.00

This project will investigate the colonial history of Panama through the study
of ceramics. The research is inspired by postcolonial debates that introduced
notions of agency and negotiation in the structuration of colonial experiences.
Local processes of colonial negotiations have been overshadowed by the splendor
of the American, Asian, and European riches circulating through this region
during the expansion of the imperial enterprise. As a result, non-European
people still lack historical agency in the archaeological narratives of colonial
Panama. Previous archaeological research highlights the disappearance of
indigenous ceramic styles from the archaeological record and their replacement
by European and creole styles. This evidence is used to affirm the extinction or
assimilation of indigenous groups located in the areas the Spaniards occupied.
However, in light of postcolonial debates, the previous statement raises
questions about the process of technological change and the role of political
and economic variables in colonial Panama. Did local communities keep control of
some aspects of ceramic production? Did the Spanish appropriate local knowledge
and resources in the production of ceramic technologies? The study of technology
is a window to understand the impacts of colonization not accessible through
documentary sources. This research will supplement and diversify the elite
perspective of Spanish history and its narratives to include the participation
of local and non-European communities in the construction of colonial Panama.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on a combination of historical, archaeological, and
archaeometric research, MS. Navas will study indigenous production and
consumption of ceramics under the supervision of Dr. Rodríguez-Alegría, as part
of her doctoral dissertation research at the University of Texas. She will focus
on the possible continuity, transformation or disruption of ceramic production
and consumption after European colonization. The researcher aims to identify raw
materials and technologies used in the production of ceramics in the pre-
Columbian and colonial periods. Her study will be centered on compositional
analyses of pastes, slips, and glazes of ceramic samples collected in previous
excavations from three different Spanish colonial settlements: Nata de los
Caballeros, Old Panama (Panama Viejo), and the Panama Historic District (Casco
Antiguo). The inclusion of samples from these three sites will allow a regional
comparative study of technological and compositional changes in ceramics from
different production centers over the long term, starting in the Late Ceramic
period (700 AD to conquest) to the nineteenth century. The analyses of the
samples will be based on neutron activation analysis (NAA), petrographic thin
section analysis, and laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). These techniques will permit the identification of the
constituent raw materials and techniques used in the production of ceramics and
patterns of continuity or change in their use during the colonial
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.