* 1811806
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018 - Testing the Oscillation Hypothesis of Symbiont Diversification using Parasites Isolated from Host Tissue Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Spencer Galen, Galen                   Spencer
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Spencer Galen is "Testing the Oscillation Hypothesis of Symbiont
Diversification using Parasites Isolated from Host Tissue Collections" The host
institution for the fellowship are the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel
University (ANSDU) and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jason Weckstein.

The goal of this research is to identify the factors that influence the
diversification and distribution of symbiotic organisms (organisms that live in
close association with a host), a group that is thought to comprise the majority
of species on Earth. Symbionts play critically important roles in the function
of ecological communities worldwide, though the traits and general rules that
have produced modern symbiont diversity are still poorly understood. This
project will gain insight into the patterns and processes that have resulted in
the incredible diversity of modern symbionts by studying an expansive collection
of avian malaria parasites, a symbiont group that is closely related to the
deadly human malaria parasites. Specifically, this research will examine how
variation in the number of host species that a parasite can infect, known as
"host breadth", influences a parasite's potential to diversify or colonize new
geographic regions. By analyzing the host breadth of malaria parasites that have
been isolated from a large collection of avian tissues sampled across North and
South America, this research will improve our understanding of how parasites and
symbionts more broadly have come to be so exceptionally diverse and have
attained their current distributions. In addition, studying the causes of
parasite diversification and distributions will lead to a better understanding
of when and where novel disease-causing parasite species originate, a problem of
major importance in today's rapidly changing world. Training objectives include
sequence capture probe design and implementation, phylogenomic analysis,
phylogenetic comparative analysis, and methods used in parasite specimen
acquisition, accession, and curation. Broader impacts include outreach
importance of symbionts to educational camps at the ANSDU and the mentoring of
high school and undergraduate students through the Students Tackling Advanced
Research (STAR) Scholars in Natural Sciences programs.

The Fellow will use the oscillation hypothesis of symbiont diversification as a
framework to test the effect of host breadth on parasite geographic range
evolution and diversification. This research will utilize malaria parasites
isolated from a geographically and taxonomically expansive collection of avian
tissues located at the ANSDU and the Field Museum of Natural History. Malaria
parasite genetic data will be collected using a novel exon capture probe design
to estimate a robust phylogeny for the group and thousands of avian tissue
samples will be tested for malaria infection to estimate parasite host breadth
and geographic range size metrics. Data from this project will be analyzed using
phylogenetic comparative methods to test for associations between host breadth
evolution, geographic range shifts, and malaria diversification. To promote the
use of and increase accessibility of project outcomes, all products from this
research will be made available on public repositories (GenBank, Dryad,
ParaSite, MalAvi). In addition, specimens involved in this research will be
vouchered in public research institutions, and the research will be published in
open-access journals.

Keywords: Diversification, Host breadth, Malaria parasites, Oscillation
Hypothesis, Phylogenomics, Sequence Capture

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.