* 1811897
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Nicolas Dowdy, Dowdy                   Nicolas        J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The Fellow's research focuses on the evolutionary innovations
that have allowed tiger moths to ward off their would-be bat predators. Tiger
moths protect themselves from bat predators with toxic chemicals obtained from
plants and with their unique ability to produce ultrasonic clicks which
advertise their distastefulness and/or disrupt bat echolocation. There is a
large degree of variation in the chemical profiles and in the sounds produced by
tiger moths. It is unknown what drives these differences, given that both of
these are defenses against bat predation. The Fellow will address this knowledge
gap by utilizing museum collections to estimate sound-production, chemical
profiles, and genetic relatedness among a large number of tiger moth species.
The Fellow will also utilize geographic information associated with each
specimen to determine if any aspects of their environment can explain these
differences. As part of this work, the Fellow will work with staff at a major
museum to develop an exhibit which will communicate this research to the public,
immersing them in the bat-moth co-evolutionary arms
race.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the goals of this project, the Fellow will
apply a newly-developed molecular probe set to generate a densely-sampled
phylogeny based on &gt;650 genes to resolve evolutionary relationships within
the tiger moths. Sound-production will be inferred with a previously-developed
predictive statistical model relating morphometric measurements to important
acoustic characteristics. Chemical profiles of insect tissues will be generated
by utilizing analytic chemistry techniques to identify compounds based on their
fragmentation spectra and estimate their concentrations. These traits will be
examined in a phylogenetic framework to examine 1) whether sonar-jamming has
evolved more than once, 2) the ancestral state(s) of sonar-jamming, and 3)
whether gaining the sonar-jamming defense is correlated with losing defensive
chemistry. Geographic information from specimen labels will be used to
understand whether environmental and/or biotic factors have influenced the
evolution of these anti-predator traits. The Fellow will be trained in molecular
methods, comparative evolutionary analyses, geometric morphometrics, analytical
chemistry techniques, and spatial analyses of overlapping species
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.