* 1811754
* RUI: Flows of G2-Structures on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Sergey Grigorian, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 201,229.00

One of the most enduring scientific problems is to understand the properties of
the universe and the laws that govern it. Ever since Einstein's theory of
general relativity, it was understood that there is a very close link between
the physics and the geometry of the universe. However, most recent physical
theories, such as superstring theory and M-theory, show that the physical
properties of 4-dimensional spacetime may be described in terms of the geometry
of hidden six- or seven-dimensional spaces. In this project, the PI will study
the properties of a particular kind of seven-dimensional spaces which appear in
these theories, known as manifolds with a G2-structure. The main goal of this
project is to further develop the theory of deformations or `flows' of
G2-structures which will effect smooth transitions between different classes of
G2-structures. The PI anticipates that this will pave the way towards giving
sufficient conditions for existence of torsion-free G2-structures, which is one
of the most significant open problems in differential geometry. (A G2-structure
defines, at each point of the manifold, a `dot product' of vectors -- a way of
multiplying two vectors to get a scalar -- as well as a `cross product' that
allows one to multiply two vectors to produce a third vector. Torsion-free
G2-structures are those for which these dot and cross products are maximally
compatible.) As part of the project, the PI will train undergraduate research
assistants and will involve them in the activities of the Experimental Algebra
&amp; Geometry Lab, of which the PI is a co-director. The lab's activities will
combine training, mentoring, research, and outreach to promote mathematics at
various levels -- starting at K-12, the broader community, and going all the way
to graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In his prior work, the PI introduced the
modified Laplacian coflow of co-closed G2-structures that rectified the non-
parabolicity of the standard Laplacian coflow. The PI also introduced a
description of G2-structures in terms of octonion bundles that interpreted the
torsion of a G2-structure as an octonionic connection and the choice of a
G2-structure within the same metric class as a choice of gauge. G2-structures
with divergence-free torsion were then interpreted as critical points of an
energy functional and as an analogue of the Coulomb gauge. This project builds
upon this prior work. The main goal is to prove existence properties for the
standard Laplacian coflow. This will be accomplished by first proving the
existence of G2-structures with divergence-free torsion within a fixed metric
class using harmonic map techniques. This will then be used as a gauge-fixing
condition for the Laplacian coflow, which will relate it to the modified coflow
for which existence is known. The second objective of this project is to study
and construct other significant flows of G2-structures, with the aim of proving
existence and stability under appropriate conditions and analyzing the behavior
of these flows on homogeneous manifolds. The third objective of this project is
to study the properties of octonion-bundle-valued differential forms and to
obtain an octonion-valued analogue of Dolbeault
cohomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.