* 1811784
* Improving Plant Breeding in Polyploid Crops Using Models for Demography and Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Paul Blischak, Blischak                Paul           D
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Paul Blischak is "Improving Plant Breeding in
Polyploid Crops Using Models for Demography and Selection." The host institution
for the fellowship is the University of Arizona and the sponsoring scientists
are Drs. Michael Barker and Ryan Gutenkunst.

The process of domestication impacts levels of genetic diversity through the
selection of individuals with desirable characteristics. Discovering what genes
are associated with these agriculturally important traits can therefore be
difficult as a result of this initial population bottleneck. Many agricultural
species also have additional sets of chromosomes as a result of whole genome
duplication (polyploidy), further complicating genetic analyses. This project
focuses on the development of computational tools to identify domestication-
related genes for crop improvement in polyploid species. These methods will be
applied to canola (Brassica napus), an economically important polyploid crop
responsible for the production of vegetable and synthetic oils, livestock feed,
and biofuels. Training objectives include the development of statistical and
computational methods and their application to the improvement of plant breeding
efforts in polyploid crops. Broader impacts include the development of open-
source software, tutorials, and teaching materials that can be used by plant
breeders and educators.

Tools for the analysis of genome-wide DNA sequence data that aim to understand
the process of domestication in polyploid crops are generally lacking. The main
goals of this research are (1) to develop statistical models for the analysis of
historical demography in polyploid crops, (2) to use these methods to infer the
demographic history of B. napus, and (3) to leverage this demographic
information to better identify domestication-related genes. This will be
achieved through the implementation of new models in the Python package DaDi
(Diffusion Approximation for Demographic Inference), applying these models to B.
napus, and using the results to perform genome-scale simulations for the
identification of genes under positive selection. All data, scripts, and
protocols for this project will be made available in public repositories, and
all software will be freely available and open source. Keywords: Brassica,
canola, demography, domestication, polyploidy, selection

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.