* 1811614
* Properties of Approximate Inference for Complex High-Dimensional Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Modern scientific data acquisition often creates datasets with many measurements
on a large sample size of individuals. The structure of interest in the data may
be low dimensional or sparse. Examples arise in scientific domains from
econometrics to genomics and image and signal processing and beyond. The project
explores approximate methods of statistical inference for such structure in a
representative set of contemporary settings: high dimensional estimation,
generalized linear mixed models and low rank multivariate models. It aims to
develop approximate methods backed by an optimality theory and/or performance
guarantees. The work is expected to provide new theoretical insights into
current problems in specific application domains such as Magnetic Resonance
Imaging and quantitative genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring
ideas from classical decision theory to compressed sensing and robust linear
modeling, rigorously solving nonconvex optimization problems and obtaining
reconstruction performance rigorously better than traditional convex
optimization methods. It will exploit decision theoretic ideas in the proposer's
previous work to provide new theoretical insights into a pressing practical
problem in compressed sensing -- deriving optimal variable-density sampling
schedules applicable to Magnetic Resonance Imaging and NMR spectroscopy. The
project will also study theoretically the statistical performance of some
methods for deterministic approximate inference popular in machine learning, but
for which little attention has been given to properties such as consistency,
asymptotic normality and efficiency. The study will begin with concrete examples
in the realm of generalized linear mixed models, from a frequentist perspective,
and seek to establish first-of-kind results for asymptotic efficiency of
Expectation Propagation. Finally, the project will study approximate inference
for the eigenstructure of highly multivariate models with low dimensional
structure. It will adapt James' classical framework for multivariate analysis to
a broad class of multispike models. Through collaboration with quantitative
geneticists, it will develop methods for inference for low dimensional structure
in high dimensional genetic covariance matrices. In both cases, methods from
random matrix theory will be essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.