* 1811176
* Modeling Physical Processes in the Solar Wind and Local Interstellar Medium with Multi-Scale Fluid-Kinetic Simulation Suite
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Jacob Heerikhuisen, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,501.00

The objective of this proposal is to use the possibilities provided by the Blue
Waters supercomputer to model fundamental and challenging space physics
problems. The heliosphere is the sphere like region of space dominated by the
Sun, which extends far beyond the orbit of Pluto. The Solar Wind (SW) consists
of ionized atoms from the Sun. The project will model the SW flows in the inner
and outer heliosphere, and compare the results with observational data. It is
anticipated that the project will provide a leap forward in the simulation of
complex charged and neutral gas systems. Furthermore, the proposed approach to
computational resource management for complex codes utilizing multiple algorithm
technologies is expected to be a major advance to current approaches. The
development of resource management technologies will be essential for all future
modeling efforts that incorporate a wide diversity of scales and physical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of flows of partially ionized
plasma that are characterized by multiple or highly localized scales and
multiple processes, will have a transformative impact for heliophysics. The
project will address a variety of physical phenomena occurring throughout the
solar system, such as the charge exchange processes between neutral and charged
particles, the birth of pick-up ions (PUIs), the origin of energetic neutral
atoms (ENAs), turbulence, the interplay of the heliopause instability and
magnetic reconnection at the SW and local interstellar medium (LISM) interface,
plasma wave generation in the LISM, the effect of the heliosphere on the TeV
cosmic ray anisotropy, and more. The project will also fit simulation results
with observational data to constrain the properties of the LISM and refine time-
dependent SW models. The project will incorporate the direct measurements from
the New Parker Solar Probe and Solar Orbiter missions, as well as the in situ
measurements of the SW from the Sun to Earth and further to the heliospheric
boundary, from the New Horizons, Voyager, IBEX, and air shower observations.
This project will extract the fundamental physics of plasma-neutral flows
accompanied by the interaction with energetic particles. The goal of the
modeling activities is to understand and interpret observations in a way
previously unthinkable because of the limitations in both physical models and
computing power. Components of the physical model and corresponding code
routines will be made available in a publicly accessible simulation
suite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.