* 1811805
* EAGER:  Drosophila evolutionary phenomics:  Public resource to support genotype-phenotype studies
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Scott Pitnick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2021
* USD 354,476.00

It is increasingly easy to sequence the genomes of species. The utility of
genomic resources, however, is limited without knowledge of the complex
developmental, physiological, morphological and behavioral traits that genes
code for. Indeed, improving the ability to predict important traits (e.g.,
lifespan, disease) from knowledge of genotypes is one of the top priorities of
modern biology. Much research uses the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, to
map phenotypes onto genotypes. This project will begin by characterizing a set
of traits that capture core aspects of life history for ~250 related species of
Drosophila. These analyses will be complemented by mapping genotype-phenotype
relationships across the 30 species of Drosophila with fully-sequenced genomes.
All data will be made available through a public database. This resource will
enable strategic decisions about future genome sequencing priorities.
Furthermore, the database will assist the integrated study of diverse life
history traits in the context of both resource ecology and phylogeny.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using standardized protocols, all ~250 species of
Drosophila and related genera (Samoaia, Scaptomyza, Zaprionus and Gitona)
maintained by the Drosophila Species Stock Center will be phenotyped for a set
of 18 morphological, behavioral, physiological and developmental traits,
Collectively, these traits capture core aspects of sexual selection and life-
history syndromes, in addition to providing characters relevant to ecological
selection. These data form the basis for a valuable public database on
Drosophila "evolutionary phenomics," along with accompanying phylogenetic
resources. The data will also be used for two kinds of state-of-the-art
comparative analyses. First, Bayesian phylogenetic modeling, applied to data for
all species, will be used to evaluate rates of diversification and co-
evolutionary dynamics among character states and across the clade using a range
of alternative trait diversification models. Second, two complementary
analytical approaches will be applied to all Drosophila species with fully-
sequenced genomes to explore genotype-phenotype relationships for all traits,
with the goals of identifying candidate genes underlying trait diversification
and setting the stage for studies of the molecular evolution and genomic
architecture of Drosophila biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.