* 1811892
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Glenn Seeholzer, Seeholzer               Glenn          F
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Understanding the process of speciation (how one distinct
species becomes two distinct species) is fundamental to understanding the
origins of biodiversity. Speciation is difficult to study because it cannot be
directly observed within a human lifetime. One way to overcome this obstacle is
to study how one species evolves across space rather than through time. One
example of this approach is to look at a species that has a distribution range
expanding around a barrier (e.g. a mountain range), and then determine if that
species has evolved due to this break in distribution. This is known as a ring
species and it is considered to be the perfect demonstration of speciation.
Examples are rare but have had an outsized impact on our understanding of
speciation. This research will expand our empirical understanding of ring
species and in turn, the process of speciation, by rigorously documenting a
promising, yet so far unappreciated ring species candidate, the Dusky-capped
Flycatcher of Central and South America. This research will utilize and
integrate a variety of biological collections including museum specimens,
genetic resources, and audio collections of avian vocalizations. In the Dusky-
capped Flycatcher, two phenotypically and genetically divergent subspecies have
distinct yet overlapping elevational distributions along the southern half of
the Andes, yet are connected by a continuous ring of intermediate populations in
the lowlands surrounding the impermeable barrier of the northern Andes. To
characterize the phenotypic variation of this potential ring species, the fellow
will collect data on morphology and plumage color from a remarkable series of
historical museum specimens. Importantly, every specimen is linked to archived
audio recordings made at the time of their collection permitting an integrated
evaluation of plumage, morphology, and vocalizations. Secondly, a reference
genome and accompanying lower-coverage genomes will be assembled from existing
genetic resources. These genomes will be used to test the genetic predictions of
the ring species hypothesis. The impact of this research will extend beyond its
intellectual contributions to the broader public through involvement and
mentorship of students from underrepresented groups. The results of this
research will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications as well as a
public education campaign through the fellow's host institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.