* 1811472
* Designing Innovative Guided Play Experiences to Empower Parents and Engage Preschool-Age Children in STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Meg Small, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,264,388.00

Parents exert a strong influence on the development of foundational science,
technology, engineering, and mathematical (STEM) skills in early childhood. This
influence occurs, in large part, through playful parent-child interactions and
conversations that expose children to mathematical and spatial concepts in
interesting and useful ways. For example, parents of preschool children are
often encouraged to use puzzles, board games, and construction activities to
foster children's spatial thinking and early math skills. However, mastery-
oriented toys like these typically elicit highly structured interactions, with
parents directing children to follow explicit step-by-step instructions and game
rules. Although this kind of parent-directed play can build content knowledge in
STEM, it does little to encourage the kind of intrinsically-motivated discovery,
generative collaboration, and creative problem-solving skills that support STEM
education and attainment. This research in service to practice project seeks to
understand how parents can play with their preschool children in ways that build
children's STEM skills while also supporting children's social-emotional skills.
As such, this research has the potential for advancing knowledge on effective
strategies for enriching informal learning opportunities in under-resourced and
sparsely populated communities where access to children's museums and other
informal learning institutions is limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a period
of three years, approximately 135 children and parents from a rural Appalachian
community are expected to participate in this research, which is organized into
three phases. During Phase 1, human-centered design processes will be used to
develop and refine play guides and parent scaffolds that promote productive
pretend play, which is characterized by joyful and creative problem-solving and
rich parent/child conversations featuring mathematical and spatial concepts and
reasoning. In Phase 2, measures will be developed and validated to
operationalize and code this kind of productive parent-child play and play
guides will be tested and refined in a local children's museum. In the final
phase, a formal field test will investigate the feasibility and acceptability of
outreach programming involving the use of play guides over time. Pre-, mid-, and
post-intervention measures will estimate program impact on child STEM and
social-emotional skill acquisition, relative to a comparison group. An expected
outcome of the project will be research-based educational materials that
illustrate and support pretend play in ways that generate spatial and
mathematical thinking and parent/child conversations. These materials will will
be made available to families and informal learning practitioners. This project
is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.