* 1811393
* High spatial resolution tactile sensing imager using optical exceptional point structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Liang Feng, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2019
* USD 129,217.00

Title: High Spatial Resolution Tactile Sensing Imager Using Optical Exceptional
Point Structures

Non-technical description: Tactile sensors have been widely used in touch
screens of smart phones to respond to touching force. Such force sensing,
monitoring, and mapping are of great interest in smart system-driven healthcare,
robotics and military applications. A variety of electronic and optical tactile
sensors have been developed to approach the desirable tactile sensing imager
with high spatial resolution and great flexibility. However, the major drawback
of the state-of-the-art tactile sensors is low spatial resolutions due to their
fundamental limitations on the sensor pixel size on the order of sub-
centimeter/millimeter. In this work, the investigators will leverage recent
advances in quantum-inspired photonics to develop a high spatial resolution
tactile sensing system with highly scalable sensor pixels that can monitor
strain response at a microscale. Its integration with smart phones can create a
compact and portable tactile sensor platform overcoming barriers in low spatial
resolution, high cost, and high instrumental complexity of the state-of-the-art
tactile sensors. This research is closely integrated with the existing
educational activities, providing both undergraduate and graduate students with
the opportunity to participate in cutting-edge science and technology in an
innovative way. The investigators also provide educational outreach activities
to promote the interests and participations of K-12 students and broaden the
participations from underrepresented groups.

Technical description: The primary focus of this research project is to develop
novel planar optical systems with optical exceptional points and arrange them on
a flexible plastic platform in a chessboard configuration for high spatial
resolution tactile sensing and imaging. The optical exceptional point
structures, due to their planar nature, can support highly scalable fabrication
using the widely used photolithography technique with spatial resolution down to
even the microscale in a large area. Based upon a flexible plastic platform,
this microscale tactile sensing imager can not only perform high-throughput
real-time microscopic strain detection, but also enable simultaneous strain and
temperature measurement with a microscopic resolution. The tactile sensor
platform can be further integrated with portable electronic devices (e.g. hand-
held smart phones), which would create a compact and portable tactile sensor
imager platform for real-time detection in microbiology and healthcare, for
example, the detection of mechanical properties of biomolecules. The principal
investigators have highly complementary expertise in optics theory, advanced
micro/nanofabrication technology, and device integration to design and fabricate
the unique portable high spatial resolution tactile sensing platform based on
novel optical exceptional point structures. The realized tactile sensing systems
are expected to represent an important technological breakthrough in strain
sensing, mapping and monitoring at a microscale with sensitivities orders of
magnitude better than the state-of-the-art tactile sensors.