* 1811511
* Explore the Science of Spring: A Live Media Event
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Fred Kaufman, WNET
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,850,000.00

Explore the Science of Spring: A Live Media Event is an Innovations in
Development project produced by the signature PBS series Nature. The new
primetime series Spring LIVE (working title) will break the frame of a
traditional documentary, letting viewers themselves explore the dramatic
seasonal changes of spring through the immediacy of live television. On-camera
hosts, scientists and naturalists in locations across the U.S., and scores of
citizen scientists will use observation and scientific inquiry to explore the
workings of nature during this season of rebirth. The unfolding stories of
seasonal change will illuminate larger scientific insights--into the
biodiversity of species in habitats, the interconnectedness of plants and
animals in diverse ecosystems, the global phenomenon of species migration, and
how spring "green-up" can be affected by environmental change--while inspiring
appreciation for species conservation and habitat preservation. Spring LIVE is
conceived as an ongoing series, with this inaugural season composed of three
one-hour programs broadcast live on three consecutive nights, along with real-
time interactions via Facebook. Reaching long-standing Nature viewers (2.5
million per episode), Spring LIVE will seek to turn mature adults and diverse
families into citizen science doers, and leverage younger Nature online
audiences through social media and community engagement in partnership with
citizen science projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spring LIVE will build public
knowledge of and engagement in phenology and citizen science. The project will
also conduct knowledge-building research on the effectiveness of Facebook as a
science learning tool. It will experiment with eliciting audience participation
via Facebook within the live shows to generate synchronous, second-screen
thought and discussion. An exploratory study by Multimedia Research will look at
the impact of this feature, addressing the question: To what extent and how does
Facebook interactivity within live science shows impact adult engagement,
learning and motivation? Spring LIVE will also engage multiple partners to
expand reach and impact and build capacity in their fields. National partners
include the National Park Service and Next Avenue; citizen science partners
include Celebrate Urban Birds, National Phenology Network, Monarch Blitz, and
SciStarter, among others. PBS stations will work with these organizations to
involve diverse, intergenerational audiences in observation of nature and
seasonal change. Project evaluation, implemented by Knight Williams Research
Communications, will focus on the impact of live television on science learning,
and the success of the integration of citizen science projects on air, online,
and in communities. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.