* 1811713
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lauren Burgeno, Burgeno                 Lauren         M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
is aimed at understanding how and when different circuits in the brain interact
to facilitate associative learning. All animals rely upon learned associations
between environmental stimuli and the outcomes they predict for functions such
as navigation, foraging, selecting mates, and avoiding predators. Associative
learning requires coordination between multiple circuits in the brain and the
neurotransmitters (signalling chemicals) to facilitate these behaviors.
Therefore, to develop a better understanding of how the brain controls complex
behaviors, it is necessary to determine how different brain circuits interact.
This fellowship will support the research, training, and career advancement of a
fellow from an ethnic group underrepresented in STEM, while also enabling the
fellow to provide mentorship, outreach and educational tools to underserved high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One neural pathway that plays a central role in
mediating associative learning is the mesolimbic dopamine pathway, which
projects from the midbrain to the striatum. Preeminent theories of dopamine's
role in signaling learned associations between stimuli are based upon studies of
mesolimbic dopamine neuron firing patterns during associative learning, and the
assumption that cell firing and neurotransmitter release are correlated. Recent
studies in brain slices, however, have demonstrated that acetylcholine, released
by striatal cholinergic interneurons, can regulate dopamine neurotransmission at
the axon terminal, effectively uncoupling dopaminergic neuron firing and
neurotransmitter release. The fellow will address the need for systematic
characterization of the function of this regulation mechanism, and its role in
associative learning, by performing in vivo studies with the following
objectives: 1) Determine how physiologically relevant cholinergic interneuron
firing patterns modulate striatal dopamine release in vivo. 2) Determine how
pauses in cholinergic interneuron firing, which are known to occur during
associative learning, alter striatal dopamine release triggered by Pavlovian
conditioned stimuli, and impact learning related behavior. Through this work,
the fellow will receive technical training in the use of genetic tools to
isolate specific cell populations, optogenetics, slice electrophysiology, mouse
behaviour, and surgical techniques, as well as professional development support.
Furthermore, the fellow will develop and employ a neuroscience workshop to
immerse high school students from backgrounds underrepresented in science in the
scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.