* 1811265
* Impacts of STEM Experiences on Informal STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Robert Tai, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,724,629.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. Informal STEM
educational activities have proliferated widely in the US over the last 20
years. Additional research will further validate the long-term benefits of this
mode of learning. Thus, elaborating the multitude of variables in informal
learning and how those variables can be used for individual learning is yet to
be defined for the circumstances of the learners. Thus, the primary objective of
this work is to produce robust and detailed evidence to help shape both practice
and policy for informal STEM learning in a broad array of common circumstances
such as rural, urban, varying economic situations, and unique characteristics
and cultures of citizen groups. Rather than pursuing a universal model of
informal learning, the principal investigator will develop a series of
comprehensive models that will support learning in informal environments for
various demographic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will undertake a
longitudinal mixed-methods approach of Out of School Time/informal STEM
experiences over a five-year time span of data collection for youth ages 9-19 in
urban, suburban, town, and rural communities. The evidence base will include
data on youth experiences of informal STEM, factors that exert an influence on
participation in informal STEM, the impact of participation on choices about
educational pathways and careers, and preferences for particular types of
learning activities. The quantitative data will include youth surveys, program
details (e.g. duration of program, length of each program session,
youth/facilitator ratio, etc.), and demographics. The qualitative data will
include on-site informal interviews with youth and facilitators, and program
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.