* 1811263
* Growing Computer Science Literacy via Informal Learning Communities among Incarcerated and Formerly Incarcerated Men and Women
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* David Bond, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,990.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. This Pilots and
Feasibility Studies project will design and study computer science education
programs in three New York State prisons and cutting-edge computer science
learning spaces in New York City and Bennington, VT for recently released men
and women. These two sites of investment will be designed and operated with the
goals of bridging informal STEM education inside the prison and post-release.
The project aims to help incarcerated and formerly incarcerated men and women
gain hands-on experience and technical fluency in computer science. The project
will also help people build effective pathways that link training and informal
learning communities in prison to professional and educational success after
prison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine how informal STEM
learning can 1) provide incarcerated and post-incarceration populations more
effective pathways into computer science and technology professions, and 2) help
revitalize neighborhoods struggling with high rates of incarceration and high
rates of adults under correctional supervision. Results will be shared among the
STEM learning community and prison educators through existing networks,
scholarly and journalistic publications, and conferences. As a pilot program,
this project aims to develop a comprehensive, rigorous, and transferable model
that may be used as a resource in other prison education programs as well as in
rural and urban communities across the United States seeking to address economic
and educational inequalities of post-incarceration
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.