* 1811859
* Estimation, Sampling, and Simulation for Long-Range Dependent Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Alexandra Chronopoulou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

In a variety of phenomena in science and engineering, such as those studied in
hydrology, signal processing, computer science, operations research, economics,
finance, and biology, it is often the case that observations that are far apart
in time or space are strongly correlated. Such phenomena can be modeled by
stochastic systems that allow for long-range dependence. For such models to be
relevant, it is important to be able to make reliable inferences about the
inherent degree of memory in the system, as well as other model parameters.
Moreover, it is critical to have efficient simulation and sampling schemes,
tailored to the task of interest and incorporating the system memory. This
project aims to develop novel, computationally feasible, rigorous, rate-optimal
inferential and sampling methods that overcome limitations of existing
methodologies. The results of this research can contribute to a more widespread
and reliable use of stochastic systems that account for long-range dependence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to resolve various problems regarding
the inference, design, and simulation of long-range dependent processes,
bridging the gap between the continuous-time nature of these models and the
discrete-time nature of their observations. Specifically, the goals are to: (i)
develop statistically- and computationally-efficient parameter estimators in a
coupled stochastic system where the noise of the observed diffusion is
correlated with the noise of a hidden long-memory process; (ii) develop and
analyze optimal non-uniform sampling methods for tracking a fractional
stochastic differential equation (SDE) with a constraint on the number of
observations; (iii) develop efficient simulation algorithms for fractional SDEs
with long memory; and (iv) analyze the approximation error for reflected
additive noise fractional SDEs. The research will rely to a considerable extent
on the theories of fractional and Malliavin calculus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.