* 1811155
* Developing a Research Action Agenda for Assessing the Long-Term Impacts of STEM Programs for Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Babette Moeller, Intrepid Museum Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Gathering evidence for the long-term impact of programs for youth on their
involvement in STEM studies and careers continues to be a challenge, especially
for program interventions happening in earlier stages of development (e.g.,
elementary, middle, high-school years. Work that focuses on mechanisms for
mitigating these challenges is important. The conference and associated
activities aim to build a research action agenda that is rooted in practice to
support better understanding of the long-term impacts of informal STEM programs
for girls, along with methods and approaches for measuring them. The project
team will use a collaborative co-design approach to establish a STEM for Girls
Research Alliance. The Alliance will include three levels of participants, with
different levels of commitment: a core planning group (CPG) of 8-10 people,
approximately 20-25 participating members (PM) and 50-60 interested stakeholder
group representatives (SGR). The project team will utilize face-to-face
meetings, digital engagement strategies, and surveys to develop the agenda and
solicit multiple rounds of feedback and input. The CPG, consisting of leaders
and representatives from state-based STEM for Girls organizations that are part
of the National Girls Collaborative Project (NGCP) and members of the New York
State STEAM for Girls Collaborative, will be responsible for setting priorities
and guiding the action agenda. The PM will include representatives (educators
and researchers) from informal STEM programs at cultural institutions that
participate in the state-based collaboratives. The PM will be regularly
consulted on important aspects of the action agenda that relate to their work.
Finally, the SGR will include representatives from several audiences that are
being served by or work with the participating members: girls and young women,
parents, educators, funders, researchers and employers. The SG will be engaged
via focus groups virtually or at national meetings to which these individuals
attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support broader involvement of professionals
working in this sector, a comprehensive digital engagement plan using web and
social media networks will be developed. The plan will utilize a consistent
hashtag, allowing participants to follow the conversation across social media
platforms. Social media platforms to be utilized will include Twitter,
Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+, Snapchat and others. More than 60,000
people will be engaged via the networks of the NY STEAM Collaborative, NGCP,
WSKG Public Media and project partners. A robust research action plan will
position researchers to further explore the role of informal STEM education
experiences in shaping the career choices of girls and identify where there are
breaks in the hoped-for pathways to STEM college and careers. It also will
benefit informal STEM organizations by yielding information that will help them
to fine-tune their programs for girls and young women. Ultimately, contributions
to the knowledge base will result in broadened participation of girls and women
in STEM programs and careers. This work is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program as part of its strategy to enhance learning in informal
environments and support innovative research, approaches, and resources for use
in a variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.