* 1811352
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Simulations of Binary Neutron Star Mergers
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Philipp Moesta, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 09/30/2019
* USD 6,585.00

The era of multimessenger astronomy has been inaugurated with the extraordinary
detection of the collision of two neutron stars (NSs) by the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), and the subsequent
observations by X-ray, optical, infrared, and radio facilities. These
observations have started to revolutionize our understanding of many areas in
physics, including the origins of the heavy elements, like silver, gold, and
platinum. However, they also pose many pressing open questions. This project
will make use of the Blue Waters supercomputer to address these open questions.
State-of-the-art NS merger simulations will be performed on the Blue Waters
supercomputer to examine all the different possible NS collision scenarios to
understand the fundamental physical processes that generated the observation
data. This will be followed by extremely high-resolution simulations considering
the post-merger evolution. Simulation results will be made publicly available,
and dissemination via movies, public lectures and school visits are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic study of the evolution of NS binary
systems compatible with the observed NS collision, GW170817, will be performed
by means of merger simulations on Blue Waters, employing sophisticated
microphysics and neutrino treatment. These simulations will ascertain the
viability of tidal torques and shocks as mechanisms for the ejection of matter
during mergers, which in turn powers the observed optical and infrared
transients and synthesizes heavy elements. The impact of the NS equation of
state (EOS) will be evaluated by considering a set of 3 EOSs spanning the range
of the current nuclear uncertainties. The range of possible outcomes of the
merger as a function of the binary parameters and EOSs will be assessed. High-
resolution general-relativistic magnetohydrodynamics simulations of the merger
remnant will be performed, with sufficient resolution to determine the
magnetorotational instability (MRI) and the angular-momentum redistribution in
the remnant while employing a microphysical treatment of the NS matter. These
simulation results will ascertain the role of magnetohydrodynamics processes in
determining the lifetime of the remnant and the observational signatures of an
early or delayed black-hole formation. The role played by magnetized winds in
the powering of the optical and infrared emissions and their nucleosynthetic
yields will be assessed. In addition, this project will develop significant
improvements to current open-source codes, and all improvements will be released
to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.