* 1811163
* Advancing the Design of Visualizations for Informal Science Engagement
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jennifer Frazier, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,677.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project is a two-day conference, along with pre- and post-conference
activities, with the goal of furthering the informal science learning field's
review of the research and development that has been conducted on data
visualizations that have been used to help the public better understand and
become more engaged in science. The project will address an urgent need in
informal science education, providing a critical first step towards a synthesis
of research and technology development in visualization and, thus, to inform and
accelerate work in the field in this significant and rapidly changing domain.

The project will start with a Delphi study by the project evaluator prior to the
conference to provide an Emerging Field Assessment on data visualization work to
date. Then, a two-day conference at the Exploratorium in San Francisco and
related activities will bring together AISL-funded PIs, computer scientists,
cognitive scientists, designers, and technology developers to (a) synthesize
work to date, (b) bring in relevant research from fields outside of informal
learning, and (c) identify remaining knowledge gaps for further research and
development. The project team will also develop a website with videos of all
presentations, conference documentation, resources, and links to social media
communities; and a post-conference publication mapping the state of the field,
key findings, and promising technologies.

The initiative also has a goal to broaden participation, as the attendees will
include a diverse cadre of professionals in the field who contribute to data
visualization work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.