* 1811395
* Framing Research on Activities as Mathematical Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andee Rubin, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,768.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Pilot and Feasibility study will investigate strategies for enhancing the
mathematics in museum-based making and tinkering activities and lay the
foundation for a full research study on broadening family participation in
mathematics through making. This proposal builds directly on the NSF-funded Math
in the Making convening. During this convening, questions about how to
authentically highlight and enhance the mathematics in making and tinkering
experiences, and how different math-enhancement approaches might influence
learner experiences and outcomes, emerged as critical issues for researchers,
educators, and mathematicians alike. The project aims to provide a practical
lens to help researchers and educators connect topics across STEM with making
and tinkering experiences. The project also seeks to advance theoretical
understandings of museum-based learning by exploring ways that activity design
and facilitation strategies influence how visitors understand the nature and
goals of the experience and, in turn, how these visitor experiences shape
learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to explore the
most promising of these math-enhancement strategies in more depth, to propose as
a next project and develop a theoretical framework for understanding and
describing how these strategies influence how families understand and engage
with the mathematics in maker experiences. Through several culturally-responsive
approaches developed in collaboration with community-based organizations, the
project will research how mathematics in maker experiences influences
participant engagement and learning. The project will culminate in the design of
a research study. Reports and resources developed by the project will be broadly
disseminated to researchers, mathematicians, and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.