* 1811000
* Collaborative Proposal: Central States Mathematics Undergraduate Research Conferences
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Richard Rebarber, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2020
* USD 8,824.00

This National Science Foundation award supports the fourth and fifth in the
previously funded, successful series of Central States Mathematics Undergraduate
Research (CeSMUR) conferences that will take place on April 20-21, 2018 in
Lincoln, Nebraska, and in spring 2019 in Manhattan, Kansas, respectively.
Research experience is very helpful in both the graduate application process,
and in placement in technically demanding jobs. The scientific activities and
mentoring interactions at CeSMUR are designed to encourage undergraduate
students who are already engaged in research, and to inspire others to begin.

The conference is comprised of one and a half days. The format follows the one
successfully tested in previous editions. Two main speakers each give a one-hour
lecture, and there is ample time for undergraduate student speakers to present
their research. During the evening and lunch meetings students interact with the
featured speakers and guest graduate students in attendance, and get advice on
the next steps in their career. In addition to a commitment to increasing the
number of highly trained STEM professionals, the conferences focus on increasing
diversity in the mathematical workforce, via participation of first generation
college students, females, and underrepresented minority groups. Further details
regarding the 2018 CeSMUR conference can be found on the conference website:
https://www.math.unl.edu/events/cesmur.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.