* 1811363
* Collaborative Research: Information-Based Subdata Selection Inspired by Optimal Design of Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* John Stufken, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 59,994.00

Extraordinary amounts of data are collected in many branches of science, in
industry, and in government. The massive amounts of data provide incredible
opportunities for making knowledge-based decisions and for advancing complicated
research problems through data-driven discoveries. To capitalize on these
opportunities, it is critical to develop methodology that facilitates the
extraction of useful information from massive data in a computationally
efficient way. Even the simplest analyses of the data can be computationally
intensive or may no longer be feasible for big data. It is however often the
case that valid conclusions can be drawn by considering only some of the data,
referred to as subdata. This project develops optimal strategies for selecting
subdata that retain, as much as possible, relevant information that was
available in the massive data set. The methodology helps to identify the most
informative data points, after which an analysis can proceed based on the
selected subdata only. This facilitates data-driven decisions, scientific
discoveries, and technological breakthroughs with computing resources that are
readily available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Existing investigations for extracting
information from big data with common computing power have focused on random
subsampling-based approaches, which have as limitation that the amount of
information extracted is only scalable to the subdata size, not the full data
size. This project develops and expands the Information-Based Optimal Subdata
Selection (IBOSS) method proposed by the PIs in the following directions: 1) It
combines IBOSS with sparse variable selection methods in linear regression; 2)
it develops subdata selection methods for generalized linear models; 3) it
constructs computationally efficient algorithms for selecting the most
informative subdata; and 4) it develops user-friendly software that supports the
methodology. The research is a significant addition to the field of big data
science. It advances a new method for dealing with big data and has the
potential to create novel research opportunities in statistical science and
other quantitative fields. The results are valuable even when supercomputers are
available, because cutting edge high performance computing facilities will
always trail the exponential growth of data volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.