* 1811118
* Building Capacity for Co-Created Public Engagement with Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Lawrence Bell, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,919,470.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This project will build and test a new model for co-created public engagement
with science activities in partnership with civic, community, and scientist
partners. The innovation to be tested is deliberative dialogues in science
museums that help reduce the polarization about socio-scientific issues, giving
people a greater voice in science, and addressing barriers that disconnect
scientists from the public. The project will engage four target audiences
(informal science education/ISE professionals, civic, community and scientist
partners). Science museum partners include Museum of Science (MOS) Boston,
Oregon Museum of Science, the Michigan Science Center, and the North Carolina
Museum of Life and Science. The project is designed to have a strategic impact
on how ISE institutions choose topics of STEM engagement and build public Forum
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will be two evaluation teams for the
project. MOS Research and Evaluation will act as formative evaluation mentors
for the four partner sites as they co-create their forums. They will provide
evaluation capacity building for the sites using team-based inquiry as they
create and understand the potential impacts and outcomes of the model. Data
collection will include panel surveys and focus groups. The evaluation will
explore how the forums can decrease 1) public polarization around STEM topics
and (2) the disconnect between scientists, civic organization, and the public.
The external summative evaluation will be conducted by Rockman et al (REA). They
will conduct a study of the project's process to help the team identify
challenges and strategies for overcoming them as they work through the phases of
public engagement. The summative study will focus on the project goals taking a
qualitative approach. Early interviews with partner participants will explore
their strengths and weaknesses in taking on this type of public engagement model
including the extent of their previous work with civic partners. Later
interviews will investigate what factors have enabled or hindered this project.
Summative evaluation questions will also address changes in attitudes toward
public engagement with science. REA will collect feedback from summit attendees
through intercept interviews and post-surveys administered within a week at the
event's conclusion to explore the any changes in knowledge or confidence in
undertaking this type of model. REA will present findings from the external
evaluation during the annual meeting of the Association of Science-Technology
Centers and publish reports to Informalscience.org. Once the model has been
developed and tested it will be disseminated to an initial group of 25-30
science museums and eventually to the entire ISE museum
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.