* 1811199
* WSC-Category 1 Collaborative: A surface water management framework to counterbalance groundwater withdrawals in wetter regions of the U.S.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* David Borrok, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,868.00

1360398 Borrok 1360282 Zhand

WSC-Category 1 Collaborative: A surface water management framework to
counterbalance groundwater withdrawals in wetter regions of the U.S.

The over-use of groundwater is becoming a critical problem in regions
historically characterized by abundant rainfall and surface water, including
much of the U.S. Northern Gulf and Southern Atlantic Coastal regions. This
project proposes to develop a theoretical framework and a new modeling/decision
support tool aimed at better managing surface water so that it can be used to
close groundwater supply gaps. The proposed management framework focuses on
understanding human-water-land use interactions, with an emphasis on
agriculture. The research team will explore the potentially transformative
concept of integrating the social and biophysical dimensions of water systems
into a unified framework for improved management of surface water resources.
This includes consideration of the balance between water demand for humans and
ecosystems.

The project team will develop an innovative geospatial decision support/modeling
tool that can identify and evaluate opportunities to capture and use surface
water to replace groundwater in these wetter regions of the US. The theoretical
framework and associated geospatial decision support tool will be unique for
wetter regions of the U.S. where groundwater and surface water have
traditionally been managed separately and surface water management has focused
largely on flood control. The tool will directly benefit farmers, land managers,
regulatory agencies, and state and local government officials. The research will
be integrated with education through a trans-disciplinary senior/MS-level course
at UL Lafayette. Public outreach, focusing on water conservation efforts, will
be part of this course. The project will additionally leverage and expand
existing NSF and NOAA watershed-based education/outreach projects that target
graduate students and high school teachers, respectively. This project also
serves as a catalyst for developing a new collaborative team of researchers
interested in water sustainability.