* 1811518
* Geometry, groups, and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Christopher Leininger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2020
* USD 205,465.00

The shape of an object can influence a wide variety of data observed for that
object. An important mathematical problem is to determine the extent to which
what is observed determines the shape of an object. More generally - what
mathematical features of a shape can one determine from the observables? The
principal investigator will study both concrete and abstract problems of this
nature. For example, suppose a particle is enclosed in a polygon and is
traveling in a straight line, bouncing off any side it encounters. The shape of
the polygon could be inferred by observing the sequences of sides encountered by
the particle. The principal investigator will study the extent to which the
shape of the region is determined by these observables. More abstract objects
studied in these projects involve algebraic systems probed using "cross-
sectional images" analogous to those recorded by an MRI. These cross-sectional
images can be fit together to completely reconstruct an object. The principal
investigator will develop techniques for predicting certain properties without
carrying out the reconstruction. Using these approaches will also allow one to
develop problem solving techniques and methods that could find applications in
concrete settings.

The principal investigator will investigate a variety of problems, each of which
is connected, either directly or indirectly, to surfaces through geometry, group
theory, and dynamics. The research activities are organized into four themes.
(1) Studying the large-scale geometry of surface bundles. The goal is to
determine hyperbolicity properties of surface bundles from the geometric data of
their associated monodromy representation to the mapping class group. (2)
Probing geometric and dynamical properties of free-by-cyclic groups from the
cross section of flows on 2-complexes, and pursuing a fruitful analogy with
fundamental groups of surface bundles over the circle. (3) Analyzing singular
Euclidean metrics on surfaces and understanding the extent to which the limited
data encoded by the support of its associated Liouville current determines the
geometry of the metric. This is directly related to studying the extent to which
the symbolic dynamics of billiards in polygons determines the shape of the
polygon. (4) Studying the geometry at infinity of spaces of structures on a
surface, specifically the Teichmueller space, the curve complex, and variants of
these spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.