* 1811111
* Applications of Gauge Theory and Floer Homology to Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniel Ruberman, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,017.00

The understanding of the structure of the four-dimensional universe in which we
live is a key topic of investigation in modern mathematics and physics. Many of
the questions posed by geometers and topologists have to do with the nature of
three-dimensional spaces sitting in a four-dimensional space, and with the
restrictions that the global properties of larger space places on such sub-
spaces. The research in this National Science Foundation funded project uses
modern tools of analysis and geometry to shed light on the local nature of such
subspaces, including new methods for showing that singularities in such spaces
cannot be smoothed. Related analytical techniques will be used to explore the
global topology of four-dimensional spaces, including an investigation of their
symmetries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Ruberman will carry out research in
geometric topology, using Seiberg-Witten gauge theory, Heegaard-Floer homology,
and more traditional topological techniques. The first parts of the project,
joint with Jianfeng Lin and Nikolai Saveliev, are concerned with the smooth
topology of four-manifolds that homologically resemble a product of a three-
dimensional manifold with a circle. Central questions concern the interpretation
of the classical Rohlin invariant and multi-signature invariants in terms of
gauge theory; solutions of the main problems will decide the existence of
manifolds predicted by high dimensional surgery theory. The PI will work with
Adam Levine on embeddings of punctured three-manifolds in four-space, using
refined techniques from Heegaard Floer theory to find obstructions. An ongoing
project with David Auckly, Hee Jung Kim, and Paul Melvin is concerned with the
topology of the diffeomorphism group of a four-dimensional manifold and how it
is affected by stabilization of the manifold. Finally, the PI will work with
Saveliev and Demetre Kazaras on a new technique to obstruct the existence of
positive scalar curvature cobordisms between even-dimensional
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.