* 1811617
* Designing Our Tomorrow: Mobilizing the Next Generation of Engineers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Marcie Benne, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,675,445.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Designing Our Tomorrow project will develop a framework for creating exhibit-
based engineering design challenges and expand an existing model of facilitation
for use in engineering exhibits. The project seeks to broaden participation in
engineering and build capacity within the informal science education (ISE) field
while raising public awareness of the importance of sustainable engineering
design practices. The project focuses on girls aged 9-14 and their families and
is co-developed with culturally responsive strategies to ensure the inclusion
and influence of families from Latino communities. The project will conduct
research resulting in theory-based measures of engineering proficiencies within
an exhibit context and an exhibit facilitation model for the topic area of
engineering. Based on the research, the project will develop an engineering
design challenge framework for developing design challenges within an exhibit
context. As the context for research, the project will develop a bilingual
English/Spanish 2,000-square foot traveling exhibition designed to engage youth
and families in engineering design challenges that advance their engineering
proficiencies from beginner to more informed, supported by professional
development modules and a host-site training workshop introducing strategies for
facilitating family engineering experiences within a traveling exhibition. The
project is a collaboration of Oregon Museum of Science and Industry with the
Biomimicry Institute, Adelante Mujeres, and the Fleet Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing Our Tomorrow builds on a theory-based
engineering teaching framework and several previous NSF-funded informal
education projects to engage families in compelling design challenges presented
through the lens of sustainable design exemplified by biomimicry. Through
culturally-responsive co-development and research strategies to include members
of Latino communities and provide challenges that highlight the altruistic,
creative, personally relevant, and collaborative aspects of engineering, the
Designing Our Tomorrow exhibition showcases engineering as an appealing career
option for women and helps families support each other's engineering
proficiencies. To better understand and promote engineering learning in an ISE
setting, the project will conduct two research studies to inform and iteratively
develop effective strategies. In the first study, measurement development will
build on prior research and practice to design credible and reliable measures of
engineering proficiency, awareness, and collaboration, as well as protocols for
use in exhibit development and the study of facilitation at engineering
exhibits, and future research. The second study will explore the effects of
facilitation on the experience outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.