* 1811819
* Geometric-Analytic Studies of the Einstein Equations and Other Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lydia Bieri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 211,446.00

This project concerns a number of topics in mathematics and physics as well as
at the interplay between these fields. The overarching aim of these topics is to
push forward our knowledge in mathematics as well as in physics. In particular,
this involves geometric analysis and nonlinear partial differential equations
(PDE) with a focus on the Einstein equations in general relativity. The new
insights and methods from this project will also be important to solve other
structurally similar PDE, some of which are central to models in science and
technology. One main branch of the PI's research concerns the Einstein equations
linking the physical content of our universe to geometry, thus they give the
physical laws a geometric structure. These equations are at the heart of the
theory of general relativity, which governs the physics of our universe in the
large. Exploring these equations will lead to a better understanding of the
universe as a whole and of isolated systems such as galaxies, binary black holes
or binary neutron stars. The observation of gravitational waves by the advanced
LIGO (aLIGO) project in 2015 marked the beginning of a new era where information
from distant regions of our universe is decoded directly from the universe
itself (rather than from electromagnetic waves like for instance light in
telescopes). More than ever, synergies between mathematics, in particular
analysis of PDE and geometry, physics and astrophysics are needed to unravel the
new structures. The PI will build on her results to develop new methods to
achieve these goals. Through the educational component of this project, the PI's
research will also have direct impact in a wider sense via teaching and outreach
activities. The PI will train students and postdocs in these fields, and through
broad outreach activities reach members of the public including underrepresented
groups. The PI will also communicate her results through publications,
conferences and the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop and
explore new mathematical methods to investigate the Einstein equations and other
nonlinear PDE describing physical phenomena. In particular, the PI proposes to
study: (1) the Cauchy problem for the Einstein equations focussing on spacetimes
with radiation; (2) the mathematics of gravitational waves and their memory
effect (a permanent change of the spacetime showing as a permanent displacement
of test masses in a detector like aLIGO) in general relativity, as well as
analogs of memory in other physical theories; and (3) Euler equations and other
PDE per se and their coupling to the Einstein equations. Whereas all these
topics center around a purely mathematical (geometric-analytic) treatment, each
one of them will produce results that can be directly applied in physics
experiments. Parts of the suggested research will continue the PI's former work
linking her mathematical insights to experiments (aLIGO in particular). It is
expected that the gravitational wave memory effect will be measured in the near
future. These new projects will partially build on the PI's and collaborators'
recent results and methods but will also require new ideas and approaches. The
PI and D. Garfinkle derived two analogs of memory in electromagnetism, thus for
the first time outside of general relativity. The PI and collaborators will
continue their research to complete the understanding of memory in general
relativity, and to extend their research to other physical theories (e.g.,
quantum electrodynamics). The PI will connect this line of research with her
other project about the global Cauchy problem, and she will study other PDE with
geometric-analytic methods. Moreover, solutions of the Einstein equations
coupled to other PDE will be investigated for general situations, including
asymptotically flat as well as cosmological spacetimes, and thereby interesting
local and global structures are expected to be found. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.