* 1811995
* RUI: Analysis on HyperKahler Moduli Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Christopher Kottke, New College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 125,449.00

In many areas of geometry and physics, the collection of objects under
investigation can be organized together to form a space with intrinsic geometry,
known as a "moduli space". Moduli spaces may parameterize a wide variety of
objects, from physical particles, to geometric shapes, to solutions of
differential equations. They are important not only because they carry
information about the objects they parameterize, but also because they represent
naturally occurring examples of interesting geometries. There are several well-
known families of moduli spaces which carry a so-called hyperKahler geometry,
based on the algebra of quaternions, and physical considerations suggest that
these moduli spaces may have certain strong properties reflected in their global
shape, or topology. A principal goal of this project is to develop analytical
tools to establish these properties and more deeply understand the geometry of
these spaces and their relatives. This work has significant interdisciplinary
appeal as it makes contact with several different areas of analysis, geometry
and topology, and provides a testing ground for certain duality principles in
physics. Additional impacts of the project include the facilitation of the PI's
educational activities, including the supervising of original undergraduate
research, mentoring student-led project-based independent study projects, and an
ongoing initiative to improve diversity and gender parity in the mathematics
program at New College of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a framework for the analysis of elliptic operators on a class of spaces
which includes several families of hyperKahler moduli spaces of interest in
physics and geometry. These are exemplified by the moduli spaces of magnetic
monopoles, the L2 cohomology of which is the subject of a long standing and
still open conjecture of Ashoke Sen coming from supersymmetric physics. This
seminal conjecture spawned several parallel conjectures about similar moduli
spaces, and is the starting point for a number interesting geometric questions
motivated by physics. A principal tool this project will develop is a
generalization of Mazzeo and Melrose's well-known calculus of pseudodifferential
operators on manifolds with "fibered boundary", to a category of compact
manifolds with "quasi-fibered boundary". This is a category in which the
monopole moduli spaces and other families of hyperKahler moduli spaces admit
natural compactifications, the construction of which is a second major goal of
this project. Beginning with a proof of Sen's conjecture, this work will
therefore make refined techniques of geometric microlocal analysis newly
available to the study of these important classes of spaces in hyperKahler
geometry and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.