* 1811400
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Roxanne Beltran, Beltran                 Roxanne        S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will characterize the navigation and diving abilities of northern elephant seal
pups. Three months after birth these young animals begin their first migration,
learning to navigate and forage without any parental instruction. Despite
exhibiting the farthest independent migration of any mammal, it is unknown how
these seals find their way, or their way home, in a seemingly featureless ocean.
In the next 100 years, increases in sea surface temperature and decreases in
primary productivity are expected in the North Pacific Ocean. These changes are
expected to affect northern elephant seals by shifting their critical foraging
habitat northward by 1,000km and deeper in the water column. Thus, it is
important to determine whether elephant seal navigation and diving are
genetically passed on from mother to daughter and if so, how that might limit
their adaptive capacities to predicted climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Fellow will work with sponsoring scientist Dr. Daniel Costa from the University
of California Santa Cruz to analyze existing and newly-collected tracking and
diving data from mother elephant seals and their female pups. Using a novel
simulation model, the Fellow will predict the impacts of climate change on a
predator with top-down ecosystem control. In these ways, the Fellow will be
trained in cutting-edge biologging and computational techniques and will obtain
professional development opportunities in science communication. Animal
navigation is an intriguing field that provides an ideal basis for teaching
students key concepts in behavior, ecology, and evolution. By incorporating
results into high school biology learning modules, the Fellow will gain valuable
teaching skills. Research findings will also be communicated with docents and
visitors at the A?o Nuevo State Park research site in collaboration with the
State Park PORTS distance learning program. Finally, the Fellow will provide
hands-on research experience to undergraduate and graduate students, with an
emphasis on broadening the participation of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.