* 1811356
* Teaching Together: Engaging Parents and Preschoolers in STEM Activities &amp; Academic Conversations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tricia Zucker, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,991,914.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This project examines
the conditions in which families and young learners most benefit from "doing
science and math" together among a population that is typically underserved with
respect to STEM experiences--families experiencing poverty. This project builds
on an existing program called Teaching Together that uses interactive parent-
child workshops led by a museum educator and focused on supporting STEM learning
at home. The goal of these workshops is to increase parents'/caregivers' self-
perception and ability to serve as their child's first teacher by supporting
learning and inquiry conversations during daily routines and informal STEM
activities. Families attend a series of afternoon and evening workshops at their
child's preschool center and at a local children's museum. Parents/Caregivers
may participate in online home learning activities and museum experiences. The
project uses an experimental design to test the added value of providing
incremental supports for informal STEM learning. The study uses an experimental
design to address potential barriers parents/caregivers may perceive to doing
informal STEM activities with their child. The project also explores how the
quantity and quality parent-child informal learning interactions may relate to
changes in children's science and mathematics knowledge during the pre-
kindergarten year. The project partners include the Children's Learning
Institute at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston and the
Children's Museum of Houston. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to
increase understanding of how parents/caregivers can be encouraged to support
informal STEM learning by experimentally manipulating key aspects of the broader
expectancy-value-cost motivation theory, which is well established in psychology
and education literatures but has not been applied to preschool parent-child
informal STEM learning. More specifically, the intervention conditions are
designed to identify how specific parent supports can mitigate potential
barriers that families experiencing poverty face. These intervention conditions
include: modeling of informal STEM learning during workshops to address skills
and knowledge barriers; materials to address difficulties accessing science and
math resources; and incentives as a way to address parental time pressures
and/or costs and thereby improve involvement in informal learning activities.
Intervention effects will be calculated in terms of effect sizes and potential
mediators of change will be explored with structural equation modeling. The
first phase of the project uses an iterative process to refine the curriculum
and expand the collection of resources designed for families of 3- to 5-year-
olds. The second phase uses an experimental study of the STEM program to examine
conditions that maximize participation and effectiveness of family learning
programs. In all, 360 families will be randomly assigned to four conditions: 1)
business-as-usual control; 2) the Teaching Together core workshop-based program;
3) Teaching Together workshops + provision of inquiry-based STEM activity kits
for the home; and 4) Teaching Together workshop + activity kits + provision of
monetary incentives for parents/caregivers when they document informal STEM
learning experiences with their child. The interventions will occur in English
and Spanish. A cost analysis across the interventions will also be conducted.
This study uses quantitative and qualitative approaches. Data sources include
parent surveys and interviews, conversation analysis of home learning
activities, parent photo documentation of informal learning activities, and
standardized assessments of children's growth in mathematics, science, and
vocabulary knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.