* 1811597
* Data-driven, biologically constrained biophysical computational model of the hippocampal network at full scale
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Ivan Soltesz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 10/31/2023
* USD 4,230.00

This project aims to fundamentally improve our understanding of the brain. In
particular, this project will construct a detailed, biologically realistic,
computational model of the brain hippocampus. The hippocampus is a major
component of the brain that plays an important role in memory and other major
human functions. This detailed computational model of the hippocampus will allow
researchers to understand the origins of specific behavioral level features of
the brain, as well as treatment effectiveness for conditions such as epilepsy.
In addition, the project aims to investigate brain changes under different
radiation exposure regimes. Furthermore, the software infrastructure developed
in the project, as well as simulation results, will be publicly released to the
wider neuroscience community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
research projects is the construction of realistic and biophysically detailed
computational models of the three major neuronal circuit layers in the
hippocampus: the dentate gyrus (DG), CA3, and CA1. These three regions of the
hippocampus are interconnected, and therefore the computational aspects of this
research require building a detailed data-driven, full-scale computational model
of the entire hippocampal formation and its inputs from the septum and the
entorhinal cortex. Information processing in the brain is organized and
facilitated by the complex interactions of intrinsic biophysical properties of
distinct neuronal types, neuronal morphology, and network connection topology.
These properties give rise to specific types of network oscillations and other
dynamic processes that govern neural information encoding and exchange. The
hypotheses in this proposal are designed to create a detailed picture at
unprecedented scale of how the intrinsic properties of hippocampal principal
neurons and interneurons define the network activity under normal conditions,
and how pathological changes in those properties under epileptic conditions
disrupt hippocampal function. The project has made public releases of the CA1
model code and simulation management tool (SimTracker), and have also published
the CA1 simulation datasets that accompany the publication describing the main
results of the CA1 work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.