* 1811878
* Discrete Conformal Geometry of Surfaces and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Feng Luo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 09/30/2022
* USD 105,552.00

Digital surfaces are being massively produced from scanners, imaging systems,
sensors and many other devices these days. How to compare and categorize these
surfaces is an urgent and important problem. This National Science Foundation
funded project aims to develop mathematical theories for an efficient and speedy
classification of digital surfaces. A successful completion of this National
Science Foundation funded project will have applications in medical imaging,
game industry, engineering and many fields. Some of the earlier work of the PI
in this area have already been used in health and game industries. The project
work will further advance this progress and develop deep mathematics based on
the classical Riemann surface theory and conformal geometry. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The classical theory of Riemann surfaces is a powerful tool for
classifying surfaces up to conformal diffeomorphisms. The most important theorem
in the theory is the Poincare-Koebe's uniformization theorem. The theorem has a
wide range of applications within and outside mathematics. However, computation
of uniformization maps and metrics on non-flat surfaces are very difficult in
general. The goal of the proposal is to develop a theory of discrete conformal
geometry for polyhedral surfaces, to establish the counterpart of the
uniformization theorem in the discrete setting, and to prove convergence of
discrete conformal maps to conformal maps. The PI will develop efficient
algorithms to compute uniformization metrics through collaboration. The main
ingredient in developing a discrete conformal geometry is to define the notion
of discrete conformality. In a recent joint work with collaborators, the PI
introduced a notion of discrete conformal equivalence for polyhedral metrics on
surfaces. The PI and his collaborators proved a discrete version of
uniformization theorem for compact polyhedral surfaces and showed that discrete
conformal maps converge to conformal maps on tori and disks. There remain
several major open problems of establishing the convergence of discrete
conformal maps for all surfaces and proving the discrete uniformization theorem
for all non-compact simply connected surfaces. The discrete conformality
introduced by us is closely related to the work of Alexandrov, Pogorelov and
Thurston on convex surfaces in hyperbolic three-space, the classical Wyle
problem and the Koebe circle domain conjecture. Tools developed in the classical
area of mathematics will be used to solve the proposed
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.