* 1811109
* SHF: Small:Extremely Energy-Efficient Monolithic 3D System Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With the slowing down of Moore's Law, traditional 2D scaling is not expected to
deliver the area, power, and performance benefits the semiconductor industry has
been counting on. Thus, the time has come to go vertical, accommodating
processor cores, accelerators, cache, and main memory in the same package. There
are two ways of doing this: use through-silicon vias (TSVs) or monolithic 3D
integration. TSVs do not have memory-on-logic stacking success stories.
Monolithic 3D integration uses monolithic inter-tier vias that have a much
smaller diameter than TSVs, and enable many different design styles: transistor-
level monolithic, gate-level monolithic, and block-level monolithic. While
fabrication and test techniques for monolithic 3D integration are maturing,
monolithic 3D system architectures have not been investigated in depth. The work
on this project fills this gap. The methodologies and tools developed under this
grant will be made available on the web. They will also be made available to the
industry. The material will be included in course materials, and under-
represented graduate students will be attracted to this research through
Princeton Fellowships. Results will be disseminated through research articles
and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are various "walls" confronting
computer system architects these days. The Power Wall constrains the portion of
the chip that can be powered on. This is also known as the dark silicon problem.
The Memory Wall prevents efficient access to off-chip memory. Monolithic 3D
integration has the potential to significantly alleviate the problems associated
with these walls, especially for abundant-data problems, such as machine
learning and inference, which are becoming commonplace. This project seeks to
improve the energy efficiency of monolithic 3D system architectures by a factor
of 500 relative to traditional system architectures. It will do so by exploiting
synergies across the device, logic, memory, accelerator, micro-architecture,
chip multiprocessor, and monolithic 3D IC levels of the design hierarchy,
providing a common computation platform from high-performance mobile devices to
data centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.