* 1811568
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Network Estimation across Multiple Sample Groups and Data Types
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Marina Vannucci, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,943.00

As part of this collaborative research, the investigators will develop new
statistical methods for the estimation of multiple graphical networks. The
proposed research will address the challenge of learning networks when there is
heterogeneity among both the subjects and the variables considered, breaking new
ground in graphical modeling and Bayesian statistics. The methods developed will
have the potential for significant impact in statistics and in applied fields in
which problems of network estimation naturally arise. In particular,
applications in neuroimaging will be explored. The project will include
educational and training activities for graduate students. Findings will be
disseminated to the research community and used to further interdisciplinary
collaborative efforts. Software and code will be developed and deposited in
public repositories.

When all samples are collected under similar conditions or reflect a single type
of disease, methods such as the graphical lasso or Bayesian network inference
approaches can be applied to learn the underlying conditional dependence
relations. In many studies, however, samples are obtained for different subtypes
or disease, under varying experimental settings, or other heterogeneous
conditions. The challenge becomes even more formidable when multiple data types
are under consideration. This project will focus on the development of Bayesian
methods to learn networks for a single data type across multiple sample groups
using an approach that both links edge values across groups, and flexibly models
which groups are most similar. Methods will also be extended to a hierarchical
modeling framework of networks from both heterogeneous sets of subjects and
heterogeneous data types.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.