* 1811240
* Tuyuryaq (Togiak, Alaska): A Model for Alaska Native Youth Learning on College Campuses
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Kristen Barnett, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Paragraph 1:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Alaska Native students attendance at
a workshop at Bates College focused on investigating new models for advancing
academic achievement by Indigenous students on college campuses. As a Yup'ik
scientist, PI Dr. Kristen Barnett, understands first-hand how college campuses
are critical environments for providing Indigenous students with a pathway to
science careers, yet Alaska Native youth have limited participation and face
limited support at institutions of higher learning. Barnett points out that
scientific research frequently focuses on topics that directly affect Indigenous
communities, e.g., coastal erosion, permafrost, fisheries, the digital economy,
and could benefit by incorporating Indigenous experiences and epistemologies
into the science curricula at academic institutions. The vision for this
workshop, Tuyyuryaq (Togiak, Alaska), is to develop new models for improving the
learning environment for Indigenous students on college campuses, as well as
ways in which faculty can reenvision academic institutions and the ways in which
they impart knowledge to Indigenous students and communities. Creating
opportunities for Alaska Native and Native American students is strongly in the
national interest; these groups are highly underrepresented in higher education
and in science disciplines in particular. Increasing the participation of these
groups can provide leadership and economic opportunity in regions of the U.S.
where opportunities for development are currently limited.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2: &lt;br/&gt;This workshop seeks to overcome
structural inequalities in higher education and for indigenous students in
particular, by developing and applying inclusive epistemologies derived from
multiple cultures. The workshop provides a platform for collaborative
participation accommodating a wide range of Indigenous communities,
interdisciplinary scholars, students, administration and staff, and the general
public. The workshop will consists of an opening plenary session, followed by
multiple small group sessions that facilitate immersive and sensitive
discussions among participants, and concludes with a larger group discussion
that highlights conference experiences, ideas and future directions.
Participants will access tools for curriculum development and deepen their
understanding of impacts of the current (western) educational models. The long-
term goals of this workshop is to advance awareness and support the
incorporation of inclusive practices of research and teaching, to encourge
student involvement in campus culture that is scalable to any
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.