* 1811965
* Evolution of Secondary Herbivore Defense Metabolite Biosynthesis from Primary Metabolism in the non-model Crucifer Erysimum (wallflower)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Cynthia Holland, Holland                 Cynthia        K
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Cynthia Holland is "Evolution of Secondary Herbivore
Defense Metabolite Biosynthesis from Primary Metabolism in the non-model
Crucifer Erysimum (wallflower)." The host institution for the fellowship is the
Boyce Thompson Institute and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Georg Jander and
Lukas Mueller.

To protect themselves against insect herbivores, plants have evolved a wide
variety of chemical defenses. One class of plant defensive metabolites, known as
cardiac glycosides, is found in at least twelve plant families and works by
slowing the contractions and increasing the pumping force of the predator's
heart. Despite the therapeutic use of these compounds in treating arrhythmias
and congestive heart failure, a complete pathway for cardiac glycoside
biosynthesis is not known for any plant species. This project will use the
cardiac glycoside-producing wormseed wallflower (Erysimum cheiranthoides) to
identify the biosynthetic pathway genes for these compounds. These results will
contribute to the understanding of the evolution of defensive chemicals in other
plant species, including important crops such as maize, soybean, and wheat.
Training objectives include metabolomics, genetics, gene expression technologies
and bioinformatics. Broader impacts include introducing underrepresented
students to genomics and chemical ecology research via mentoring through an NSF-
funded REU program, outreach to high school students at an urban high school in
Yonkers (NY) and the development of laboratory kits for middle- and high-school
teachers in rural New York.

As a rapidly-growing, self-pollinating annual, E. cheiranthoides is an excellent
model system for investigating the evolution of a new metabolic pathway for the
production of cardenolides, a class of cardiac glycosides involved in herbivore
defense. Modification of ubiquitous biosynthetic pathways of endogenous plant
steroids, e.g. brassinosteroids, has likely been repeatedly selected for in the
course of evolution to generate similar anti-herbivore toxins. This research
will identify expansion and neofunctionalization of the enzyme families in E.
cheiranthoides that normally contribute to primary metabolism in other crucifer
species. Erysimum homologs of known cardenolide biosynthetic genes from other
species will be identified using genome assemblies and characterized using
structure-function-sequence analysis. Missing genes in the cardenolide pathway
will be discovered through comparative metabolomics, transcriptomics, genomics,
and forward genetic screens. Finally, the ecological "escape from herbivory"
hypothesis will be tested by examining the role of cardenolides in host-insect
interactions. Results from this research will be shared through publications,
presentations at conferences, and inclusion in www.erysimum.org, a wallflower-
specific website which will serve as a publicly accessible repository for all
data related to this project.

Keywords: biosynthesis biochemistry, plant biotic stress, comparative genomics

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.