* 1811815
* Direct Nuclear Reactions: Theory and Uncertainties
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Filomena Maciel Nunes, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Direct nuclear reactions provide some of the most versatile probes in nuclear
physics and provide access to a large variety of nuclear properties, most of
which are relevant for astrophysics and societal applications. Reliable reaction
theory with known uncertainties is key for the interpretation of nuclear
reaction experiments. This project aims to advance our understanding of the
information contained in a number of different reaction data. By quantifying
uncertainties and evaluating the level of confidence of the reaction theory used
to interpret a given experiment, this project will enable a better use of
current and future rare isotope facilities in the U.S. and worldwide.
Specifically, the PI and her student will work with experimentalists in planning
and interpreting on-going nuclear reaction experiments at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory and at the future Facility for Rare Isotope
Beams at Michigan State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
advance our understanding of the information content and uncertainties
concerning direct nuclear reactions, quantifying uncertainties and evaluating
the level of confidence of the quantities extracted from the interpretation of
experiments. Tools will be developed to use Bayesian statistics to extract
constraints on the optical potential from data, as well as defining confidence
bands for reaction observables. Strategies for reducing the uncertainty of the
theory will also be explored. The Bayesian tools will be applied to extracting a
non-local global optical potential for a wide range of masses and energies,
informed by ab-initio many-body theories. The Bayes factor will be used to
perform model comparisons and establish the level of sophistication needed in a
reaction model to describe available data. The PI and her student will focus on
advancing the theory for direct reactions with a particular focus on uncertainty
quantification. A second goal of this project is to pave the way for a direct
connection between many-body and few-body approaches and enable a better
understanding of the role of excitation in direct reaction
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.