* 1811414
* Theory and Methods for Inferring Causal Effects with Mendelian Randomization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hyunseung Kang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In medicine, many investigators use observational studies as a starting point to
uncover causal effects of risk factors on health outcomes. Mendelian
Randomization (MR) is one popular approach to draw better causal conclusions
from observational data. In a nutshell, MR is a "big data" approach based on
methods from economics. Specifically, MR adapts instrumental variables (IV) to
large observational genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to determine causal
mechanisms. Specialized MR methods and computer software have been developed
leading to the widespread use of the approach, but to date little is understood
about the statistical properties of these methods. For example, when do MR
methods work well (and when do they not)? Other fundamental questions about the
underlying causal mechanisms are also poorly understood. This project will
investigate the statistical theory and methods behind MR so that investigators
can properly use MR to draw causal conclusions from observational data, leading
to better medical and health decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MR approach
requires finding genetic variants in GWAS, called instruments, that satisfy the
following assumptions: (A1) Instruments are associated with the risk factor,
(A2) Instruments have no direct effect on the outcome, and (A3) Instruments are
unconfounded by variables affecting both the outcome and the risk factor.
Specific aims that will be investigated include (1) laying the theoretical
foundations for MR including identification and statistical sufficiency, (2)
studying the statistical properties, including efficiency, power, and
robustness, of popular MR methods, such as the median method or the MR-Egger
method, (3) proposing new MR methods that are robust to common problems
associated with MR data, most notably violations of the three core assumptions
(A1)-(A3), (4) developing numerical and visual diagnostic tools for assumptions
underlying MR, and (5) producing easy-to-use software
suites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.