* 1811794
* Travel Support to attend The 16th International Heat Transfer Conference (Beijing, China, August 10-15, 2018)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Xiuling Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 02/28/2019
* USD 18,000.00

The International Heat Transfer Conference has a long and rich history, which
dates back to the International Discussion on Heat Transfer held in London and
Atlantic City in 1951. In 1966, with the third conference held in Chicago, the
International Heat Transfer Conference started a four-year cycle, having been
organized already in 16 different cities of 9 countries. As the world's premier
thermal transport processes conferences, researchers, engineers and scientists
from all over the world get together to exchange knowledge and experience and
introduce novel interdisciplinary research ideas. The International Heat
Transfer Conference continues the increasingly important mission of fostering
international cooperation and the exchange of ideas among scientists and
engineers in the heat and mass transfer research community, together with
engaging underrepresented minorities in its activities.

The International Heat Transfer Conference is the largest worldwide forum on
heat transfer and thermal science and engineering. The organization is devoted
to meeting the scientific and social challenges of thermal energy usage,
environmental sustainability, materials processing, and bioscience. The mission
of International Heat Transfer Conference has become more important with the
rapid development of human society. The International Heat Transfer Conference
will be held in Beijing, China, August 10-15, 2018. It is under the auspices of
the Assembly for International Heat Transfer Conferences, an institution founded
in 1966, with the principal goal of creating and sustaining a worldwide forum
for heat transfer specialists to present research results, discuss the state of
the art techniques in heat transfer areas, and identify the future direction and
priorities in the various domains of thermal science and engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.