* 1811770
* EAGER: Nature of the Pre-chemistry Ensemble in Protein Kinases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Ranajeet Ghose, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2022
* USD 358,675.00

Kinases are biological molecules that modify the rate of specific chemical
reactions in cells. They and the products of these chemical reactions represent
central hubs in the intracellular signaling networks in all domains of life. In
addition to sub-cellular localization and temporal expression, the efficiencies
of particular kinases towards specific molecular products is key in targeting
input signals towards distinct physiological outputs. The goal of this project
is to understand the nature of this regulation with sufficient resolution in
space and time to provide the means to perturb and ultimately design signaling
networks that drive specific input signals towards defined cellular responses.
This project will also provide a fertile training ground for a graduate student
and several undergraduate researchers in a wide variety of skills that range
from computational methodology, experimental NMR and enzyme biochemistry. The
undergraduates will be drawn from the pool of students who transfer from one of
the seven community colleges that are part of the City University of New York
(CUNY) into the City College of New York (CCNY) with a goal of encouraging them
to pursue higher education in the STEM disciplines. It is notable that the
graduate student who is expected on this project was formerly a transfer student
who has chosen to pursue his PhD degree in Biochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of a phosphate group from adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) to specific serine, threonine or tyrosine residues of
substrate proteins represents a central mechanism of signal transduction within
cells and plays a critical role in almost all physiological processes. This
transfer is enabled by biocatalysts known as protein kinases and involves the
formation of a pre-chemistry complex between the kinase, the substrate and ATP.
Recent studies suggest that the nature of the structural dynamics of the
catalytic elements of the kinase and the phospho-acceptor region of the
substrate in the context of this pre-chemistry complex determines the efficiency
of the phospho-transfer reaction and contributes to its variability between
specific kinase/substrate pairs. These variations in phosphorylation efficiency
between kinase/substrate pairs is necessary to maintain the finely tuned network
of numerous phosphorylation based signaling events occurring simultaneously in
the cell. An understanding of these differences in efficiency requires the
characterization in atomic detail of the conformational state/states that
comprise the pre-chemistry complex. This project, using a combination of
cutting-edge computational approaches, solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) methods and biochemical assays, aims to characterize the conformational
states that define the pre-chemistry complex towards the goal of addressing the
following question: what determines the efficiency of phosphorylation within a
kinase-substrate-ATP pre-chemistry complex? The model system chosen for this
project involves the mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK2 and peptides derived
from its natural substrate, the transcription factor Elk-1, that are
phosphorylated with differing efficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.