* 1811225
* RAPID: Ant community responses to a 1000-year flooding event
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Scott Solomon, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Gruner
* 12/31/2019
* USD 103,115.00

Extreme weather events, such as catastrophic fires or floods, are expected to
become more likely under global environmental change. Scientists have a
relatively poor understanding of how such extreme events influence the abundance
of plants and animals, including species that affect human well-being such as
pollinators or invasive pests. Improving this scientific understanding requires
that we learn from natural disasters. This project examines how extreme flooding
associated with Hurricane Harvey in August 2017 affected the abundance and
community composition of ants in the Big Thicket region of east Texas. This
region hosts dozens of native ant species that provide valuable ecosystem
services, such as decomposition and pest control, as well as noxious invasive
species (fire ants and tawny crazy ants). The researchers will use "before" and
"after" samples to test the hypothesis that Hurricane Harvey disrupted east
Texas ant communities, favoring an increase in abundance and extent of invasive
ants. The research will be conducted in coordination with the National Park
Service, who hope to learn more about the ecological effects of Hurricane
Harvey. The scientists will communicate their results to the public in the Texas
communities of Houston and Beaumont, which were affected by fire ants and
strongly affected by Harvey's floodwaters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological
theory suggests that the relative abundance and even presence of species in
communities may be driven as much by historical contingencies associated with
rare events as by filtering from average environmental conditions. Forecasts for
environmental change in the 21st century include an increase in frequency of
extreme events, and ecologists are increasingly called upon to predict their
consequences. The researchers will study how the 1,000-year flooding associated
with Hurricane Harvey modified the taxonomic and functional trait composition of
Big Thicket ant communities. The researchers will leverage three years of pre-
event sampling to contrast the abundance, diversity, and species composition of
ant communities before and after Harvey's floodwaters. Importantly, pre-event
work demonstrated that exotic ant species had begun to penetrate the intact
native communities. The researchers will evaluate whether Hurricane Harvey
increased opportunities for invasion by exotic ants. They will conduct monthly
pitfall sampling at 19 established sites to document changes in ant communities,
and test whether changes in response to the hurricane are transient or represent
new stable states. They will also assemble a functional trait database for these
communities to test whether taxonomic shifts were driven by the filtering of
species-specific traits that confer tolerance to flooding. Functional traits of
interest include risk-spreading strategies such as polygyny (multiple queens per
colony) and polydomy (multiple nesting locations). As the floodwaters have just
now receded in the study area, there is an urgent window of opportunity to study
the dynamics of ecological response and recovery.