* 1811436
* Big Astronomy in Chile through Dome+
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Vivian White, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,219,327.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The team of Associated Universities Inc. (AUI), Michigan State University (MSU),
California Academy of Science (the Academy), Astronomical Society of the Pacific
(ASP), and Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), will
bring together experts in astronomy, STEM education, and planetarium show
production. This work will tell the story of the people and places that make
"big astronomy" possible, particularly the search for exoplanets and
understanding of how planets form. The show and related materials will be
presented in dozens of venues around the USA and internationally. Through a
planetarium show and learning experiences that extend beyond the theater, the
team will take visitors to extreme sites of the NSF ground-based observatories
on the mountains of Chile and meet the diverse people who enable amazing
discoveries in astronomy. In addition, the project develops the Dome+ model,
which ensures engagement does not end with the planetarium. Dome+ will include
additional content, weekly virtual sessions with STEM professionals, and a suite
of closely linked outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dome+ will serve as
a model to extend engagement and increase the impact of future planetarium
shows. Project goals include 1) increasing awareness of the research in
astronomy being made at the NSF-funded observatories in Chile, 2) increasing
awareness and interest in diverse STEM career opportunities at large
observatories and related institutions in the USA, 3) increasing knowledge of
science enabled by big observatories, 4) increasing Latinx perceptions as
someone who can have a career at a major observatory, and 5) developing the
Dome+ model and identify best practices for implementation. Iterative and
summative evaluation of the project by collaborators at MSU will address four
main questions: How does the Dome+ model affect visitors' perceptions of
diversity of careers in STEM? How does the Dome+ model affect visitors' interest
and understanding of Chile as an ideal observing location for astronomy? How
does the Dome+ model support visitors' interest and understanding of the science
of exoplanets? How do planetariums implement Dome+, and how does implementation
affect the outcomes for visitors? The impact assessment component of this
project takes places in four phases. The goals of the first phase are to
leverage the expertise of the research team to inform the creation of the
planetarium show and to set up a robust research agenda to be achieved in Years
2-4 of the project. The goals of the second phase are to collect preliminary
data from visitors on their responses to planetarium show content and to use
this information to advise on edits to the show and to develop the content and
format of the web-portal and educational materials. The goal of the third phase
is to then collect data on how effectively the technology-rich environments of
the three components of the Dome+ model (planetarium show, web-portal,
educational materials) work in concert to reach the intended goals of changing
visitors' perceptions of diversity in STEM, engaging visitors with astronomy
content on exoplanets, and exposing visitors to the wonders of astronomy
research in Chile. The goal of the fourth phase is to perform data analysis,
synthesize findings and make recommendations for future implementations of the
Dome+ model for practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.