* 1811360
* New Techniques for High-Dimensional Regression and Applications to Precision Medicine
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xinge Jeng, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This project focuses on the study of statistical inference in high-dimensional
regression and its applications towards biomedical research. A new analytic
framework for inference-based variable selection will be developed to explicate
key properties of selection performances, including the numbers of true
positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives. Consequently,
the investigator will develop novel procedures, with which practitioners can
select variables based on Type I error control to prevent false discoveries,
Type II error control to improve the chances of selecting a large proportion of
signals, or some balanced criteria to meet their different needs. This study
will be particularly valuable in areas where signals are relatively weak under
high-dimensionality; such examples include whole-genome sequencing studies and
precision medicine with a large number of prognostic factors. The education and
outreach components of the project include new course development, involvement
of undergraduates and under-represented groups, and an accessible website
resource for the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises
several key innovations in establishing foundations for new high-dimensional
variable selection procedures beyond those based on standard penalized
regressions. These innovations include (1) accurate approximations for false
discovery proportion (FDP) and false negative proportion (FNP) via higher-order
Mehler's expansions and new theories for sparse inference under dependence; (2)
data-driven approaches that are automatically adaptive to the unknown sparsity
level of the regression coefficients and data dependence; (3) derivation of
regression-based confidence intervals that are robust to outcome model
misspecification in precision medicine. Further, accurate approximations of FDP
and FNP lead to new interpretable variable selection procedures for big data
applications; data adaptivity will allow the methods to be applicable across a
spectrum of data scenarios; whereas robust inferential procedures can provide
suitable personalized treatment decisions in the high-dimensional
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.