* 1811832
* RUI: Testing Fundamental Symmetries with Muon g-2
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Frederick Gray, Regis University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 170,000.00

This award will support the PI and undergraduate students from Regis University
to enable them to contribute to the Muon g-2 Experiment at Fermilab, which aims
to discover new particles and interactions that are beyond the current Standard
Model. The Standard Model of subatomic physics provides an overarching
theoretical framework that describes all known forces except gravity. It has
been extensively tested, and it successfully predicts almost every phenomenon
that has ever been observed in experiments at particle accelerators.
Nevertheless, it is known to be incomplete, since it does not have a way to
explain dark matter or dark energy, and it does not account for the asymmetry of
matter over antimatter that allowed the structures of our universe to form.
Muons are in many ways similar to electrons, but with a mass approximately 207
times higher, and they are unstable, decaying in a few microseconds; they appear
in nature as cosmic rays. The Muon g-2 Experiment measures the rate at which the
of muons rotate as they orbit in a magnetic field. That rotation could arise
from the coupling of muons to new particles. The experiment has been constructed
and has completed its first year of data collection. With close mentoring from
the PI and other collaborators, students will maintain and upgrade particle
detectors, assist with taking data at Fermilab, and analyze data. They will have
opportunities to present their work at conferences and collaboration meetings.
The professional development of these students is a primary focus of this
project. Entering classes at Regis University are continuing a trend of
increasing ethnic and socioeconomic diversity, so the students supported by this
award represent a broadening in the participation by groups that are currently
underrepresented in physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Muon g-2
experiment measures the muon's anomalous magnetic moment. Previous measurements
of this quantity differ from theoretical predictions by about 3.5 standard
deviations. The new measurement at Fermilab will record 20 times more muon
decays than experiment 821 at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Systematic
uncertainties will also be reduced, leading to an expected precision of 140
parts per billion. Consequently, the experiment has the potential to discover
the indirect effects of new particles and interactions with very high
statistical significance. The range of possible new physics is wide; it could
include ideas such as supersymmetry, light weakly-interacting particles from a
"dark sector," axion-like particles, or extra dimensions. Conversely, if the
result turns out to agree with the Standard Model, it would provide a strong
constraint on all of these new physics models. The experiment measures the rate
of spin precession in flight for a muon beam in a weak-focusing 1.5 Tesla
storage ring magnet. Several beam dynamics effects directly contribute to the
systematic error, including coherent betatron oscillations (CBO) and muon
losses, which are partly driven by the CBO. The fiber harps, which were
refurbished and are maintained by the Regis group, are used to characterize and
to minimize the CBO. The anticipated precision of the experiment assumes that
the systematic errors from CBO and muon losses will be reduced by factors of 2.3
and 4.5, respectively. The Regis group participates in the analysis of fiber
harp data in order to understand these beam dynamics effects; it also
contributes to other parts of the analysis effort, including data quality
control and run selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.