* 1811952
* Phase Transitions in Random Interacting Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Tobias Johnson, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 124,422.00

This research project addresses several questions in discrete probability. The
first is on random interacting systems of particles, which serve as
probabilistic models for phenomena ranging from the spread of infections to the
growth of populations of competing organisms. Even the simplest examples of such
particle systems are not fully understood. This project is focused on a system
in a larger family known as A + B -&gt; 2B models studied by physicists as
models for combustion. The system has recently been shown to display surprising
behavior on finite and infinite trees, which this project will explore further.
The other major question to be pursued is on random trees, another common model
throughout the sciences. This project investigates equations arising from random
trees whose solutions are related to the existence or nonexistence of certain
classifications of trees into categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of
the project is to study a system of interacting random walks known as the frog
model. In this process, inactive particles are placed on a graph. One particle
then becomes active and performs a random walk, waking any particles it
encounters. These particles then start their own random walks, waking any
particles they encounter, and so on. Recent work by the PI has shown that the
model exhibits phase transitions between transience and recurrence on infinite
trees and between different cover time regimes on finite trees. The project
proposes proving the existence of an additional weak recurrence phase on the
infinite tree and an intermediate cover time phase on the finite tree. A
potential route to this lies in further finer analysis of recursive
distributional equations, working first with toy models. The other proposed
project explores classifications of trees that follow rules given by automata.
The prototypical example is the classification of trees according to whether
they contain an infinite binary subtree starting at the root. This
classification obeys a recursive rule (namely that a tree is in the class if and
only if at least two root child subtrees are) that can be described by a tree
automaton. This rule induces a fixed-point equation that one can use to compute
the probability of a Galton-Watson tree being in this class. This project will
investigate further the relationship between the classifications, the tree
automata, and the fixed-point equations. Two approaches to the problem are
probabilistic investigation of the random trees and other branching processes
arising from them, and the direct analytic investigation of the fixed-point
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.