* 1811745
* Methodology for Multi Time-Scale Nonlinear Dynamical Spatio-Temporal Statistical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Christopher Wikle, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

Scientists and engineers are increasingly aware of the importance of accurately
characterizing various sources of uncertainty when trying to understand complex
systems such as those that vary across time and space. Examples of such systems
include how ocean heating influences convective clouds in the tropics, which in
turn, can influence severe weather and habitat conditions over North America;
or, how a migratory species interacts with its environment and competitive
pressures from both predators and prey. When performing statistical modeling on
such complex spatio-temporal phenomena, the scientific goal is typically either
inference, prediction, or forecasting, all of which require some measure of
uncertainty. To accomplish these goals through modeling, one must synthesize
information from a variety of sources, including direct observations, indirect
(remotely sensed) observations, surrogate observations (mechanistic model
output), previous empirical results, expert opinion, and scientific knowledge.
This information must then integrate into a process model that can represent the
complexity of the interacting processes, and account for uncertainty. This
research is concerned with building these models in a way that can account for
complex interactions across different time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the development of
a methodological framework for parsimonious and computationally efficient models
for multi time-scale nonlinear dynamical spatio-temporal processes that accounts
for the interaction across processes and time scales in such a way as to
accommodate uncertainty in data, processes, and parameters. In particular, the
project will focus on a hybrid model that combines elements of a generalized
quadratic nonlinear spatio-temporal dynamical model with a recurrent neural
network model. However, this methodology will focus on models for processes that
involve multiple time scales of variability. This will include the development
of computationally efficient algorithms that can deal with the extreme curse of
dimensionality in the state and parameter spaces associated with complex
interacting nonlinear phenomena by adapting, extending and combining approaches
from both statistics and machine learning. Not only will the proposed modeling
and computational methodology be an advancement in statistics, but it will be
useful across a broad range of disciplines that deal with complex multi time-
scale dynamical processes such as brain science, climatology, demography,
econometrics, fisheries, ecology, meteorology, oceanography, and wildlife
biology. In addition, the project will contribute to STEM education through
training a graduate research assistant, who will gain inter-disciplinary
experience. In addition, the project will foster undergraduate interest in the
STEM disciplines by employing undergraduate research assistants to help with the
development of visualization tools for spatio-temporal
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.