* 1811543
* CRII: RI: A Biologically-Inspired Algorithm to Detect, Segment, and Track Moving Objects with Observer Motion
* CSE,IIS
* 07/31/2017,04/30/2020
* Neda Nategh, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 124,588.00

This project aims to develop a real-time computational algorithm to detect,
segment and track moving objects in the presence of observer motion. This
algorithm will be based on a computational model of experimentally measured
properties of Object Motion Sensitive (OMS) cells in the vertebrate retina,
which solve a similar problem. From the known computational properties of the
retina, it is expected that the algorithm will be robust under difficult tasks
in motion tracking, including object occlusion, multiple moving objects, varying
scene statistics, substantial background motion, and optic flow. From a
biological perspective, the developed computational model will give insight to
how the retina encodes moving objects. From an engineering perspective, the
resultant computational algorithm will be applicable to machine vision from a
moving platform, including autonomous vehicles, surveillance and reconnaissance
applications, as well as, smart sensor design and neuromorphic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite many advances in motion analysis methods,
techniques based on moving observations are still in a preliminary stage when
compared to static observations, as far as reliability, efficiency, robustness,
and runtime are concerned in real world scenarios. At other hand, our biological
visual system is capable of performing similar motion computations reliably in
the presence of constant eye movements. Recently, it was discovered that
segmentation of moving objects, and rejection of background motion, begins in
the retina. A subset of retinal ganglion cells responds to differential motion
between the receptive field center and surround, as produced by an object moving
over the background, but are strongly suppressed by global image motion, as
produced by the observer's head or eye movements. This selectivity for
differential motion is independent of direction and the spatial pattern of the
object, enabling our visual system to find the boundaries of the moving objects,
segregate multiple moving objects, and also anticipate the direction of motion.
The retina performs these tasks simultaneously, in real-time, and with high
accuracy using a network of only five basic cell types. These properties, along
with the experimental accessibility of the retina, makes this neural circuit an
ideal working biological system to serve as the design for an object-tracking
algorithm. This project will develop a unique motion analysis algorithm for
mobile observers based on recent findings of retina's motion computations and
circuitry, and demonstrate its performance in a variety of realistic scenarios,
which includes lateral observer motion, optic flow, dynamic scenes, and other
objects that occlude the moving object.