* 1811214
* Evaluating STEM Scouts: The Design of a Comprehensive Evaluation Plan and Feasibility Study
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Miriam Linver, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 193,617.00

The Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. An immediate challenge for informal
STEM education is the lack of high quality program evaluation. What does high-
quality evaluation look like and how can it be accomplished? High-quality
evaluation necessarily begins with good evaluation planning. In addition,
although several large-scale youth-serving organizations embrace STEM, there is
limited research on the interaction between STEM outcomes and social-emotional
learning (SEL). This pilot and feasibility project involves a collaboration
between researchers with expertise in STEM education, out-of-school time (OST)
programs, social-emotional learning, and evaluation, as well as practitioners
and program developers. STEM Scouts participants are grouped into "labs" of
approximately 10-20 boys and girls with 3 or more leaders per group and often
collaborate with local schools. The mission of STEM Scouts is to help young
people grow in character and STEM skills as they explore their curiosity using
experiential activities and interaction with STEM professionals. Building on
prior NSF-funded work, this project expands the implementation of the Systems
Evaluation Protocol (SEP), a three-stage evidence-based approach to evaluation
planning involving (a) Preparation, (b) Model Development, and (c) Evaluation
Plan Development. The proposed project has implications for other youth-serving
organizations that also embrace a dual mission of supporting STEM and the
social-emotional development of youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to: (1) develop a detailed theory of change for STEM Scouts that
highlights the hypothesized interactions between STEM outcomes and Positive
Youth Development/SEL outcomes; (2) pilot three new enhancements to the SEP
(System Mapping, Ecosystem Modeling, and Model Validation); and (3) determine
the feasibility of conducting a national scale STEM Scouts study. The project
will utilize a research-practice partnership Evolutionary Evaluation approach
and the enhanced SEP. A working group of STEM Scouts leadership and project
researchers will work through initial stages of the SEP to generate a
stakeholder map, logic model and pathway model (a causal depiction of how the
program works). Ten STEM Scout Labs purposively selected from across the country
with the goal of diverse representation will participate in focus groups. Using
logic and pathway models generated by the working group, each Lab will complete
a System Mapping activity to identify the larger system in which the Lab exists
(e.g., stakeholders and decision-makers). Focus group participants will review
and discuss their maps. Through Ecosystem Modeling they will identify the most
important outcomes, key connections, and revisions they might make to their
model, and discuss how the model reflects their STEM Scouts experiences. A
coding dictionary will be developed to analyze focus group transcripts; findings
will inform Model Verification and will be used to assess whether changes need
to be made to the enhanced SEP. It is hypothesized the enhanced SEP will enable
the working group to better understand factors hindering or enabling program and
evaluation feasibility and success. Project findings will be disseminated to the
evaluator and research community, OST program providers/developers and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.