* 1811865
* SHF: Small: Scalable Program Synthesis using Counterexample-Guided Abstraction Refinement
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Isil Dillig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 366,000.00

The field of program synthesis promises to dramatically simplify software
development by automatically generating programs from high-level specifications,
such as input-output examples. While there has been a flurry of recent research
on program synthesis, existing techniques have limited scalability both in terms
of the complexity of the underlying programming language as well as the
complexity of the programs that can be synthesized. The main goal of this
project is to advance the state-of-the-art in program synthesis by developing
much more efficient and scalable synthesis techniques. This research could
potentially broaden the applicability and scalability of program synthesis which
could enable disruptive changes to both end-users and programmers. The
investigator will include both graduate and undergraduate students in this
project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the foundations and
instantiations of the synthesis using abstraction refinement (SYNGAR) paradigm.
In the SYNGAR paradigm, an abstract synthesizer generates candidates programs
that satisfy the specification with respect to an abstract semantics, and an
abstraction refinement engine constructs new abstractions that rule out spurious
programs returned by the abstract synthesizer. Building on previous work done by
the investigators, the project develops (a) new abstract synthesis algorithms
that can efficiently handle richer language features such as recursion and
higher-order functions; (b) automated &amp; efficient abstraction refinement
algorithms; (c) incremental synthesis techniques that can reuse knowledge from
previous iterations; and (d) specification inference techniques to reduce the
effort required to integrate new primitives that can be used by the synthesizer.
The project will develop tools and apply these ideas to different domains, such
as numerical/statistical computing, text processing, and programming with
complex Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.