* 1811821
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jared Homola, Homola                  Jared          J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow will conduct research to improve our understanding
of the role of rapid evolution in facilitating biological invasions. A
longstanding theory in the field predicts that decreased genetic diversity
normally associated with small initial populations of invasive species should
reduce the likelihood of success for these species. However, invasive species
are everywhere across the globe, and result in hundreds of billions of dollars
in economic costs each year. The fellow will apply recently developed DNA
sequencing techniques to museum specimens of an invasive Great Lakes fish, the
round goby, to look for evidence of genetic adaptations associated with this
species ability to spread across the Laurentian Great Lakes since 1990. An
improved understanding of the evolutionary processes that allow biological
invasions to succeed will allow natural resource managers to better anticipate
which species pose the greatest risks, increasing the likelihood of successful
prevention or mitigation of invasions. The fellow will engage K-12 and
undergraduate teaching programs to design active learning classroom lessons
focused on biological invasions, which provide an elegant nexus between concepts
related to biology, ecology, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will be completed using a spatially- and temporally-explicit landscape
genomics approach that accounts for demographic processes that often make
genomic detections of selection difficult. By using genomic data derived from
museum specimens collected throughout the Great Lakes region since the invasion
began, the project will provide a unique opportunity to empirically observe
changes in allele frequencies associated with adaptation to novel environmental
stressors. To complement methods seeking genomic signals of selection, the
fellow will also evaluate associations between genetic data and a suite of
morphological and environmental variables. This project will provide the fellow
with training in laboratory and bioinformatic analyses of degraded DNA,
including DNA extraction from formalin-preserved samples and sequencing via
target capture. The genome-wide panel of loci used in the analyses will provide
a resource for future genomic research on round gobies. In addition to creating
classroom learning resources, the fellow will also train undergraduate
researchers, with an emphasis on underrepresented minorities, in genomic and
bioinformatic methods necessary for evolutionary biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.