* 1811685
* Structural and Dynamical Determinants of Influenza Transmissibility
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Rommie Amaro, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,500.00

Both seasonal and pandemic influenza have been responsible for millions of
deaths worldwide. The persistence of seasonal influenza strains costs between
3,000 and 49,000 lives annually in the United States alone. The project aims to
use Blue Waters to run simulations of the influenza virus to explain flu
transmissibility. These simulations will be of a very large scale, involving
over 200 million atoms, and are expected to provide unprecedented insights into
the mechanisms of influenza virulence and drug resistance. In addition,
simulations will set the stage for the longer-term goal of developing an atomic-
level understanding of the influenza infection process, leading to new pathways
for pharmacological intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has used
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the individual influenza membrane
glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) to identify
experimentally validated antiviral compounds that bind to new glycoprotein
pockets never before captured by experimental techniques. However, influenza
glycoproteins are components of a much larger virion surface that collectively
participates in host recognition and infection processes. The surface
glycoprotein distributions and their decoration with glycans poses many
interesting unanswered questions related to the roles of HA, NA, glycans, and
substrate (and substrate mimicks) play in the viral infection and assembly
process. Additionally, the functional balance of HA, which binds to host-cell
receptors, and NA, which abrogates receptor binding via cleavage of terminal
sialic-acid residues, has not yet been fully characterized The project request
time to run two whole virion simulations: (1) H1N1 with glycans attached to key
glycolysation sites on HA and NA and (2) with sialic acid bound in the sialic
acid binding sites (mimicking a substrate bound complex). With the addition of
the glycans and substrates, both systems will consist of over 200 million atoms.
The simulations will for the first time combine large-scale, subcellular /
cellular level modeling at atomic detail with Markov state model theory;
effectively aggregating the many copies of the individual glycoproteins into one
statistics based network of states type model that enables it to extract long
timescale dynamics from the short time scale
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.