* 1811231
* MathScapes: Activating Public Spaces for Early Math Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Catherine O'Connor, Young People's Project, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 02/28/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Mathematics plays a significant role in understanding and participating in
science, technology, and engineering (STEM). Research shows that early
mathematics experiences in everyday life are critical to the development of
children's mathematical knowledge. This project will explore an innovative
approach to fostering parent-child math interactions and conversations related
to mathematical ideas. The approach will use community-based, exhibit
installations called Mathscapes. These are artistic, culturally relevant, easily
accessible, physical installations designed to encourage adults and children
(ages 3 to 7) to use their immediate environment to playfully explore key early
math concepts. The project also addresses a need for research about the cultural
experiences and resources that marginalized children and families bring to
mathematical conversations. Understanding parent-child interactions about
mathematics community settings could result in new knowledge about early math
learning among low income children and parents. As part of its overall strategy
to enhance learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory study will design and investigate an innovative approach to
encouraging math talk and math-related interactions between parents and children
(ages 3-7) through the creation of MathScapes. These are temporary physical
installations designed to use the immediate environment to playfully explore
mathematical concepts. This study will be conducted in two Boston neighborhoods
that are populated by low-income, non-dominant minority and immigrant families.
Adopting a case study approach, the project will use observational methods,
discourse analysis of parent/child talk, and interviews to study the
interactions of 200 families at two neighborhood Mathscape installations. LENA
devices will be used to capture parent/child talk at the Mathscapes while
researchers use observational methods to document participant interactions,
talk, and gestures. Data sources will include audio recordings of family talk,
field notes of family interactions at Mathscape installations, surveys, and
interviews. A qualitative approach will be used to produce research findings at
multiple levels. The focus of the analysis will be to understand if this
approach enhances the quality and quantity of math talk between parents and
children. The project will be carried out by a research-practice-community
partnership in Boston, Massachusetts that includes community mathematics
educators, education researchers, and participating children and families. The
design of community installations could promote engagement with math through
adult/child conversations in culturally-relevant contexts situated in the local
environment. By addressing the cultural experiences and resources of young
people, the project could greatly enhance our understanding of how to leverage
the resources that children and families bring to engaging with
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.