* 1811166
* Broadening Participation by Middle-School Students in STEM via Integrating Hands-on Experiences in Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* George Barnett, The Dorothy and Charles Mosesian Center for the Arts
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 10/31/2020
* USD 299,780.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This exploratory Pilot study project brings together a diverse set of partners
that include the Watertown Children's Theatre (WCT) which is west of Boston,
and, from Boston College a team of science educators, learning science
researchers, and positive youth development experts. The goal is to design and
develop a project for middle school-aged youth. The pilot project, which
integrates hands-on science learning experiences, experiments, and field trips
with the student-led production of short plays, will engage youth in expressing
their beliefs, passions, and their own identities about STEM by examining how
the intersection of skills and practices used in both domains (science and
theatre) can enable them to learn about science concepts, principles and methods
as well as to develop science-focused identities. Middle-school youth will be
engaged in a three-week summer program where they will be led by science
teachers, playwrights, and high school students to conduct hands-on
investigations in science in conjunction with developing original, ten-minute
plays around a specific scientific theme relevant to their life experience, for
example, the potential impact on their lives of heavy metals in water and poor
air quality. After a science theme is chosen, the principal investigators will
identify the big ideas that are important for youth to understand and be able to
explain. Upon identification of the key science ideas, youth will then engage in
pertinent science activities, visits to local sites, reading current news
articles and then in identifying the local impacts and how the underlying
science relates to those local impacts. The youth will perform their ten-minute
plays at the end of the summer program. Following this showcase event, they will
engage in additional science learning experiences and also revise their
productions throughout the academic year in preparation for a youth science
festival, where their creations will be performed by professional adult actors
as a part of the Cambridge Science Festival taking place in the spring. The
broader impact of the work focuses on broadening participation in STEM,
specifically, the engagement of youth from under-represented populations in the
sciences, such as African-Americans, Latinxs, and women with partner Boston
Public Schools. The Pilot study will investigate the student learning and
organizational dimensions of the model being developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Boston College researchers will study youth's sense of
purpose and identity toward science, particularly how youth's identity
discrepancy changes through participation in the project. The work places youth
voice at the center of the creation of STEM-based theatre plays. The theoretical
foundation of the work is grounded in part in the concept of "path to purpose."
The major research questions are: How do youth perceptions (interest, science
anxiety, identity) toward science shift as they participate in the project? What
is the residual impact on parents (family members) and youth on their
discussions about science, and how does participation in the project impact
those discussions? Research methods include surveys, interviews and
observations. The external evaluation study will focus on understanding project
implementation and progress toward meeting the project goals, in particular, how
well the initiative works to establish a model for the informal STEM learning
field that the team and others can apply beyond the Pilot
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.