* 1811293
* Geometric Variational Theory and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Xin Zhou, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 162,000.00

The main topics of this research program are mathematical models for soap films
spanning a closed wire and soap bubbles. By the least action principle, the
surface area of a soap film or a soap bubble will minimize among all films
spanning the wire or among all bubbles including a fixed volume. The physical
characterization of such surfaces says that the soap film and the soap bubble
are respectively critical points of area or area subtracting enclosed volume.
Mathematically, a soap film spanning a wire is called a minimal surface, and a
soap bubble is called a surface of constant mean curvature (abbreviated as CMC).
These two types of surfaces already caught interests by physicists and
mathematicians in 1760s, and have been extensively-studied topics which also
inspired the advances of many other subjects in mathematics and science. One
general theory for proving the existence of such geometric objects, called the
"min-max theory", has had striking recent successes, and will be the major
object of study in this research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the PI will conduct research on the min-max theory and its
applications for CMC surfaces and minimal surfaces with free boundary. In the
first subject, the PI intends to prove topological bounds for the min-max CMC
surfaces by Heegaard genus in a given three manifold, as well as to prove the
existence of multiple CMC surfaces for a given mean curvature. The PI also plans
to establish the min-max theory for constructing surfaces with mean curvature
prescribed by an arbitrary smooth function, generalizing that of the CMC
surfaces where the curvature functions are constants. In the second subject, the
PI will investigate the compactness property, properness property, and Morse
index upper bounds of the free boundary min-max minimal surfaces obtained by the
PI with collaborators before; as applications, the PI plans to study minimal
surfaces in singular or non-compact spaces by approximations using the free
boundary solutions. The PI will finish a program on constructing min-max minimal
disks with free boundary using the theory of harmonic
maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.