* 1811748
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Dahiana Arcila, Arcila                  Dahiana        K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award supports an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Explanations for the spectacular success of fish are complex
and must account for many factors. To advance this field, this project
investigates extinct and living species of pufferfishes, boxfishes,
triggerfishes, ocean sunfishes, and allies called tetraodontiforms that include
some of the most extreme body shapes in the Fish Tree of Life. These body types
range from nearly square to globose, and spheroid to laterally compressed.
Tetraodontiforms harbor the smallest vertebrate genomes known to date and one
the best-known and well-studied fossil records among fishes. Recent evidence
suggests that diversification dynamics (speciation and extinction) in this group
are linked to a period known as the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (ca. 50
Ma). It is still unknown, however, how this event or other paleoclimate changes
affected their body shape evolution over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will synthesize a comprehensive, all species, tetraodontiforms phylogeny, by
quantifying morphological evolution using 3D morphometrics and body size
diversity by leveraging biological collections. It will characterize the
evolution of candidate genes associated with body size change in
tetraodontiforms, and use comparative methods to test how morphological
evolution contributes to tetraodontiform fish diversification. Aside from
scientific endeavors, these funds are also being used to contribute to
community-driven scientific efforts, student training, and public outreach.
Training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate student from
underrepresented minorities constitute a core goal of the activities of the
project. Outreach activities include the participation in a long-term program
for Chicago disadvantaged youths through the Project Exploration Sisters4Science
Program, and lectures at existing programs at the University of Chicago, such as
Saturday Scientist and their active Women In Science programs. This project will
also broadcast knowledge on fish diversity through a variety of social platforms
and at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.