* 1811663
* Impactathons: Student-Led Peer-to-Peer Learning in Community Social-Change Technology Projects
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Chris Benner, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This pilot study will examine the effectiveness of an innovative applied social
change, community and technology based program on marginalized youths' access,
interest, efficacy and motivation to learn and engage in digital technology
applications. Using stratified near-peer and peer-to-peer mentoring approaches,
the pilot builds on extant literature that indicates that peer-supported hands-
on mentoring and experiences can alleviate some barriers to youth engagement in
digital technologies, particularly among underrepresented groups. In this
project, undergraduate students will mentor and work collaboratively with high
school youth primarily of Hispanic descent and community-based organizations to
develop creative technology-based solutions to address social issues and
challenges within their local communities, culminating in events called
Impactathons. These community-hosted local and state-wide events set this pilot
project apart from similar work in the field. The Impactathons not only provide
a space for intellectual discourse and problem-solving among the undergraduate-
youth-community partners but the Impactathons will also codify expertise from
scientists, social scientists, technologists, community leaders, and other
stakeholders to develop technology-based solutions with real world application.
If successful, a distal outcome will be increased youth interest in digital
technologies and related fields. In the short term, favorable findings will
provide preliminary evidence of success and lay the foundation for a more
extensive study in the future.

This pilot project is a collaboration between the Everett Program, a student-led
program for Technology and Social Change at the University of California Santa
Cruz - a Hispanic Serving Institution - and the Digital NEST, a non-profit,
high-tech youth career development and collaboration space for young people ages
14-24. Through this partnership and other recruitment efforts, an estimated
70-90 individuals will participate in the Impactathon pilot program over two
years. Nearly two-thirds of the participants are expected to be undergraduate
students. They will receive extensive training in near-peer and peer-to-peer
mentoring and serve as mentors for and co-innovation developers with the high
school youth participants. The undergraduates and youth will partner with local
community organizations to identify a local social challenge that can be
addressed through a technology-based solution. The emergent challenges will vary
and could span the spectrum of STEM and applied social science topics of
interest. Working in informal contexts (i.e., afterschool. weekend), the
undergraduate-youth-community partner teams will work collaboratively to develop
practical technology-based solutions to real world challenges. The teams will
convene three times per year, locally and statewide, at student and community
led Impactathons to share their work and glean insights from other teams to
refine their innovations. In parallel, the research team will examine the
effectiveness of the Impactathon model in increasing the undergraduate and
youths' interest, motivation, excitement, engagement and learning of digital
technologies. In addition to the research, the formative and summative
evaluations should provide valuable insights on the effectiveness of the model
and its potential for expansion and replication.

The project is co-funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Program
and STEM +C. The AISL program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. STEM + C focuses on research and development of interdisciplinary
and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of computing within STEM
teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.