* 1811189
* Computations in Stable and Unstable Equivariant Chromatic Homotopy
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Hill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2022
* USD 418,923.00

The project addresses directly the heart of algebraic topology: computing
invariants like numbers, groups, and rings to understand spaces. The goal of
algebraic topology is to systematically build a connection between algebraic
objects like numbers and geometric objects like spaces. This connection allows a
two-way flow of information, with algebraic invariants distinguishing spaces and
topological methods informing algebraic problems. Starting from foundational
work of Quillen, algebraic and algebraic geometry data like formal groups gives
rise to new invariants for spaces with striking properties. This project
combines this classical thread with much more recent developments coming from
equivariant algebraic topology. "Equivariant algebraic topology" remembers a
collection of symmetries inherent in a space as part of the data, systematically
grouping spaces with the same symmetries, and the numbers and invariants
produced must reflect this. This extra structure provides more nuanced
computations, giving more information about how the classically described
invariants change under symmetries. Equivariant algebraic topology has
experience a renaissance recently dues to the solution by the PI, Hopkins, and
Ravenel to the Kervaire Invariant One problem, one of the oldest outstanding
problems in algebraic topology. The solution introduced a host of new
constructions and techniques that have striking ramifications in classical and
equivariant algebraic topology, and the problems in this project focus on
unpacking some of these new constructions and describing what they mean for
algebraic topology in general. Many of the projects focus on diversity in STEM.
The PI is currently developing tools to help others build a conference series
for graduate students and develop their own conferences for younger researchers
to attract them to a field. The PI is also in discussions with an HBCU about
building more direct connections between their students and the PI's
institutions, starting with electronic seminars to introduce students to active
researchers in algebraic topology. The goal of these collaborations is to have
more students from underrepresented groups enter and succeed in graduate
programs in algebraic topology. Finally, the PI has developed and continues to
refine a First Year seminar on "Women in Math." The seminar connects students
with female mathematicians, allowing the students the opportunity to hear about
their research and experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern stable homotopy
theory heavily utilizes the fact that the stable homotopy category behaves like
a derived category of modules. The ground ring here is the sphere spectrum, and
computing its homotopy groups is one of the overarching themes in the subject.
The problem can be approached by first looking p-locally, and we can pass to the
p-local stable homotopy category. Here algebraic geometry provides a further
refinement via the theory of formal groups, a cornerstone of algebraic topology.
The current approach to understanding monochromatic homotopy is via certain
homotopy fixed points computations. Computing the homotopy groups of fixed
points and homotopy fixed points is very difficult in general. One of the most
exciting new tools developed to solve the Kervaire problem is a general slice
filtration, a method which directly computes homotopy groups of fixed points.
For Real Landweber exact theories, this is an extremely efficient tool. For
larger groups, computations are still tractable but much more mysterious. In all
cases, many of the conceptual tools from non-equivariant homotopy are not
available. Many of the techniques developed for stable equivariant homotopy can
also be applied unstably. This gives a natural and geometric notion of "even"
which refines the ordinary one non-equivariantly and which encompasses spaces
related to Real bordism and its norms. The PI expects to see a close connection
between unstable even spaces, various orientations by norms of Real bordism, and
Mackey functor objects in algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.