* 1811290
* Constraining Planet Formation Around Hundreds of Young Stars in Rich Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Joshua Eisner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,053.00

Star and planet formation occur at the same time, in regions of the Galaxy less
than about 10 million years old. Most stars in the Galaxy form in dense groups
or clusters. This research will produce the most comprehensive and detailed
study to date of the dust disks with the potential to form planets surrounding
stars in these typical, dense star-forming regions. In previously-funded work,
the investigator obtained the basic data for this new program and published the
first results in scientific journals. Here, the investigators will combine these
data with available supporting data from other scientists, increase the amount
of data with the results from new telescopic observations, and analyze all of
the data. These results will constrain theoretical models of planet, dust disk,
and clustered star formation. This project supports the mission of the NSF by
promoting our understanding of the formation of planet-forming disks in dense,
clustered star forming regions. The lead investigator will include a student
from a non-traditional background in the research project, and will share the
research results with classes that he teaches and through public evening
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce the most comprehensive
and highest angular resolution study to date of potentially planet-forming disks
in clustered star forming regions. Such dense, transient, short-lived clusters
contain from 100 to over 1000 forming stars inside self-gravitating, parsec
diameter clumps within giant molecular clouds where outflow feedback, UV
radiation, stellar winds, and supernovae shape the environment of planet
formation. The expected results will include the circumstellar masses within the
planet-forming zones of hundreds of coeval protoplanetary disks, the size
distribution for these disks, constraints on other disk parameters such as scale
height and surface density profile, and relationships between disk, stellar, and
environmental properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.