* 1811279
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Scale Modeling of Non-Gaussian Random Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Tomoko Matsuo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,998.00

Data collected on various environmental, geophysical and meteorological
processes often exhibit different modes of variability, especially at different
scales. An accurate description of the features of the fluctuations in these
data can improve scientific understanding of the physical phenomena. Development
of new statistical tools for modeling such geophysical processes can also
enhance the ability to monitor and predict the impact of their fluctuations on
communication systems and sensory networks. Despite the ubiquity of such data,
few statistical methodologies are currently available to describe such
spatiotemporal scalar and vector random fields globally on a spherical domain.
One key objective of this project is to propose a multiscale approach for
constructing non-Gaussian random fields on a sphere, that on the one hand
provides a flexible mathematical framework for modeling, and on the other hand,
enables one to fit these models by using modern computational tools. A further
objective is to extend the methodologies to deal with data observed on graphs
and networks. The project also aims to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed methodologies in enhancing scientific understanding of geophysical
processes by analyzing ground-based and satellite-based measurements of the
earth's magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed statistical
framework for spherical processes is based on the idea of multiresolution
analysis on a sphere. In this application, a class of needlet frames on the unit
sphere is utilized as a building block to construct spatio-temporal scalar and
vector fields on the unit sphere that satisfy natural physical constraints such
as being curl-free or divergence-free, thereby enabling a flexible approach to
approximating physical processes. Parametric statistical models are proposed to
model random vector fields on the unit sphere and spherical shells. These random
fields are represented in terms of vectorial needlets and can exhibit non-
Gaussian features. A suite of methodologies is proposed under this modeling
paradigm to analyze and predict large-scale spatiotemporal scalar and vector
processes arising in geophysics, such as ground and satellite based measurements
on the earth's main magnetic field or on ionospheric electro-magnetic fields.
Theoretical questions related to the structure and properties of the proposed
vectorial needlets and the random vector fields represented by them are also
investigated. The flexible framework of modeling random fields through
multiresolution analysis is further exploited to construct non-Gaussian
processes on graphs by means of graph spectral wavelets. This collaborative
project requires bringing together skills and knowledge from disparate areas
such as multiresolution analysis, spatial statistics, spectral graph theory,
Bayesian and large-scale computation, space physics, and
geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.