* 1811734
* Incremental Regression Analysis of Streaming Data: Estimating Function Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Peter Song, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The advent of distributed data storage and parallel computing systems such as
the Apache Spark has provided opportunities of innovation in data analytics and
modeling. This project focuses on regression analysis of streaming data under
the Spark's Lambda architecture, aiming to develop a new toolbox of Big Data
analytics. Streaming data refers to a series of data batches that arrives
sequentially. Such data collection schemes have become abundant lately in
biomedical fields due to the booming of many AI-enhanced medical devices that
are designed to monitor safety and effectiveness of medical treatments delivered
by smart personalized products, or to measure real-time physiological variables
such as heart beats, body temperature, and physical activity. This so-called
deep phenotyping technology has significantly changed the way of information
acquisition in terms of both volume and velocity. Being the most important data
analytics, the regression analysis will be rebuilt in the proposed project to
address various challenges from the processing of streaming data. The resulting
methodology may be applied to many practical fields, where incremental learning
with data streams is of primary interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to develop an incremental statistical inference to
address methodological challenges in regression analysis with streaming data
stored in the Spark's Lambda architecture. Efficient incremental methodology
requires no use of any historic raw data, rather only historic summary
statistics and a newly arrived data batch. At the completion of this project the
PI expects to make the following new contributions: (i) To develop a new theory
of renewable estimation and incremental inference in the context of estimating
functions; (ii) to develop an expansion of speed data flow architecture, called
the Rho architecture, in which a new layer is added to carry over updates of
inference-related quantities such as the Fisher information; (iii) to apply the
proposed methodology in many important regression models, such as the
generalized linear models, the generalized estimating equations (GEE), the Cox
proportional hazards model, and the quantile regression model. Both python and R
packages will be delivered from this project to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.