* 1811028
* STEM CareerLaunch: Evaluating the Feasibility of a STEM Career-Based, Collective Impact Model on Youth in Boys &amp; Girls Clubs
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Donata Martin, Boys & Girls Club of Fitchburg and Leominster
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 01/31/2022
* USD 297,180.00

Increased exposure to STEM content and career pathways during out-of-school time
contexts can significantly extend STEM learning and aspirational interests among
middle and high school youth. Using a collective impact approach, the STEM
CareerLaunch pilot project tests the feasibility of redesigning a widely used,
national youth and career focused program for and by the National Boys &amp;
Girls Clubs of America to extend STEM learning and promote awareness, interest,
and readiness for STEM-related occupations among youth. STEM CareerLaunch
integrates extant STEM programs, such as First Robotics, Girls Who Code and
Jason Learning, with newly developed STEM content and opportunities to create
and test a comprehensive STEM learning and career program for youth. The results
of this pilot will inform a more expansive effort to bring STEM CareerLaunch to
an already networked 4,000 Boys &amp; Girls Clubs, reaching over four million
youth from predominately underrepresented groups in STEM, and youth
participating in other afterschool/summer program throughout the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 100 youth and informal educators in
Boys &amp; Girls Clubs in Fitchburg and Leominster, Massachusetts will
participate in this pilot feasibility study. A five-pronged approach will be
instituted including: (1) high quality out of school time STEM programming, (2)
connected STEM career education, (3) mentorship, (4) professional development
for the informal educators, and (5) incentives such as internships and field
experiences for youth participants. The developmental evaluation will focus on
program implementation, participant outcomes, and scale-up. Data collection
methods will include quantitative and qualitative approaches such as baseline
student data, project tracking logs, retrospective surveys, focus groups, staff
interviews, and observations. A summative evaluation will also be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This endeavor is led by a collaborative
partnership between the National Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America, Worcester
Polytechnic Institute STEM Center, the Fitchburg and Leominster Public School
Districts, and others. It is primarily funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. It is also co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program which is committed to better understanding
and promoting practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to
pursue careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, and or mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.