* 1811323
* I-Corps: Coordinates and Volumetrics in MRI Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Nidhal Bouaynaya, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to fill a
critical need in neuro-radiology, neuro-oncology, and radiation therapy, by
developing a clinic-ready software suite that computes physician-approved
volumes of key three-dimensional (3D) structures in the brain from Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). Currently, physicians make a decision on tumor status
by visual inspection and by measuring the largest perpendicular diameters from a
single two-dimensional (2D) axial image. Radiation oncologists use manual
segmentation to delineate the boundaries of the tumor regions; these contours
are used for treatment planning. Current practice is associated with significant
limitations that impede the quality of patient care. This software suite will
potentially change the status-quo by generating 3D volumetric structures of
tumors and other key regions in the brain. The physician can readily apply this
information to better understand the disease and optimize care leading to early
treatment, less morbidity, and longer survival times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project produces a practical, clinic-ready suite of Magnetic Resonance
(MR) analyses and display tools to solve the number one impediment to reliable
use of MRIs for guiding radiation treatment of brain cancer: accurate and timely
multimodal 3D segmentation of key structures in the brain. The main engine of
the MR suite is a mathematical optimization framework that combines calculus of
variation with deep learning techniques; thus amenable to pixel-level-accurate
3D segmentation in almost real-time. The proposed technology was developed from
an algorithm for multimodal brain segmentation, which consists of (a) an
automated, accurate and robust algorithm for 3D image segmentation, combined
with (b) semi-automated and interactive multimodal labeling that requires
physician approval.