* 1811641
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Marshall McMunn, McMunn                  Marshall       S
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
examines how temperature change affects bacteria that live within the gut of a
desert ant. Many animal guts contain bacteria that aid in digestion, but the
bacteria within Cephalotes rohweri (the Arizona turtle ant) are unusual in two
important ways 1) the bacteria help the ant acquire Nitrogen, a key nutrient in
growth and development, and 2) the bacteria survive extremely hot temperatures.
The fellow will perform several experiments to determine if this bacterial
community provides benefits to its ant host despite extreme heat exposure. The
research improves scientific understanding of how animals can cope with a
changing environment through shifts in their bacterial partners. The research
broadly informs current industrial and commercial efforts to manipulate bacteria
associated with animals and plants to improve food production. As a part of this
research the fellow will develop a set of software tools to enable visually
impaired scientists to interact with data through the sense of touch.

The fellow will 1) observe variation in gut bacterial composition between turtle
ant colonies along a natural temperature gradient using 16s sequencing, 2)
perform a growth chamber experiment; manipulating nest temperature and measuring
response variables of gut bacterial composition and nitrogen acquisition from
heavy isotope labeled urea, and 3) transplant gut bacteria into temperature
naive ants; isolating the effect of microbe-based phenotypic plasticity in
response to temperature. This research will test the hypothesis that shifts in
bacterial symbionts facilitate acclimation to novel temperature conditions in
this desert ant species. This particular mechanism of phenotypic plasticity is
poorly understood, but given the ubiquity of bacterial symbioses across plants
and animals, shifts in symbiont composition may be important in determining the
outcome of environmental change in a wide array of species. The project broadens
participation of people with vision impairments by extending the functionality
of a common scientific data analysis platform, R, to interface with 3-D
printers, braille printers, and several commercially developed assistive
technologies. The fellow will benefit from training in genetic data analysis and
software development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.