* 1811267
* Non-Compact Solutions to Geometric Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Tobias Colding, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2023
* USD 160,022.00

Geometric flows are processes that evolve surfaces or higher-dimensional spaces
by their curvatures. In particular, the flows considered in this project are
differential equations that model how the shape of a geometric object changes as
its area, volume, or some other geometric quantity decreases as rapidly as
possible. For example, the surface area decreases most rapidly under the mean
curvature flow (MCF), while the enclosed volume deceases most rapidly under the
Gauss curvature flow (GCF). Due to these natural decreasing properties, as the
flow becomes singular (i.e., the object develops folds, corners, or other points
of high curvature) these evolutions often tend (under magnification) toward
optimal shapes minimizing the corresponding energies such as area and volume.
For example, a soap bubble is the shape of a rescaled singularity of the MCF.
These energy minimizers appear not only in geometry, but also in economics and
physics; for instance, optimal transport refers to a mapping from one area to
another that minimizes an energy which is the total cost of resource allocation.
Thus, studying singularity of the geometric flows sheds new insight on
the?understanding of energy minimizers?in physics and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the singularity
of various geometric flows including the Gauss curvature flow (GCF), the mean
curvature flow (MCF), and the Ricci flow (RF). For the MCF and the RF, the
uniqueness of non-collapsed type II ancient solutions will be considered. For
the GCF, the existence and the uniqueness of type II closed ancient solutions
will be studied under suitable conditions.?Moreover, this project also examines
the convergence to the translating solutions to the curve-shortening flow and
the GCF.? Interior estimates, decay rate, and monotonicity formulas will be
developed.?In addition, this project will also address optimal regularity and
free boundary problems for the GCF and and other fully non-linear equations,
including optimal transport and Monge-Ampere equations. This project will
provide a method to utilize prescribed singularity conditions to obtain optimal
regularity and free boundary regularity, in particular in free boundary problems
that arise from quantitative economics and classical
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.