* 1811708
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Sean Ehlman, Ehlman                  Sean           M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow will head a collaborative team at the University of
Minnesota to investigate how ecologically important species of zooplankton
'Daphnia pulicaria' respond to rapid, human-induced changes to the environment.
Given the rapid pace of contemporary environmental change, understanding how
populations adjust to novel conditions and variability within the environment is
a top concern in ecology and evolution. The fellow will utilize a unique
characteristic of Daphnia that allows them to be resurrected from resting egg
sacs contained in layers of sediment at the bottom of lakes. Daphnia eggs that
are up to 700 years old can be resurrected and aspects of their biology measured
to reconstruct the last 700 years of evolution in this keystone species. This
research will inform our understanding of how human activities affect patterns
of evolution in wild animal populations.

The fellow will utilize biological collections contained in sediment cores
collected throughout the state of Minnesota from both highly human-disturbed
regions and more pristine regions to resurrect Daphnia from diapausing eggs
trapped in sediment layers. Daphnia from up to 700 years old will then be raised
to adulthood in conditions that emulate both historic and contemporary
nutritional states of local water bodies. The degree of phenotypic plasticity in
resurrected Daphnia metabolism and nutrient processing will be assessed through
both genomic and transcriptomic tools, documenting both how evolutionary
patterns are affected by nutritional plasticity and how nutritional plasticity,
itself, evolves. The fellow will work with an integrative and cross-disciplinary
team of researchers to enhance their training in these cutting-edge methods.
Concurrent with this research, the fellow will also be developing hands-on
research modules suitable 6th-12th grade students directed at using Daphnia and
other freshwater invertebrates to teach evolution in response to human-induced
environmental change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.