* 1811767
* Estimation, inference and testing for large-scale directed network models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Garvesh Raskutti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Large-scale interaction networks naturally arise in many modern scientific
applications. For example, in biochemistry and systems biology, amino acids in
different locations of the protein sequence interact, while in computational
neuroscience, connectivity networks amongst neurons in the brain naturally
trigger responses to particular stimuli. This project will develop reliable and
scalable algorithms for learning the underlying interaction network amongst many
nodes. Due to both the scale, complexity, and the changing data technologies in
the applications described above, the solutions to the challenges addressed in
this project will lead both to the development of novel theory and methodology,
and the implementation of new algorithms for the application domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to address the
challenge of estimation, inference and testing for large-scale network models.
Given the size of the networks generated, this project presents a number of
computational and statistical challenges the PI will address by focusing on two
methodologies: (i) multivariate time series models; (ii) directed graphical
models. The PI's prior work has developed new theory and methodology both for
large-scale non-linear time series models and directed graphical models. This
prior work points to a number of significant open challenges for both
methodologies that this project will. These challenges include: (i) lack of
sample size/statistical resources for learning complicated dependence
structures; (ii) computational challenges due to non-convexity and large search-
spaces for dependence models; (iii) incorporating domain knowledge and
scientific experiments into the estimation methodologies; and (iv) exploiting
learned networks for hypothesis testing, inference, and parameter estimation.
This project will address these challenges and these contributions will lead to
the development of new methods for network learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.