* 1811560
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Evaluating Performance and Security of Executable Steganography for Surreptitious Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2020
* William Mahoney, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2020
* USD 173,969.00

Intellectual property protection of software remains a priority for the
commercial sector because counterfeiting and piracy erode profits and market
share, ultimately causing impacts on companies, consumers and governments.
Watermarking for proving digital ownership and obfuscation for hindering
adversarial reverse engineering are currently used to provide some level of
deterrence against this. This project will investigate novel methods of software
protection, hiding executable programs within other executable
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed research will investigate the use of
"executable steganography" as a possible anti-reverse engineering technique and
a way to watermark software. The goal of this research is to produce viable
methods for hiding executable code, expanding the state-of-the-art for this
style of program protection, while also characterizing its effectiveness based
on capacity, robustness, detectability, invisibility, and resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both University of Nebraska Omaha and University of South
Alabama bring key opportunities for broader impacts of this research. Both have
a rich tradition of meeting the needs of diverse student bodies, both are in
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) states, with
numerous students coming from rural areas. Both universities have extensive K-12
STEM outreach and Scholarship for Service students preparing for future
cybersecurity careers. The research teams will directly engage students in the
research as part of their academic programs via course projects, senior capstone
exercises, and labs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The data for this project will not
contain any personal or sensitive information other than the algorithms
developed. Other researchers will have access to any databases and the source
code via individual requests to the PIs. Research papers and published
conference papers, etc. will be available via the project web page: http://loki.
ist.unomaha.edu/~wmahoney/ExecutableSteganography/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.