* 1811101
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Mining Scientific Literature with the LAPPS Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Brent Cochran, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2019
* USD 29,816.00

Scientists have become unable to keep up with the ever-expanding number of
scientific publications. The lack of this ability is a fundamental bottleneck to
scientific progress. Current search technologies are limited because they are
able to find many relevant documents, but cannot extract and organize the
information content of these documents or suggest new scientific hypotheses
based on the organized content. Natural Language Processing (NLP) based text
mining strategies are a recognized means to approach this problem, but most
scientists do not have the expertise or time to take use them. In addition, the
lack of interoperability among NLP tools as well as the data in repositories
scattered around the web are barriers to sharing workflows, resources, and
results. This project will identify what analysis features are needed within an
easy-to-use platform for mining scientific texts, implement an initial version
of such a platform, and make it available to scientists.

There is currently no open, easy-to-use platform for mining scientific texts
that provides interoperable access to a wide array of software, computing
resources, and publication data. Publicly available software (such as Google) is
not geared toward publication data, and in-house tools are fragile and deliver
only a fraction of relevant results. The main objective of this project is,
therefore, to (1) identify the requirements for an easy-to-use platform for
mining information from scientific publications and (2) deploy facilities that
meet these needs. To achieve this goal this project will extend the already
existing NSF-funded LAPPS Grid to include means to access a broad range of
interoperable NLP tools, large bodies of publication data and lexical and
ontological resources, and, crucially, to rapidly adapt existing software to new
domains and evaluate results. This project will also leverage enhancements to
the NSF-funded Galaxy platform for interactive data exploration and extended
access to NSF hardware resources (XSEDE machines including Stampede, Bridges,
and Jetstream). By providing access to services for mining scientific
publications and lowering the barriers to entry resulting from licensing,
redistribution, and intellectual property concerns, this project provides
capabilities that were previously unavailable to scientists. Researchers are
able to perform large-scale text mining using an HPC infrastructure through a
web-based interface without the need to know about underlying infrastructure.
Additionally, providing iterative domain adaptation capabilities enables
scientists to easily adapt existing services to specialized areas without
configuring or installing additional components. The ability to examine both
explicit and implicit information scattered across massive repositories of
publications will undoubtedly result in new observations and insights.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.