* 1811048
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Aaron Reedy, Reedy                   Aaron          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Males and
females show differences in lifespan and aging within nearly every animal group.
The reasons why this occurs is a major question in biology. This proposal will
fund a fellow to receive training in molecular methods to assess aging
physiology and will explore how differences between males and females may help
explain differences in lifespan between them. To broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in biology, the fellow is creating teacher training
experiences around DataClassroom, a new software tool of his creation that was
designed to teach data skills to students in grade 6-12 science classrooms. This
professional development will help school districts serving large numbers of
minority students to adopt technology and curricula that builds data skills as
these skills increasingly become a prerequisite for scientific careers.

The fellow will use parallel longitudinal-studies in matched wild and lab
populations of brown anole lizards (Anolis sagrei) to identify differences in
longevity and rates of aging between male and female lizards, while also testing
for differences in the fitness benefits of a long lifespan between males and
females. This approach leverages long-term mark-recapture work in an island
population of lizards where thousands of individuals have been longitudinally
measured and tracked from hatching to death. The proposed work has three aims:
(1) test if the relationship between age and fitness is fundamentally different
for males and females, (2) test for differences in aging in a wild population
using cellular and whole-organism biomarkers of aging, and for differences in
selection on the reaction norm trait of aging, and (3) test the relative roles
of environmentally mediated and genetic factors in any differences in the aging
process. Broader impacts and broadening participation efforts are focused on
increasing the capacity of science teachers in grades 6-12 to teach data skills
and statistics in the science classroom. The fellow will plan and provide
DataClassroom training for more than a hundred science teachers, serving
thousands of minority students in both the Chicago Public Schools and a network
of schools throughout the State of Alabama.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.