* 1811043
* Exhibit-Based Public Participation in Social Psychology Research
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joshua Gutwill, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,847.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The Exploratorium in San Francisco, in collaboration with social science
researchers at Arizona State University and Rutgers University, will conduct a
two-year Pilots and Feasibility Studies project that will test a new model for
integrating museum exhibits with public participation in scientific research,
called Exhibit-Based PPSR (E-PPSR). The team will create a mini-exhibition about
social psychology that (a) engages science museum visitors in investigating and
reflecting on social factors that promote cooperation or not, (b) builds public
awareness of the science of social psychology and (c) generates valid data for
academic research in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Exploratorium will
build on its long history of creating participatory exhibits that engage
visiting groups in social science learning and in self-reflective metacognition.
This expands beyond the typical lab-in-the-museum in which individual visitors
interact with researchers' laptops or simple props. The model takes the exhibit
experiences further, injecting the dimension of public participation in social
psychology research. By voluntarily and anonymously contributing demographic and
response data, large numbers of people from mixed-age groups will help social
scientists gain new insights into cooperation among a broader sample of humanity
than are usually studied in university labs. The E-PPSR lab is always available,
rather than open only when a researcher is present. The model also incorporates
research on learning and assesses the effect of E-PPSR on social science
learning experiences. Do museum visitors build greater conceptual understanding
of the social science by contributing to real research and seeing their own
responses within the larger dataset? Do they attend more deeply to debriefing
activities when they have contributed their own data? The three main
deliverables include: 1) a prototype Exhibit-based PPSR laboratory at the
Exploratorium comprised of one exhibit for gaining informed consent, three
'Data-Catcher' exhibits modified to record anonymous responses when visitors
opt-in to contributing to social psychological research, and one debriefing
exhibit. A back-end database will send data to the academic researchers; 2)
evaluation studies that test the E-PPSR model. The studies will assess the
success of debriefing approaches, the effectiveness of recruitment and the
impact of E-PPSR on learning. The team will publish a journal article describing
the E-PPSR model and academic research findings. The team will also organize a
conference session with others in the museum field who manage in-house academic
research laboratories; and 3) a report by the academic partners describing the
impact of the project on their research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.