* 1811691
* Akeakamai:  Indigenous Explorations in Community-Based Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Helen Turner, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understanding of deeper learning by participants.
This pilot study, Akeakamai (Hawaiian, literally lover of wisdom, scientist,
scholar), will explore the convergence of contemporary Western science topics
with indigenous Hawaiian culture-based science experiences as a mechanism to
strengthen STEM perceptions, cross-cultural science collaboration, and multi-
generational community engagement with STEM. The work is grounded in the notion
that STEM learning within the context of local informal indigenous community
settings should be culturally responsive and culturally sustaining, and should
privilege indigenous epistemologies. If successful, the results of this pilot
could provide valuable insights on effective approaches to developing and
implementing culturally consistent and sustainable multigenerational STEM
engagement among Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders, and across the Pacific
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a two-year duration, the study will address
three research questions. (1) To what extent does inclusion of culture into
curriculum designed for informal Culture-Science Explorations mitigate perceived
barriers to participation in science? (2) What barriers do community members
perceive to limit their participation in science? (3) What are the areas of
consonance between Native Hawaiian and Western scientific approaches to
knowledge and learning? Approximately 200 predominantly Native Hawaiian and
Pacific Islanders, ranging in age from 8 - 85 years old, will participate in the
pilot. The research team will collect participant data during all phases of the
social intervention, a suite of culture-science exploration experiences held at
the Halau Inana, a Native Hawaiian community collaboration space. The
intervention will employ pedagogical methods that are responsive to Hawaiian
cultural norms to deliver content that integrates across the interfaces of
Western science and technology and indigenous knowledge, and incorporates
Hawaiian language. A rigorous external evaluation will also be conducted. The
results of the research and evaluation will be broadly disseminated. Ultimately,
the project aims to develop a conceptual and practical cross-cultural, multi-
generational framework for community-based science learning in Hawai'i that can
serve as a model for future research and programs that extend into and beyond
indigenous communities of the Pacific region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.