* 1811957
* 2018 Tribology: Progress in Tribology at the Interface Between Disciplines; Gordon Research Conference; Bates College, Lewiston, Maine; June 24-29, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Ashlie Martini, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2018
* USD 14,550.00

This award supports the Gordon Research Seminar and at the Gordon Research
Conference on Tribology held on June 24-29, 2018 at Bates College, Lewiston, ME,
USA. Tribology - the study of friction, lubrication, and wear - is essential to
technological applications with moving parts, from large machineries and cars,
to medical implants, to micro-mechanical mirrors in projectors. Regular meetings
of the key researchers in this field are necessary for the exchange of ideas,
information, and state-of-the-art technologies, in order to enable and
accelerate advances and breakthroughs the field. The science of tribology
impacts the national prosperity through improvements in manufacturing and energy
reduction. The Gordon Conference is a key mechanism for linking the basic
sciences with an engineering discipline of significant importance to the US and
world economies. This GRC is held biannually and a unique forum for the open
exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific ideas. In addition to
poster presentations, the conference includes presentations and extended
discussion and interactions among participants. The theme of the 2018 Gordon
Research Conference is interdisciplinarity bringing together scientists and
engineers from a variety of disciplines to discuss and debate the forefront
research questions, and to identify areas for significant breakthroughs in
tribology that are likely to be found at the interfaces between the classical
fields. An important aspect of the 2018 conference is the Gordon Research
Seminar. The Gordon Research Seminar is held the weekend before the Gordon
Research Conference and is a forum for students and early-career researchers to
exchange ideas in an informal but dynamic setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation support from the Materials
Engineering and Processing Program enables the participation of 15 junior
participants, including graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, at the
Gordon Research Seminar, and 12 invited early-career speakers and discussion
leaders at the Gordon Research Conference. The Gordon conference is a premier
workshop venue which allows weeklong discussion with not resulting conference
summary published. This allows for the free flow of ideas and information within
an open environment. The topics range from the atomic origins of friction and
lubrication to the tribology of the earth. The workshop will focus on
interdisciplinary and unpublished work with research presentations to inform the
community in a small group format with ~100 attendees to foster discussion. NSF
participant support is directed to the individuals from underrepresented groups,
including gender and ethnic diversity; first-time GRC/GRS attendees and people
from diverse fields to broaden the attendance base; and individuals with
evidence of high-quality, early-career research
accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.