* 1811063
* Reconceiving Exhibit Design for Public Engagement with Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Peggy Monahan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 247,051.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The theme of this conference project by the New York Hall of Science will be
exploring how to better design exhibits to promote "public engagement with
science." Here, "public engagement with science" refers to opportunities that go
beyond traditional approaches to the public understanding of science. The event
will invite professionals to consider how to shift exhibit designs toward
engaging visitors with STEM in ways that emphasize the intersection of STEM
innovation with visitors' daily lives, their personal agency, and their
interdependence with their personal social networks and the institutions that
advance STEM knowledge and innovation. The conference and its pre- and post-
conference activities will bring together curators, exhibition developers,
community outreach professionals, museum administrators, and learning scientists
from the United States and Canada. They will work together to identify design
principles and key obstacles to designing exhibits that can better help science
museums achieve two goals: 1) making visitors' diverse and personal questions,
concerns, and perspectives central to their experience of the exhibits; and 2)
engaging visitors as contributors to the exhibit experience in ways that make
their contributions visible and consequential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this
two-day event attendees will consider how exhibits can support broader and more
diverse public participation in critical debates about the roles of STEM
discovery and innovation in society. The effort is grounded in recent work on
public engagement with science; on reorganizing museums to become sites for
participation and contribution by visitors, and particularly by institutions'
local communities; and on making and engineering design programming within
museums. The goal is to chart a course toward a vision of the future of science
museums in which they maintain their status as sources of trusted information,
while also fulfilling their potential as sites of genuine participation and
social interaction, in which visitors make meaningful contributions to the
substance and workings of the museum floor while also engaging with, learning
about and holding themselves accountable to the core concepts and practices of
the STEM disciplines. The conference will build the capacity and collaborative
engagement of a network of science centers whose work is central to achieving
the museum field's ultimate goal of engaging the public of all ages in learning
STEM in informal environments. The conference and associated activities will be
evaluated by staff at the New York Hall of Science, with oversight by an
external advisory committee of research and development
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.