* 1811881
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Amanda Carter, Carter                  Amanda         W
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. A major
consequence of climate change is increased temperature variation; however, most
studies addressing temperature variation in climate change use constant
temperatures and focus on adult organisms. This is problematic because many
traits important to survival (e.g. metabolism) are not only temperature-
sensitive, but are differentially affected by constant versus fluctuating
temperatures. Further, developmental life stages may be more sensitive to
temperature variation than adult life stages. This research will compare how
developmental and adult life stages are affected by temperature variation, and
the potential role of parents in mitigating the degree of temperature variation
experienced by young. Findings from this work will enhance predictions of animal
responses to climate change and ultimately aid conservation and management
decisions. A key facet of the program will be carried out by high school
students in the Eastern Band of the Cherokee Indians (EBCI) during a summer STEM
camp developed and led by the PI, her sponsor, and collaborators in the EBCI.
The summer STEM camp will be evaluated and revised during the fellow's tenure,
so that an effective outreach program can be implemented annually following the
conclusion of the fellowship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will determine if
(1) temperature variation differentially affects organisms throughout ontogeny,
and (2) assess the role of parents in mitigating the degree of thermal
variability experienced by young. This project will utilize Onthophagus taurus,
which exhibits discrete life stages and suites of parental effects, like
variation in sub-surface brood ball burial depth. Brood ball burial depth may
significantly contribute to the degree of thermal variability young experience
during development, potentially affecting thermal sensitivity of metabolism,
survival, and fecundity, ultimately influencing responses to climate change. To
address the first research objective, the fellow will measure: (a) metabolic
costs incurred under fluctuating temperatures, (b) degree of thermal plasticity,
and (c) potential costs associated with mounting thermally plastic responses
across life stages. The second research objective assess shifts in brood ball
burial depth under current and predicted climates. Importantly, this research
objective will be carried out by EBCI students annually, culminating in a
longitudinal citizen science database that tracks climate-driven shifts in
parental behavior. During the research program, the fellow will receive training
in invertebrate physiology, quantifying thermal sensitivity of metabolism, and
R. The fellow will also receive career development training from K. Sheldon and
NIMBioS, and gain educational experience implementing culturally responsive
practices and Traditional Ecological Knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.