* 1811930
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jessie Tanner, Tanner                  Jessie         C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Understanding why some animal traits evolve more rapidly than
others is a fundamental goal of evolutionary biology. Reproductive traits are
often among the fastest changing traits, but despite longstanding ideas about
what drives their evolution, biologists still lack direct evidence of how these
traits evolve in vertebrate animals such as mammals. The fellow will investigate
how competition among males may drive changes in reproductive traits. First, the
fellow will use lines of experimentally evolved house mice, in which changes in
male reproductive traits have been documented, to determine whether male and
female reproductive traits have evolved together. Second, the fellow will use
recently developed methods to determine how fast these traits have evolved among
species within a group of Australian rodents, and whether these changes have
been driven by competition among males. This work will provide some of the first
direct evidence about what drives the evolution of male and female reproductive
phenotypes in mammals. It will also contribute to the toolkit available to
scientists by establishing new methods for the study of evolution using museum
collections. Finally, it will result in new international collaborations between
scientists in the US and Australia, while training a new post-doctoral
researcher in cutting edge methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The fellow will
investigate the hypothesis that the mammalian baculum has evolved via selection
driven by male-male competition. First, the fellow will use experimentally
evolved, wild-derived house mice to empirically determine whether and how female
reproductive morphology co-varies with baculum shape. Second, using phylogenetic
comparative methods and specimens from 63 species of muroid rodents, the fellow
will determine the diversification rate of bacula and female reproductive tracts
across a molecular phylogeny. Finally, the fellow will quantify the relative
importance of male-male competition across Australian muroid rodents and
determine its role in the evolutionary diversification of reproductive
morphology. The proposed fellowship activities will significantly expand the
fellow's range of research expertise with respect to both ideas and concrete
skillsets, enabling a more integrative approach to the study of evolution and
animal behavior in her academic career. Broader impacts activities are aimed at
promoting the participation of indigenous peoples, who are underrepresented in
post-secondary education and the sciences in both the US and
Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.