* 1811855
* Applications of Nuclear Structure Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* B. Alex Brown, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2022
* USD 493,708.00

The properties of atomic nuclei are essential for our understanding of many
areas of physics. At the most fundamental level, nuclei are composed of quarks
held together by the exchange of gluons. The grouping of quarks into baryons and
mesons provides the ingredients for our understanding of nuclei as being
composed of protons and neutrons held together by the exchange of mesons. The
stable isotopes provide about 250 different combinations of protons and
neutrons. About 3,000 more combinations have been made in the laboratory, and
many more, in particular those with a large excess of neutrons, will be made and
studied at the next generation of facilities such as the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University. Up to 7,000 different
combinations of protons and neutrons were involved in the formation of the
elements during the evolution of the universe. This project in nuclear structure
theory will provide analytical models and computational tools for understanding
the properties of these nuclei. The results of these studies will be applied to
areas of fundamental physics and nuclear astrophysics where the nuclear
properties are needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will greatly expand the
use of of Configuration Interaction (CI) and Energy Density Functional (EDF)
models for nuclei. This will carried out on several levels. The PI will develop
new Hamiltonians used for these methods with input from ab-initio models based
on nucleon-nucleon scattering data together with empirical constraints from
known experimental data. The PI will develop computational methods that allow
for the solution of the quantum many-body problem that take into account the
very large basis dimensions needed in the CI method. The PI will make
applications of these results to many areas of physics interest. They will be
used for collaborations with the experimental program at FRIB and other
laboratories. They will be used to obtain nuclear matrix elements for studying
fundamental physics with nuclei. They also will be used in collaboration with
the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics and Center for the Evolution of the
Elements (JINA-CEE) at MSU to calculate reaction rates needed for understanding
supernovae and X-ray bursters, and for the nuclear equations of state needed for
neutron stars and neutron star mergers. The graduate students supported by this
project will have unique opportunities to train and contribute to high-profile
research in nuclear theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.