* 1811480
* I-Corps: Direct Characterization of Electrothermal Properties of Roll-to-Roll-Manufactured Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Michael Pettes, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable the
commercialization of a multi-property measurement apparatus for use in energy
materials manufacturing diagnostics. The smart phone, and electric vehicle, and
waste heat recovery markets will be the major opportunities for this project. A
vast number of commercial and industrial processes rely on accurate temperature
and electrical measurements for diagnosing problems during the manufacturing
process and certifying performance. How temperature and electrical performance
are measured and what degree of accuracy is required are two very important
questions that need to be answered for every application and product. Initial
commercialization review of the instrument is supported by the needs for the
manufacturing sector to accurately measure temperature while cycling energy
storage devices such as lithium-ion batteries operating under direct current
extreme fast charging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project presents a
feasible solution to the difficulty of accurately measuring multiple transport
properties without material/device exchange, and is the first system capable
consecutive measurement of intrinsic electrical conductivity, thermal
conductivity, ionic conductivity, and spatial temperature distribution. The most
critically lacking capability in current instrumentation is the ability to
accurately measure thermal properties, which is addressed here. The unique
enabling design in this apparatus is an actively heated thermal guard with
feedback controlled zones, which allows for the elimination of parasitic heat
loss channels that prevent competing technologies from accurately determining
the thermal conduction through a material.