* 1811960
* Conference on the Intersections of Particle and Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Wick Haxton, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The Conference on the Intersection of Particle and Nuclear Physics (CIPANP) is a
triennial series that focuses on topics of interest to elementary particle
physicists, nuclear physicists and particle/nuclear astrophysicists. In addition
to disseminating the latest results, CIPANP facilitates both formal and informal
exchanges of information and the building of connections between physicists in
these fields. The 13th CIPANP will be held May 28 through June 3 in Indian
Wells, California and will bring together physicists from around the word. This
award supports the participation of early career physicists and will be used to
encourage a diverse group of participants.

CIPANP 2018 is organized with public lectures, plenary, parallel and poster
sessions. Topic areas include Physics at High Energies; Precision Physics at
High Intensities; Cosmic Physics and Dark Energy/Inflation and Strong-Field
Gravity; Neutrino Masses and Neutrino Mixing; Tests of Symmetries and the
Electroweak Interaction; Dark Matter; Particle and Nuclear Astrophysics; Heavy
Flavors and the CKM Matrix; QCD, Hadron Spectroscopy and Exotics; Parton and
Gluon Distributions in Nucleon and Nuclei; Nuclear Forces and Structure, NN
Correlations, and Medium Effects; and Quark Matter and High Energy Heavy Ion
Collisions. Proceedings will be published and presentations will be posted on
the conference website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.