* 1811288
* I-Corps: Characterization of the Vaginal Microbiome Through Sampling Kits
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
wider adoption of vaginal microbiome testing solutions. The most common vaginal
dysbiosis is bacterial vaginosis (BV) which affects 30% of women at any given
time. Having BV puts women at risk for increased incidence of sexually
transmitted infections, urinary tract infections, and, if pregnant, preterm
birth, low birth weight, and spontaneous abortion. Yet, most women don't even
know they have BV. BV is only treated if it is symptomatic, but half of all
cases are asymptomatic. Therefore, there are millions of women with BV, who are
at risk for infections and adverse pregnancy outcomes, but are unaware of their
risk. This technology would allow for discrete at-home testing that includes an
easy to understand report that can be shared directly with the patient's
physician.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercial potential of an at-home
sampling kits for analyzing the vaginal microbiome (bacteria). The vision is to
empower women with new knowledge about their health, and drive innovative care
around female related bacterial disorders. The core of our technology is twofold
- DNA sequencing and bioinformatics. For DNA sequencing, our technology uses
Illumina sequencers to analyze a vaginal bacterial sample to attain part of the
bacterial genomes. A proprietary bioinformatics pipeline is then used to
categorize and quantify the bacteria present in the sample. Classifying the
bacteria then allows the user to better understand how they can get and stay
healthy.