* 1811883
* RAPID: An interdisciplinary study of winds, surge, damage, risk analysis and psychosocial response before and after Hurricane Irma
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Roxane Silver, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2019
* USD 160,171.00

Hurricanes rank among the most damaging natural hazards affecting the United
States, the worst of which (e.g. Galveston 1900, Andrew 1992, Katrina 2005)
caused some of the highest U.S. death tolls and insured dollar losses of any
natural disaster. Given estimates of $83 billion in economic losses, Hurricane
Irma will likely join this list. Hurricanes threaten the sustainability of
entire communities: recovery is often slow or incomplete, residents may be
permanently displaced, and physical destruction may cause long-term economic
hardship. Human losses, including mental and physical health outcomes, may be
affected by structural damage to the community and by individual- and community-
level choices made before, during and after the hurricane reaches land. Yet many
deleterious consequences of hurricanes may be mitigated through more effective
and appropriately targeted evacuation efforts, improved decision making, and
building codes/practices. Prior research suggests that human responses to
hurricanes are influenced by variability in storm exposure, demographics, prior
evacuation behavior, and type and perceived trustworthiness of disaster
messaging. Moreover, real-time perceptions of risk may be related to actual wind
and storm surge conditions and ongoing evolving damage to infrastructure, as
well as to how these events are communicated. The investigators in this project
have been at the forefront of developing and maintaining a sample (with prior
NSF support) of Florida residents, including both pre- and post-Irma mental,
physical, psychological and behavioral responses. This project examines how
physical indicators of the storm and media exposure interact and influence those
responses. To facilitate future mitigation efforts in places vulnerable to
hurricanes and other hazards, gaining an integrated understanding of the
physical nature of, and human responses to, these devastating storms is
critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an interdisciplinary team of
investigators leverages a recent NSF RAPID-funded survey of a representative
sample of Florida residents in the 3 days before Hurricane Irma made landfall
across the State of Florida and again a few weeks after the storm passed. The
team examines the role played by the physical parameters of the storm (wind,
surge, damage) and media communications in understanding psychological and
behavioral responses to the hurricane. The investigators collect relevant time-
stamped physical and media data in places where the sample resided in the days
leading up to and after Hurricane Irma made landfall. The researchers explore
three questions: 1) What are the effects of spatially- and temporally-varying
winds and surge that result in varying and evolving damage on the evolving
perception and decisions made by people affected by these physical inputs? 2)
What proportion of individual variability in pre-storm risk perceptions,
decisions, and distress levels are accounted for by these physical inputs
compared to respondents' personal histories, exposure to previous risks,
exposure to evolving media communications, and other non-meteorological, non-
damage factors? and, 3) To what extent is variability in the post-hurricane
response a function of the decision to evacuate, exposure to evolving media
communications, or other psychosocial variables, as compared to physical
parameters of the storm? Results will inform decision making about the
allocation of resources for disaster preparation, mobilization, and recovery, as
well as provide emergency managers and other officials with insight into how to
improve responses to future severe weather events. The integration of physical
parameters, media, and human response data leads to increased sustainability of
at-risk communities, while also informing theories and policies relevant to
other natural disasters.