* 1811447
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Erika Calvo-Ochoa, Calvo                   Erika
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The title of
the research plan for this fellowship to Erika Calvo is "The role of
neurogenesis in the functional recovery and morphological remodeling of the
zebrafish olfactory bulb following lesion." The host institution is Western
Michigan University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Christine Byrd-Jacobs.
This project aims to understand the mechanisms of brain repair in zebrafish, an
animal with an extraordinary regenerative potential. Specifically, the Fellow is
studying the role of the generation of new neurons in brain repair and recovery
following damage. This research will advance the current knowledge and
understanding of mechanisms of adult brain regeneration, repair and recovery of
function following injury, as well as the contribution of newly generated
neurons in these processes. Furthermore, this research has implications for
improving human health since it could lead to transformative strategies to
stimulate neuronal regeneration and integration into damaged brain areas. These
strategies could aid to achieve enhanced repair and recovery in injured human
brains after stroke and traumatic brain injury. In addition to improving our
understanding of the mechanisms of brain repair, the Fellow is broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in biology by actively recruiting,
teaching and mentoring young Latino students through promoting a multi-
collaborative platform between different Latino advocacy organizations. These
outreach activities will assist in the recognition, fostering and advancement of
promising Latino scientists that might otherwise be overlooked due to language,
cultural and economic barriers, thus broadening their participation in higher
education and in biology.

The Fellow is studying the hypothesis that following damage in the olfactory
bulb of zebrafish newly generated neurons mature and integrate into lesioned
neuronal circuits to repair the tissue and promote recovery of olfactory
function. To study this, the Fellow is investigating: 1) loss and recovery of
olfactory function after damage of the olfactory bulb, by means of olfactory
mediated behavior tasks; 2) repair of the lesioned olfactory bulb, by means of
histological, stereological and cellular analysis; and 3) the role of
neurogenesis in mediating repair and recovery of olfactory function of the
lesioned olfactory bulb, by means of behavioral and histological analysis
following specific neurogenesis ablation. This project includes the following
training activities for the Fellow: mastering the use of a model of brain
regeneration and laboratory technical skills, as well as developing expertise in
teaching, mentoring and scientific communication. Furthermore, the Fellow is
undertaking wide-ranging mentoring, teaching and outreach activities that will
expose students from underrepresented groups, particularly Latinos, to science
in order to promote their recruitment and participation in biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.