* 1811857
* Inference in High-Dimensional Linear Models: Methods, Theory, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Zijian Guo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,999.00

Statistical inferential methods are used to answer questions in a variety of
modern science disciplines. For example, in medical studies, whether the
treatment effect varies by different individuals and which treatment procedure
will be recommended to a future patient given his or her baseline information;
in genomics, whether different traits share common genetic etiology and how gene
expression levels are regulated by genetic variants. For these complex studies,
high-dimensional linear models have become ubiquitous to approximate the data
generating mechanism and extract useful information. Despite significant
advances on estimation, inference problems in high-dimensional linear models
have been far less understood, from both methodological and theoretical
perspectives. In this project, the investigator plans to address the
methodological and theoretical challenges of high-dimensional statistical
inference problems, including confidence interval construction and hypothesis
testing, and apply the developed methods to answer important scientific
questions encountered in genomics and health studies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to construct confidence intervals and
conduct hypothesis testing in a simultaneous consideration of multiple sparse
high-dimensional linear models, which are important in answering scientific
questions encountered in a wide range of applications. Specifically, the
investigator will tackle statistical inference problems by the following means:
(1) constructing confidence intervals for functionals of multiple regression
vectors and conduct significance tests for groups of variables; (2) testing the
existence of heterogeneity in treatment effects and compare efficacy of
different treatment procedures for a specific individual; (3) studying multiple
testing procedures for a large number of functionals; and (4) applying the
developed inferential procedures and collaborate with researchers in genomics
and epidemiology to answer important scientific questions about genetic
relatedness network and personalized treatment comparison through analyzing
large-scale data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.