* 1811623
* Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for Highly Multivariate Spatial Processes with Applications to Climate Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Dorit Hammerling, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 62,500.00

Geophysical, environmental and ecological datasets often include many variables
observed over a set of irregular geographical locations. While spatial datasets
are increasing in size, they are also increasing in complexity with many
variables being simultaneously observed, recorded, modeled or derived. Current
methods in spatial statistics are unable to cope with such highly multivariate
datasets; this research addresses this gap in statistical science, aiming to
establish a new framework for multivariate spatial models. The testbed for the
new framework is in the field of climate data science. Understanding of the
Earth system relies on coupled physical models that represent the dynamic
evolution of the atmosphere, ocean, land use, rivers, glaciers and other
processes. These models have led to vast amounts of climate model data that
severely constrain storage resources. Moreover, statistical emulators are
increasingly common and desirable alternatives to running complex physical
models directly. Development and validation of compression and emulation
algorithms require understanding and maintaining complex dependencies between
physical variables, but current tools are univariate or pairwise-based. This
research will provide statistical guidance for climate data science
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a modeling framework
for multivariate spatial processes, and relies on new theory incorporating
graphical models in multiscale multivariate spatial process representations.
Moreover, many multivariate datasets exhibit non-Gaussian behavior. A companion
thrust of this work is in introducing and exploring empirical likelihood
techniques for large multivariate spatial processes. Finally, the proposed
models and estimation frameworks will be applied to a climate dataset from the
Community Atmosphere Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.