* 1811534
* Collaborative Research: Effective environmental workshop facilitation and local community action
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Lara Hansen, EcoAdapt
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,191,428.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Research in Service to Practice project examines how informal place-based
collaborative learning can support local communities' planning processes related
to current environmental changes. As a part of this study workshops will be
conducted in 8 communities that have a range of planning mandates based on
recent extreme environmental changes such as drought/wildfires, flooding,
invasive species, or loss of native wildlife. Place-based adaptation workshops
will be designed to be locally relevant and empower people to learn and act on
their newly acquired understandings. Local community collective actions may
include a range of decisions (e.g., infrastructure changes such as building
defenses against sea level rise in coastal communities or improving the quality
of roads to withstand higher temperatures.) Collective action may also lead to
community wide behavioral changes such as individuals using less water or
farmers planting different crops. The study will focus on the efficacy of the
methods used in 8 workshops in communities throughout the country. Research
objectives include: 1) identifying experts' belief about the most critical
components of successful workshops; 2) Understanding of prior workshop outcomes
and 3) test hypothesized effective practices and understand how learning takes
place and collective action does or does not take place. The project addresses
key AISL solicitation priorities including strategic impact on the field of
informal STEM learning, advancing collaboration, and building professional
capacity. It engages both public and professional audiences as described in the
solicitation. Public audiences include stakeholders in each of the 8 communities
such as community environmental groups, NGOs, businesses, landowners, and local
government planners. Professional audiences include the workshop scientists and
facilitators who will be trained in the experimental workshop approach. The
project builds upon and expands the existing AISL portfolio of science
communication projects such as science cafes, science festivals, science media,
and library based projects. This is a collaborative project of EcoAdapt and
Virginia Tech with participants from the National Parks Conservation
Association, the Desert Research Institute, and the Wildlife Conservation
Society and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will progress through two
phases. Phase 1 is designed to identify consensus-based effective practices for
promoting learning and action in adaptation workshops. It includes a Delphi
study to synthesize beliefs about effective practices held by experienced
workshop facilitators across the United States. Phase 2 includes iterative
design and research of eight adaptation workshops in various communities with a
range of planning mandates and recent extreme weather experience. By iteratively
revising the workshop design, the study will elucidate how different workshop
components influence participant learning, individual behavioral intentions, and
subsequent efforts toward collective action. The overall research design will
examine the relationships of pedagogical and collaborative techniques to learner
outcomes and collective action. Many of these lessons are likely relevant to
other collaborative informal science learning
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.