* 1811457
* Design Squad Maker: Researching How to Support Upper Elementary School Children's Sustained Engagement and Participation in Engineering Design across Out-of-School Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Marisa Wolsky, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,604,294.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Design Squad Maker project, a collaboration of WGBH Public Television (WGBH) and
the New York Hall of Science (NySci), will research and develop engineering
design projects that provide evidence for how to integrate informal learning
spaces with digital public media assets. The project will be designed to provide
accessible, motivating pathways for children aged 8-11 in pursuing and
completing ambitious, fully realized engineering design projects. The project
will build on WGBH's existing Design Squad model for using media to engage kids
in informal engineering activities and NySCI's expertise in facilitating
children's unique design processes in museum settings. By developing and
studying new strategies for supporting children's use of the design process,
Design Squad Maker will address critical issues in engineering education and
informal learning that remain relatively unexplored. Project research will
contribute to the emerging literature on "connected learning" by building new
knowledge about how children's design activities can be sustained and supported
over time and across multiple contexts, such as science museums and homes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on existing research in the learning sciences and
engineering education, the project seeks to advance knowledge about the role of
museums, maker spaces, and digital technology in sustaining children's learning
in engineering. The project will use a design-based research approach, a
research and development process whereby educational designers collaborate with
learning scientists. Museum practitioners will collaborate with research staff
and media developers to design, test, and improve digital resources,
facilitation strategies, and parent engagement strategies to support children
through an entire design process. The research and development process will
result in digital resources and approaches in a flexible toolkit, which will be
used when assessing the project's scale-up potential at 10 museum/maker spaces.
The project will conduct a summative evaluation, assessing the project's
intended impacts with children, parents, and staff at museums/maker spaces
across the country. The toolkit will be nationally disseminated through national
partners that include the Association of Science-Technology Centers, Maker
Education, the National Association for Family, School, and Community
Engagement, and engineering education organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.