* 1811627
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Stephanie Smith, Smith                   Stephanie      M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This research explores the relationship between form and
function, a classic problem in biology. The fellow will investigate this problem
by studying the mammalian lumbar spine (lower back). The nature of the form-
function relationship varies across organisms, sizes, and structures, and is
especially difficult to understand for extreme or unique structures. Extra bony
reinforcements have evolved in the spine of anteaters, armadillo, and several
shrews, but it is unclear if these reinforcements serve similar functions
because their extreme and unusual shapes make them difficult to compare. The
fellow will use specialized imaging techniques to analyze the internal structure
of the vertebrae in shrews, anteaters, and armadillos. Internal bone structure
is indicative of adaptation in response to forces applied to a bone, so this
analysis will determine possible functional similarities between these
structures that is difficult to detect using external bone structure. This
project will promote understanding of how natural selection works to shape
morphology; further, it provides an exciting example to demonstrate to the
public that scientific understanding of evolution is constantly growing, and
collections-based research is critical for facilitating that growth.

The fellow will quantify trabecular bone morphology of the lumbar spine in
shrews and xenarthrans to test the following hypotheses: 1) convergent evolution
of supplementary intervertebral articulations in shrews and xenarthrans reflects
adaptation to similar in-vivo loading schemes; 2) a greater degree of external
modification corresponds to a vertebral column that is more robust to bearing
high in-vivo loads; and 3) vertebral function varies across shrews and
xenarthrans according to locomotor type rather than size or phylogeny. The
fellow will receive training in micro-CT imaging techniques, quantitative
analysis of 3D morphological data, and phylogenetic comparative methods; 3D data
collected during this project will be made publicly available for use by future
researchers. The fellow will engage the public in the study of convergent
evolution and extreme morphologies through education and outreach programs,
including the Field Museum of Natural History?s YouTube series The Brain Scoop.
The fellow will collaborate on videos for The Brain Scoop highlighting this
project and collections-based biological research generally, aiming to
increasing scientific literacy and critical thinking skills by encouraging
audience members to become engaged with natural history.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.