* 1811772
* Braids, Resolvent Degree and Hilbert's 13th Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Benson Farb, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 555,000.00

Polynomial equations are everywhere. They are used to describe, explain and
predict the motion of any object undergoing a force (gravitational, electrical,
etc); they are used to model financial, chemical and biological systems; and
they are part of computer algorithms that we use every day. The oldest and
perhaps most fundamental problem about polynomials are to understand their
solutions; in particular, how the roots (i.e. solutions) of a polynomial depend
on its coefficients. The purpose of this project is to use the incredible power
of modern mathematics in order to shed new light on this
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main themes in understanding
polynomials is to determine the minimal number of parameters R(n) to which the
solution of a general degree n polynomial can be reduced. A huge amount of work
in the 16th-19th centuries was devoted to giving upper bounds on R(n). Hilbert's
13th Problem (and related conjectures) posits some specific lower bounds on
R(n), but until now no nontrivial lower bound has been shown. The formal notion
of "resolvent degree" (due to Brauer and Arnol'd-Shimura) makes the definition
of R(n) explicit. J. Wolfson and the investigator have built a framework in
which these problems are put in a much broader context, which includes for
example many problems from enumerative algebraic geometry. With M. Kisin, the
investigator is using this new point of view, together with powerful modern
tools, to attack Hilbert's problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.