* 1811509
* Augmented Reality: Accessible Dynamic Informal STEM Learning for  Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sara Schley, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 258,861.00

This project explores augmented reality (AR) technology as a way to make STEM
content accessible to Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing (DHH) learners in "live"
presentation settings found within science centers and museums. The current ways
of providing communication and information access to DHH museum visitors require
DHH learners to split their attention between the visual focus of the experience
and the interpreter or captioning display. As a result, DHH learners are forced
to decide which information to miss during live presentations, thus
presentations may not be fully comprehended by the DHH learner. Furthermore,
this issue perpetuates a lack of inclusivity and accessibility in informal STEM
learning environments. The work focuses on investigating approaches to develop
an AR platform with a near-eye display that will allow DHH visitors to receive
signed or captioned instruction while still looking at and interacting with the
intended exhibits. The new platform will allow for transmission of live and
spontaneous instruction. Researchers will evaluate and recommend efficient ways
to make information at science centers and museums accessible to the DHH
population based on data collected from DHH learners. This project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program's Pilot and Feasibility Studies
which seek new approaches to design and development of STEM learning to be
accessible to all learners including underrepresented groups in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the
following research question: how can the use of Augmented Reality (AR) as a
method of support service delivery improve the engagement of Deaf and Hard-of-
Hearing (DHH) adolescent learners in semi-structured learning environments? Both
formative and summative evaluations will be conducted from two different angles:
(1) an engineering-centric evaluation focused on technical development and (2)
an educational-research centric evaluation focused on pilot studies on user
experiences, attitudes, and learning outcomes. Both qualitative and quantitative
data on the use of this technology will be collected. The evaluation methods
include attitudinal surveys (pre/post), ethnographic observations, pre/post
tests of content knowledge, and semi-structured group and individual interviews.
This project will be conducted by researchers in the Center on Access Technology
at National Technical Institute for the Deaf, one of the colleges of Rochester
Institute of Technology, in partnership with the Rochester Museum &amp; Science
Center, which includes the Rochester Challenger Learning Center. This project
represents a first step in setting future directions for research &amp;
development and to make educational materials more accessible to the DHH
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.