* 1811228
* Collaborative Research: Photons from Binary Black Hole Inspirals
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Manuela Campanelli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 8,155.00

Every large galaxy contains a supermassive black hole in its center. Galaxies
merge from time to time, therefore it is expected, but not yet demonstrated,
that recently merged galaxies hold two large black holes, which eventually form
a bound pair and later merge. It is generally expected that supermassive black
hole binaries can often accumulate sizable quantities of gas, and therefore be
bright for a significant time before and during the merge, as well as the
relaxation period there after. However, because it is estimated that there are
only very few such mergers per year in the entire Universe, understanding the
specific features to search for is required to discover them. A team of
researchers and graduate students from the Rochester Institute of Technology
(RIT), Johns Hopkins University (JHU), and the University of Tulsa (TU) propose
to use the Blue Waters supercomputer to perform the first realistic simulations
of gas surrounding supermassive binary black holes on route to merger. These
simulations will provide predictions of light and timing signatures emitted by
supermassive black hole mergers in order to allow for their observational
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to define the
features that identify the process of supermassive black hole mergers, using
large-scale numerical simulations that assume astrophysically relevant initial
conditions and include all the principal relevant physics: magnetohydrodynamics,
general relativity, and radiation transfer. These simulations are extremely
challenging computationally because of the complexity of the physics involved.
However, the project introduces two significant computation innovations: a time-
dependent high-order post-Newtonian spacetime to substitute for explicit
solution of the Einstein Field Equations and a multipatch scheme to coordinate
separate treatment of regions with contrasting grid requirements. In addition to
the simulation activities, the project is expected to create opportunities to
integrate many existing research programs into a larger community of scientists,
students, and the general public. It will foster cross-disciplinary
collaboration among undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and faculty at RIT, JHU and TU. Through this network, previous
highly successful outreach programs will be able to reach an even larger and
more diverse audience, and will provide many more opportunities for students to
interact and collaborate with researchers outside their home institutions. It
will also result in educating a number of graduate students and post-docs in the
techniques of very large-scale computation, which will be important skills for
their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.