* 1811933
* Statistical Analysis of Categorical Time Series through Sparse Markov Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Donald Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Analysis of a sequence of categorical values is best done by a model that
captures the statistical properties of the sequence, while being simple enough
so that statistical analysis is feasible. In many cases, the analysis of such
data has been simplified by the sequence having a short memory or Markov
property in the sense that conditional probabilities depend on only the very
recent past. Whereas Markov models are applied extensively, typically low-order
models are fit because the number of estimated conditional probabilities grows
geometrically as the number of past observations used for conditioning
increases. Another drawback involves the lack of model flexibility, as the
number of possible Markov models is limited. Sparse Markov models (SMM) help
with these two problems, thus allowing better model fits. While theoretical
results for Markov models are prevalent, those for SMMs are relatively rare,
only being considered in the last decade. Thus, there is tremendous potential
for the furthering of knowledge related to theory and applications of SMMs to
analyze categorical time series. This is the fundamental aim of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sparse Markov models allow the fitting of a parsimonious
model that is also flexible enough so that a better trade-off is obtained
between bias that arises from conditioning contexts that are shorter than truth
and variance from having many parameters to estimate, thus improving inference.
This project studies theoretical properties and applications of sparse Markov
models; the special case of variable length Markov chains (VLMCs) to the
analysis of categorical time series is considered. Related objectives are (i) To
develop theory for prediction of data from SMMs, central limit theorems, model
fitting through regularized regression, and comparisons of asymptotic and
finite-sample properties of derived and current methods; (ii) To develop a new
model called hidden sparse Markov models (HSMMs); (iii) To extend methods for
efficient computation of distributions of pattern statistics in Markovian
sequences to both sparse and hidden sparse Markov models; (iv) To apply
VLMCs/SMMs and HSMMs to improve the analysis and inference of various
categorical time series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.