* 1811894
* SHF:  Small:  Verified High Performance Data Structure Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Lennart Beringer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 515,999.00

Computational infrastructures of the 21st-century require data processing
engines that receive, store, analyze, and provide massive amounts of data, with
large numbers of requests arriving in rapid succession. To achieve the necessary
responsiveness, these systems process many requests simultaneously and use
sophisticated techniques to ensure that concurrent requests do not interfere
with each other. These techniques are highly error-prone, and mistakes in the
design or implementation of a system can lead to incorrect responses to queries
and the storing of incorrect information. The goal of this project is to develop
techniques for proving that existing systems are correctly implemented, and for
building new systems that are correct by construction. The project's novelties
are the principles used to show that sophisticated concurrent programs produce
the correct results, and the application of these principles to real-world high-
performance storage systems. The project's impacts are more reliable software
for storage systems, including cloud services, web servers, and data warehouses,
allowing people and businesses to rely on the systems that store their data
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on recent advances in concurrent
separation logic and machine-checked program verification, which allow
researchers to prove that concurrent programs as written in languages like C
correctly implement high-level specifications. In particular, the project
examines the effects of relaxed-memory operations, which give higher performance
at the cost of complicating the programmer's model of memory behavior. These
operations are used in programming patterns such as optimistic concurrency
control, which feature in several state-of-the-art database implementations. The
project involves scaling up relaxed-memory reasoning to apply to C programs at a
realistic scale, and showing how relaxed-memory reasoning at the level of
individual operations relates to high-level database correctness properties like
snapshot isolation. The upshot of such reasoning is to produce strong
mathematical guarantees of application-level correctness for storage systems
optimized for multicore architectures, and in the process to develop techniques
that can be used to verify other high-performance concurrent software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.