* 1811845
* Analysis of Singularities of the Ricci Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ovidiu Munteanu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2023
* USD 158,151.00

Differential geometry is the key mathematics in Einstein's theory of relativity.
Indeed, Einstein wrote his famous field equations in the language of tensors on
manifolds, and these equations have since been well studied by mathematicians
and physicists alike. Certainly, besides being fundamental in general
relativity, differential geometry is also very useful in other fields of
science, such as in control theory, in computer vision, data analysis, and many
others. For this reason, understanding the structure of manifolds is a
fundamental problem in science. This project will focus on the behavior of
geometric flows on manifolds. A typical example of a geometric flow is the heat
equation, which describes the distribution of heat in a region over time. This
proposal studies a more advanced form of the heat equation, called the Ricci
flow. A Riemannian metric on a manifold tells us about the shape of that object,
how to measure angles and distances. The Ricci flow is a heat-type equation for
Riemannian metrics. It is hoped, and confirmed in some cases, that the Ricci
flow will evolve a given metric on a manifold to an improved one, such as an
Einstein metric. However, a major difference between this theory and that of the
standard heat equation is that the Ricci flow is a non-linear equation, and as
such it usually develops singularities after some time. When such singularities
are understood, the process may be continued. This has played a central role in
the proof of the long-standing Poincare conjecture about the topology of three
dimensional manifolds. The main goal of this project is to understand such
singularities in dimension four, and to investigate the implications of our
findings to the structure of four dimensional manifolds. Because Ricci flow can
be seen as the renormalization group flow in string theory, there are other
possible applications of this study to theoretical physics. Other related flows,
like the mean curvature flow, have further remarkable applications to other
fields, such as in computer visualization, for eliminating noise, or in
metallurgy, for heat treatment of metals. The outreach components of this
project disseminate the results to general public and contribute to the
development of young talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow was introduced by
Richard Hamilton in the early eighties, in a fundamental work devoted to
understanding positively curved three dimensional manifolds. It became clear
later that if one flows an arbitrary metric on a given manifold, the flow will
generally develop singularities. One needs to understand these singularities in
order to continue the flow, and to not lose any significant topological
information about the space. The singularities of Ricci flow are modeled by
Ricci solitons, which are fixed points of the flow, modulo diffeomorphisms and
scaling. Three-dimensional shrinking Ricci solitons have been classified through
the work of Hamilton, Ivey and Perelman. This has important consequences to
understanding the behavior of Ricci flow with surgeries on three-dimensional
manifolds, and indeed, for the resolution of the Poincare conjecture. The main
goal of this project is to classify four-dimensional complete noncompact Ricci
solitons. This will be achieved through a complete understanding of the
asymptotic geometry of these spaces and through studying corresponding rigidity
questions. It is expected that this project will advance our insight on the
behavior of Ricci flow in dimension four, which will enable a Ricci flow
approach to some important questions about the topology of four dimensional
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.