* 1811305
* Developing bottom water temperature (BWT) calibrations using elemental ratios in benthic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Weifu Guo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Hovan
* 01/31/2021
* USD 499,997.00

Data from geological archives such as ice cores, corals, tree rings, and marine
and lake sediments reveal past changes in atmosphere and ocean conditions that
exceed the range of variability observed during the instrumental era, but the
precise mechanisms of past changes are often not well known. Temperature of the
subsurface ocean is a key indicator of many ocean processes and accurate
estimates would help test many hypotheses of past ocean and climate change.
Subsurface temperature in the past is generally estimated from elemental ratios,
especially magnesium/calcium (Mg/Ca) of benthic foraminifera but there are many
lines of evidence that the incorporation of Mg (and other metals) into the
shells of benthic foraminifera is influenced in the process of shell
construction (biomineralization). This research investigates the controls on
Mg/Ca and other elemental ratios in benthic foraminifera with the goal of
providing new calibrations to estimate subsurface temperature in the past.
Improved calibrations will enable subsurface temperature estimates that can be
used to test hypothesis of past climate change, as well as test the ability of
the same numerical models that are used to predict future climate change to
reproduce estimates of subsurface temperature in the past. The project benefits
from a collaboration between a paleoceanographer and a geochemist. A
postdoctoral scientist will participate in the research, which also includes
community participation in data syntheses. These data syntheses will be made
publicly available through NOAA's World Data Services for Paleoclimatology, and
results will be described for general audiences on participants' web
pages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will generate new benthic elemental data
from a wide range of ocean environments, with the goal of isolating the control
of temperature and carbonate chemistry on elemental ratios, especially Mg/Ca and
lithium/calcium (Li/Ca). A biomineralization model will provide a unifying
framework and more quantitative constraints on the environmental factors
controlling the elemental ratios, and context for new multi-element (e.g.,
Mg/Li) calibrations. New calibrations will be tested with data from sediment
core-top samples from regions omitted from the calibrations, and by assessing
whether vertical and horizontal temperature trends in the glacial and deglacial
ocean are reasonable. Past temperature estimates will be compared to predictions
from climate model simulations. Community participation in both the data
synthesis and data-model comparisons will be requested through a paleoclimate
listserv. While model-data synthesis will focus on the last 22,000 years, the
results will provide improved calibrations to estimate subsurface temperature
over a much longer time scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.