* 1811022
* On-the-Spot Assessment to Improve Scientist Engagement with the Public
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Linda Shore, Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,724,675.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Innovations in Development project will develop and test a model for
audience assessment that STEM professionals can use during their public
engagement efforts. These on-the-spot assessments will allow scientists to
monitor audience understanding and use this to make immediate improvements to
their activity. This project fills a critical gap in the field of public science
communication as expressed by outreach scientists and by the professional and
academic organizations that train them. Project partners include The
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Oregon State University, Pacific Science
Center, and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Research questions include: (1) How and under what conditions can
scientists, regardless of discipline, learn to build assessment into outreach
activities? (2) To what degree are scientists willing and able to change their
outreach activities to include assessment to ascertain audience attentiveness or
understanding? (3) To what degree will scientists be able to adjust their
outreach and engagement efforts based on audience feedback, and what support do
they need to do so? (4) With constraints on their time and resources, how can
the model help scientists conduct audience assessment on their own? (5) Are
audience members finding events more enjoyable and fruitful that use assessment
techniques? Several iterative rounds of R&amp;D will be used in the spiral
design-based approach. A group of Design Testers will start each of the
iterative cycles for the initial development and testing techniques, associated
training, and support. Later phases will use Field Testers using a rubric for
usability, validity, and reliability of various strategies. The summative
evaluation of the project will begin early and add data over the life of the
project. A mixed methods approach will be used including surveys of scientists
once each year after they have participated in the Prototype training.
Descriptive and inferential statistics will be used to document the extent to
which the project has achieved its intended outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.