* 1811234
* Developing the Processes and Potential to Engage Historically Underrepresented Communities in Public Participation in STEM Research Through Authentic and Impactful Collaboration
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Richard Bonney, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,537,135.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. Using community-
based participatory research, human-centered design, and developmental
evaluation approaches, this project will co-create a national community science
project, which is a form of Public Participation in STEM Research (PPSR) or
citizen science. The project seeks to increase inclusion and equity in STEM,
while building capacity in research and science through leadership and
participation by both historically underrepresented communities and established
academic institutions. Participants will record their levels of perceived stress
and well-being in relation to their local soundscape. This project will help to
connect participants, specifically youth and their families from communities
underrepresented and underserved in STEM, with science and nature through
learning that is authentic and relevant to their lives. With support of a mobile
app, community science project participants explore and map soundscapes to
identify areas of "excessive noise" as well as "noise refuges." Community-led
dissemination of results will inform adoption of community science projects by
other community-based organizations. The project is a collaboration involving
fifteen community leaders, the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Metro Atlanta Urban
Farm in Atlanta, WorldBeat Center in San Diego, CLUES in St. Paul, MN, and Camp
Compass in Allentown, PA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PPSR has exciting potential to
engage broad audiences in STEM learning and research, particularly when projects
are genuinely co-created by local communities, scientists, and educators. Using
a community-based participatory research approach in the project fosters direct
involvement from community members in integration of science practices and
learning, from the development of the research questions, design of the study,
to analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of results. Human-centered design
is important as it is an established collaborative approach for addressing real-
world problems facing human communities. In this project, human-centered design
will include technology in the problem-solving phases of inspiration, ideation,
and implementation. Developmental evaluation will provide on-going direct
feedback to the project team over the project lifespan with respect to equity
and inclusion in PPSR, an informal STEM learning environment. The project will
further knowledge and understanding of soundscapes and noise pollution, enable
use of mobile apps to map soundscapes in urban environments, and contribute to
the relationship of noise to well-being.The project will produce conceptual
frameworks and practical resources (toolkits) to guide future community-based
PPSR efforts. Results from this project will advance knowledge, skills,
attitudes, and behaviors of PPSR practitioners regarding equity, diversity, and
inclusion of underrepresented audiences in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.