* 1811818
* Statistical Methodology and Applications to Engineering, Economics, and Health Analytics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Tze Lai, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

A long-term objective of the proposed research is to develop innovative
statistical methodologies and combine them with technological advances for
resolving fundamental problems in engineering, economics, and health care. In
particular, the past seven years have witnessed the beginning of a big data era
in the US health care system, following the health care reform legislation
enacted in 2010, and the Precision Medicine Initiative of 2015. This era poses
new challenges and opens up new opportunities for the mathematical (including
statistical, computational, and data) sciences and their interactions with the
biomedical, engineering, and economic sciences. The project will address some of
these challenges, and its broader impact includes (i) direct applications in
engineering, economics and finance, health, and medicine, and (ii) training the
next generation of scientists in academia, industry, and government by involving
graduate students in all phases of the research and developing new advanced
courses and revising the curriculum in financial and risk modeling, statistics
and data science, and clinical trials and
biostatistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is broadly divided into three
areas. The first is the development of valid and efficient post-selection
multiple testing in the big data era, in which some machine learning/feature
engineering/variable selection algorithms are typically used to extract
features/variables for subsequent hypothesis generation and statistical testing.
The proposed research will address the reproducibility issues and "replication
crisis" with this data-dependent choice of features and hypotheses for
statistical inference from biomedical big data by resolving foundational issues
concerning valid post-selection inference. Initial investigations have already
started by considering samples of fixed size, and will proceed with extensions
to group sequential designs and then to sequential detection and diagnosis for
multistage manufacturing processes, multicomponent systems, and multiple data
streams from financial and production networks. The second area is the
statistical foundation of gradient boosting, which also has applications to the
first area because of its effectiveness in tackling high-dimensional nonlinear
and generalized linear models. The third area covers biomarker-guided adaptive
design of clinical trials for the development and testing of personalized
therapies and in the closely related subject of contextual multi-armed bandits
in sequential analysis and reinforcement learning. Innovations in this area can
lead to advances toward the Precision Medicine Initiative. Also covered are
innovative study designs and analyses of point-of-care trials and observational
studies, and development of mobile health platforms and wearable devices to
improve and facilitate evidence-based management of chronic
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.