* 1811019
* Collaborative Research: Influencing Millennial Science Engagement
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Sue Ellen McCann, KQED Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 12/31/2021
* USD 2,738,966.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This Innovations in Development project will research and produce science media
based on the role that interest, motivations, identify, and values play in
engaging diverse, millennial audiences in a dynamic media environment. Using a
design-based research approach the project team will develop Millennial Science
Media Engagement Profiles (a set of categories describing different audience
types who engage with science media in different ways). It will design and test
science media content (text, audio, graphics, video), placement and platform use
for millennials; and make conclusions around science media storytelling and
outreach tactics that spark interest and engagement, the precursors to learning.
Broader impacts include contributing significant new knowledge about millennials
interest and engagement in science while they are at a stage in life making
critical career decisions. It will also provide a model for other science media
producers providing new protocols for creating targeted digital media for this
specific audience. And further impacts include reaching a large national
audience through social media. The project is a collaboration between KQED and
researchers at Texas Tech.

The research will focus on the distinctive experience and interest of
"millennial" science consumers. It builds on a previously funded national survey
and series of focus groups with millennials looking at their science media
preferences versus other generations. With these survey results this project
will build profiles of millennial audiences based on two factors: level of
science curiosity and level of science media engagement. The researchers will
use a previously validated Science Curiosity Scale. The Millennial Profiles will
be validated in two ways: through performance-based survey questions and through
internet audience behavior analysis using existing digital analysis tools. KQED
will produce different science media content and send it to certain groups
conducting A/B testing to validate profiles online. The profile assumptions will
continue to be tested until the team can effectively predict the kinds of
science content that different profile groups prefer. The research will use a
study protocol used in other domains to bridge the gap between lab and real-
world settings. The protocol involves four steps: initial hypothesis
development; ante experimental simulation; real-world communication; and ex post
experimental simulations. Following the profile validation, the protocol will be
used to test the efficacy of new KQED Science content, testing the variables
that contribute to millennial engagement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.