* 1811146
* Convexity and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Elisabeth Werner, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2021
* USD 235,000.00

The principal investigator's research is in asymptotic geometric analysis and
affine convex geometry. One main emphasis of her research is on high-dimensional
objects and phenomena. This leads to applications of her research in areas as
diverse as physics, biology and medicine, computer science, optimization and
economics and material science: Indeed, a mathematical description of a
scientific or engineering question often requires lots of independent numbers,
leading to a geometric space of high dimension. For example, specifying the
location, direction and speed of one gas molecule in a room six separate numbers
in all. If you want to track 100 distinct molecules of the air in the room, then
you will need 600 independent numerical coordinates to collect all of the
relevant measurements. As these dimensions increase then the difficulty of
sampling and computation go up rapidly, a phenomenon data scientists sometimes
call "the curse of dimensionality." However, there are also patterns that emerge
as dimension increases which are not visible in low dimensions. We can exploit
those patterns, thus converting the "curse of dimensionality" into "blessing of
dimensionality". It is one purpose of this award to study such high-dimensional
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Important features of this project are the
study of high-dimensional objects and phenomena and their links with other areas
of mathematics and mathematical sciences, such as probability, statistics and
information theory. Of particular interest are the affine invariant functionals
on convex bodies in high dimensions. Among the most important such functionals
are affine surface area and the p-affine surface area (a family of functionals
parametrized by a real number p). Their corresponding affine isoperimetric
inequalities, established by the PI and collaborators for all p, are stronger
than their Euclidean counterparts and related to the famous Mahler conjecture
which is still open in dimensions four and higher. It was shown by the principal
investigator that p-affine surface areas are directly related to entropies of
cone measures of convex bodies which establishes a link between convex geometry
and information theory. This link will be further explored, also in the context
of log concave functions which are a natural extension of convex bodies in the
realm of functions. Moreover, affine surface area appears naturally in questions
on approximation of convex bodies by polytopes, a further main topic of study.
The goal is to establish optimal dependence on all the relevant parameters
involved in the approximation, for example the dimension and the number of
vertices of the approximating polytopes. The principal investigator and her
collaborators also extended the notions of affine surface area recently to a
functional setting and to spherical and hyperbolic space. To establish the
corresponding inequalities in those settings is a further topic of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.