* 1811130
* Collaborative Research: Fostering Public Engagement in Computational Thinking by Leveraging Quilting Communities and Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Gillian Smith, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches, and resources for use in a variety of settings. The pilot and
feasibility study will develop instructional workshops for an adult population
of quilters to introduce them to computational thinking. By leveraging pre-
existing social structures, skill sets, and engagement in quilting, the
researchers hope to help participants develop computer science and computational
thinking knowledge and skills. The long-term goal is to broaden public awareness
of computational thinking and build links between computer science and other
areas of interest. By leveraging the social structure and existing skills held
by practicing quilters, the workshops have the potential to reach an audience of
millions of quilters around the nation and worldwide, the majority of whom are
adult women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be developed and tested with
two groups: the Orlando Modern Quilt Guild in Orlando, FL, and an informally
gathered quilting class in the Worcester, MA area. Outcomes for the project
include workshop materials that can be used in a variety of quilting group
contexts nationwide, a deeper understanding of the processes and mechanisms for
adult computer science education through crafts, and evaluation of the pilot
workshop focused on the impact on participants' engagement, self-identity, and
learning for computational thinking. The research especially focuses on
leveraging pre-existing knowledge, interests, and social structures to draw
connections to computational thinking, and studying how this impacts
participants' self-described identity, attitude, and engagement with computer
science. The project also assesses a novel method for teaching computational
thinking that has potential for broad applicability in a variety of social and
creative hobbies. Participants will use and modify generative design software
that creates quilt designs and, in doing so, learn how creative interests can be
expanded through computer science. By focusing on the hobby of quilting, which
is not typically associated with computer science, the knowledge built through
designing and evaluating the research offers strategies for altering public
perception of computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.