* 1811452
* LabVenture - Revealing Systemic Impacts of a 12-Year Statewide Science Field Trip Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* James Hammerman, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,792,894.00

This research in service to practice project will examine the impact of a
12-year statewide science field trip program called LabVenture. This hands-on
program in discovery and inquiry brings middle school students and teachers
across the State of Maine to the Gulf of Maine Research Institute (GMRI) in
Portland, Maine to become fully immersed in explorations into the complexities
of local marine science ecosystems. These intensive field trip experiences are
led by informal educators and facilitated entirely within informal contexts at
GMRI. Approximately 70% of all fifth and sixth grade students in Maine
participate in the program each year and more than 120,000 students have
attended since the program's inception in 2005. Unfortunately, little is known
to date on how the program has influenced practice and learning ecosystems
within formal, informal, and community contexts. As such, this research in
service to practice project will employ an innovative research approach to
understand and advance knowledge on the short and long-term impacts of the
program within different contexts. If proven effective, the LabVenture program
will elucidate the potential benefits of a large-scale field trip program
implemented systemically across a community over time and serve as a reputable
model for statewide adoption of similar programs seeking innovative strategies
to connect formal and informal science learning to achieve notable positive
shifts in their local, statewide, or regional STEM learning ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the four-year project duration, the project will
reach all 16 counties in the State of Maine. The research design includes a
multi-step, multi-method approach to gain insight on the primary research
questions. The initial research will focus on extant data and retrospective data
sources codified over the 12-year history of the program. The research will then
be expanded to garner prospective data on current participating students,
teachers, and informal educators. Finally, a community study will be conducted
to understand the potential broader impacts of the program. Each phase of the
research will consider the following overarching research questions are: (1) How
do formal and informal practitioners perceive the value and purposes of the
field trip program and field trip experiences more broadly (field trip
ontology)? (2) To what degree do short-term field trip experiences in informal
contexts effect cognitive and affective outcomes for students? (3) How are
community characteristics (e.g., population, distance from GMRI, proximity to
the coast) related to ongoing engagement with the field trip program? (4) What
are aspects of the ongoing field trip program that might embed it as an integral
element of community culture (e.g., community awareness of a shared social
experience)? (5) To what degree does a field trip experience that is shared by
schools across a state lead to a traceable change that can be measured for those
who participated and across the broader community? and (6) In what ways, if at
all, can a field trip experience that occurs in informal contexts have an
influence on the larger learning ecosystem (e.g., the Maine education system)?
Each phase of the research will be led by a team of researchers with the
requisite expertise in the methodologies and contexts required to carry out that
particular aspect of the research (i.e., retrospective study, prospective study,
community study). In addition, evaluation and practitioner panels of experts
will provide expertise and guidance on the research, evaluation, and project
implementation. The project will culminate with a practitioner convening, to
share project findings more broadly with formal and informal practitioners, and
promote transfer from research to practice. Additional dissemination strategies
include conferences, network meetings, and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential insights this research could
garner on intersectionality between formal and informal STEM learning are
substantial. As a consequence, this project is co-funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) and Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) Programs. The
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new approaches
to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments. Likewise, the Discovery Research-K12 Program
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.