* 1811657
* Extremes Models and Methods from Transformed Linear Operations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Daniel Cooley, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 244,917.00

Quantification and assessment of risk associated with extreme-in-magnitude and
rare events are important in many science, engineering, and business
applications. Univariate extremes methods are well-developed, but there is a
need for easily implementable statistical methods to describe and model extremal
dependence in high dimensions, and in the time series and spatial contexts.
Linear statistical methods including traditional multivariate analysis, time
series, and spatial statistics are ubiquitous in non-extreme statistics.
Recently, the PI and coauthor connected the seemingly disparate areas of linear
statistical methods and extreme value analyses by utilizing transformed-linear
operations. An extension of this approach will be used to develop methods for
analyzing high-dimensional extremal dependence, modeling extremal dependence in
time, and modeling spatial extremes. Because the proposed work is inspired by
existing linear models and methods in the non-extreme setting, the models and
methods will be relatively simple and familiar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce statistical methods for describing and modeling extremal
dependence via applying transformed-linear operations. In a recently submitted
paper, the PI and coauthor link linear algebra to regular variation, a widely-
used and theoretically-justified framework for extremal dependence, via
transformed linear operations. The PI and coauthor obtain a sensible vector
space for extremes yielding the notion of basis, propose an extremes analog to
the covariance matrix, and perform an eigendecomposition of this matrix useful
for understanding high-dimensional tail dependence. This project aims to develop
a simple linear model for extreme spatial data, analogous to the spatial
autoregressive model in non-extreme spatial statistics, and transformed-linear
time series models inspired by familiar ARMA models, but appropriate for extreme
time series data. This project will also develop inference procedures for both
the spatial and time series models. Furthermore, this project will further
develop linear methods for understanding extremal dependence in high dimensions
and explore the idea of conditional dependence and independence for
extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.