* 1811600
* Molecular and Coarse-Grained Simulations of Biomolecular Processes at the Petascale
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Gregory Voth, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2019
* USD 8,100.00

Computer simulations of biological systems can offer insights that are difficult
or impossible to access with conventional experimental techniques, providing
significant benefits for basic scientific research. However, the large range of
characteristic time and length scales observed in biological processes makes the
use of any single computational technique difficult. While atomic-resolution
simulations can furnish a scientist with exquisite levels of detail, the sheer
computational expense of these simulations sometimes presents a significant
barrier for their application to large-scale biological problems. This project
proposes to us coarse-grained (CG) molecular models to expand the reach of
computer simulations to cellular scales. The project propose to integrate
atomic-resolution and CG simulations to study a range of biologically relevant
systems, in close collaboration with an international cohort of scientists from
various experimental fields. This work will involve not only elucidating and
explaining biomolecular processes, but also the development and dissemination of
cutting-edge simulation software to the wider scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to combine experimental data
with cutting-edge computer simulations to investigate a number of important
biomolecular systems. The systems of interest can be grouped into two main
categories: critical stages of the viral lifecycles of HIV-1 and influenza, and
studies of the actin filaments and microtubules of the cellular cytoskeleton.
The project will develop an integrated pipeline which allows scientists to
convert experimental data into computer models capable of investigating
biomolecular processes at scales that are inaccessible to other approaches.
While the results of atomic-scale simulations will clearly be important in and
of themselves, they will also, in combination with experimental data, form the
basis for generating and parameterizing rigorous UCG models. Results and
predictions made by these models will be validated by close collaboration with
experimental scientists, and used to suggest new directions in both the
theoretical and experimental field. In addition to the development and
deployment of advanced biomolecular simulation techniques, this proposal will
also assist in the dissemination of the advances to the wider research community
by the integration of the UCG model generation and simulation algorithms with
the popular LAMMPS software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.