* 1811506
* Enhancing the Capacity for Rural Libraries to Engage the Public in Drought Science, Monitoring, and Adaptation
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Nicole Colston, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,119,204.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. This specific project
will advance new knowledge about the nature of and functions for rural libraries
as informal STEM learning environments. Research will identify the social
contexts and relational capabilities of libraries to acquire new scientific
knowledge that exists externally and to integrate it into community knowledge-
building and forums. The research outcomes should lead to actionable strategies
for library and science communication practitioners about who and how to
influence public engagement in citizen science drought monitoring. Furthermore,
collaborations with these rural libraries will lead to new resources for rural
communities and informal STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on the design, development, and evaluation of informal science education
programs and educational media for use in rural libraries in drought prone areas
of the Great Plains. The target audiences include public librarians in rural
communities of Oklahoma, Nebraska, and Colorado, as well as the general public
(adults and children) they serve. The project goals are to leverage the
professional skills and community knowledge of rural librarians to support local
drought monitoring networks. The model prepares librarians to introduce citizen
science processes and practices within the context of community dialogue and
deliberation about drought. In collaboration with partners at the Community
Collaborative for Rain, Hail, and Snow (CoCoRaHS), and the National Drought
Mitigation Center (NDMC), the project will increase public participation in
citizen science and improve the communication of science-based knowledge about
drought. The project deliverables include: (1) a professional development
workshop series for rural librarians, (2) a drought infographic booklet and
poster series, and (3) co-designed library programs for rural public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.