* 1811694
* Epigenomic Consequences of Increased Heterochromatin Load in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jered Wendte, Wendte                  Jered          M
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Jered M. Wendte is "The Epigenomic Consequences of
Increased Heterochromatin Load in Maize". The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Georgia and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Robert J. Schmitz.

A major problem facing humanity is the production of an adequate food supply for
an exponentially increasing population. One promising strategy to address this
problem is the modification of crop plant genomes to produce crop varieties with
higher yields and desirable traits through genome engineering. Plant genomes are
comprised of several long stretches of DNA, termed chromosomes. Each chromosome
encodes thousands of genes, which provide the blueprint of an organism. This
project will advance genome engineering technologies in the important cereal
crop, maize, by evaluating two potential genome engineering strategies. The
first involves the possibility of adding entirely new chromosomes to maize as a
means to introduce desirable traits that are encoded by multiple genes. The
second involves adding genes that encode proteins that chemically modify DNA to
maize as a means to increase trait diversity in maize, which can then be
selected on for desirable traits, such as drought or disease resistance.
Training objectives include genomics, bioinformatics, and science communication.
Broader impacts include participation in existing programs directed at
introducing Hispanic and Native American communities to opportunities in plant
genomics sciences.

Epigenetic modification of chromatin plays a critical role in the maintenance of
genomic stability by targeting repetitive sequences, such as transposable
elements (TEs), for heterochromatin formation and transcriptional silencing. In
plants, which are characterized by relatively large genomes mostly comprised of
TEs that are targeted for heterochromatin formation, heterochromatin also plays
an important role in phenotypic diversity. Between plant species, there is
remarkable variation in the amount and distribution heterochromatin
modifications within genomes. Also, within species, heritable changes in
chromatin state, or epialleles, account for an important source of phenotypic
variability. However, mechanistic explanations for these phenomena, including
factors that influence variation in overall heterochromatin capacity and the
initiating events that lead to epiallele formation, are currently lacking. Using
advanced genomics techniques and novel genetic resources in maize, this project
will address these knowledge gaps by 1) determining if a cell?s capacity for
heterochromatin is limited, and what factors could be rate limiting by assessing
the impacts of the introduction of large, multi-megabase quantities of genetic
material in the form of supernumerary B chromosomes on maize heterochromatin
structure; and 2) identifying the determinates of methyltransferase targeting
and their role in the initiating events of epiallele formation by assessing the
heterologous expression of DNA methyltransferases in maize. All data will be
made available through public repositories including NCBI
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and the host laboratory website
(http://schmitzlab.genetics.uga.edu/data). If successful, this project will
provide new important information that can be applied to help guide crop genome
engineering design strategies for artificial chromosomes that have minimal
detrimental impacts on heterochromatin regulatory pathways. Project outcomes
will also help assess the potential of strategies for modulation of the
epigenome to induce phenotypic variability that can be selected on for desirable
traits.

Keywords: maize, epigenetics, DNA methylation, heterochromatin, artificial
chromosomes, genome engineering

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.