* 1811008
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jesyka Melendez-Rosa, Melendez-Rosa           Jesyka
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
aims to investigate how animals use chemical signals to select mates for
reproduction. It is known that animals use a variety of olfactory signals to
navigate the natural world, however, how these signals are translated by the
olfactory system to generate behavioral responses (e.g. mate selection) are not
well understood. With Heliconius butterflies as the model system, this project
seeks to identify specific smell receptor genes in butterfly antennae that are
involved in the recognition of potential mates. Utilizing genetic and behavioral
methods, this research will attempt to link olfactory genes and signals to mate
selection behavior. During this appointment, the fellow will: (a) be trained in
emerging and novel genetic techniques, (b) establish a K-12 science outreach
program for local schools, and (c) help develop a new Functional Genomics course
for undergraduates.

Insects are dependent on olfactory cues to complete fundamental biological
processes such as foraging, oviposition, and mate choice. While extensive
experimental evidence supports the importance of chemical cues in these
processes, the mechanisms linking detection of odor cues to complex behavioral
responses remain largely unknown. This research will bridge this gap by
integrating analyses of chemosensory receptor genes and patterns of mate choice
in Heliconius butterflies. The project will link genes and behavior by
describing the genetic architecture of chemosensation in two behaviorally
distinct, incipient species pairs and relating olfactory receptors to pre-mating
isolation and mate choice. The specific objectives of the project are to: (1)
identify the genetic architecture of chemosensation in Heliconius using gene
expression data, (2) develop and validate knock-out mutants for candidate
olfactory receptor genes using gene editing methods and olfactory bioassays, and
(3) use knock-out mutants to test the role of candidate genes in mate choice
with behavioral trials. As part of this appointment, the fellow will: (a)
receive training in new gene editing (CRISPR/cas9) and electroantennography
techniques, (b) establish an outreach program where undergraduates will teach
hands-on science lessons in local K-12 classrooms, and (c) help develop a new
undergraduate Functional Genomics course that will serve as an introduction to
novel genomic methods and provide hands-on experience with classic techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.