* 1811864
* Collaborative Research: Derived Differential Geometry and Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Carchedi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 142,742.00

Geometry and physics have a long history of fruitful interaction. For example,
work of Riemann on curved spaces later provided the mathematical language
necessary for Einstein's theory of general relativity, which explains gravity in
terms of curved spacetime. The broad framework, in which gravity is a paramount
example, is known as field theory. Other key examples include the gauge field
theories governing the electromagnetic, weak, and strong forces, which required
physicists to use (and develop for themselves) non-trivial mathematical ideas
from geometry, topology, and modern algebra. In fact, a systematic and rigorous
mathematical framework that fully integrates these insights of physics is
currently not available. This project aims to improve the situation by placing
these field-theoretic ideas and techniques into the emerging subject of derived
differential geometry, in particular, by developing a novel approach to derived
differential geometry tailored with this application in mind. The Principal
Investigators hope this effort will lead to a new language which facilitates
communication between mathematicians and physicists. They will explore the
wealth of derived geometric objects that theoretical physics offers, focusing on
connections with gauge theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigators will develop foundations for derived differential geometry (DDG)
custom-tailored for field theory and will work out concrete applications of this
framework. On one hand, their approach will be similar to that of Toen-Vezzosi
for derived algebraic geometry, allowing one to easily adapt their theory,
tools, and techniques, specifically the theory of shifted symplectic and Poisson
structures. On the other hand, with D. Roytenberg and R. Grady, they will
incorporate a locally ringed approach to DDG, rooted in dg-manifolds and thus
making it easy to import examples from physics. As a continual test and guide
for developing our framework, they will carefully construct and investigate the
derived critical locus of the Chern-Simons action functional, which can be
thought of as a derived enhancement of the character varieties of 3-manifolds.
With P. Teichner, the PIs will use this derived stack to relate quantum groups
to the perturbative quantization of Chern-Simons theory. Finally, with R. Grady
and B. Williams, the PIs will pursue a higher categorical analogue of work by
Gelfand-Fuks-Kazhdan, Bott-Segal, and Haefliger, providing a natural home for
invariants of smooth manifolds equipped with local structures, such as
foliations, as well as for the anomalies to quantizing nonlinear sigma-models.
The project will synthesize techniques from differential geometry, algebraic
geometry, abstract homotopy theory, higher category theory, algebraic topology,
and mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.