* 1811889
* Computations and Analysis of Efficient Snake Locomotion
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Silas Alben, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 220,063.00

Snake locomotion has been studied for several decades by biologists and
engineers, but a general quantitative understanding of how snakes bend their
bodies to move efficiently is lacking. A small number of typical snake motions
(for example, lateral undulation and sidewinding) have been described and
studied, but a much wider range of motions can occur biologically and
mechanically. This project will use mathematical analysis and simulations to
study a wide range of snake motions, identify those that move the snake body
most efficiently, and understand how they depend on physical parameters and
constraints. Snakes lack limbs but can nonetheless move efficiently on land. The
research will develop accurate simulations of snake dynamics in the presence of
friction and contact forces. Measuring the forces on real snakes performing a
wide range of movements is difficult in experiments, so mathematical models and
simulations are essential. The research will have broader impacts in the ongoing
development of robust snake robots to explore, perform inspections and search-
and-rescue operations, and assist internal medical procedures, often in confined
and/or hazardous environments. The underlying physical principles will apply to
efficient locomotion by a range of terrestrial organisms and robots. The project
will involve interdisciplinary research training of undergraduates and a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Improvements in computations and
analysis of two-dimensional snake locomotion will aim to accurately characterize
optimally efficient motions in the regimes of moderate and small transverse
friction, which are important biologically and for robotics. Little is known
about such optima at present, and why transverse undulation is ineffective in
this regime. Optimal motions will be identified under constraints including zero
time-averaged body rotation and fixed energy consumption. Optimal motions in the
presence of walls and obstacles will be computed using penalty forces preventing
penetration of the solid barriers and giving additional frictional interactions.
Such sharply varying forces will be computed accurately using adaptive
quadrature of frictional and barrier forces in the vicinity of contact. The
benefits of passive elasticity, well known for aquatic organisms, will be
studied in snakes. Accurate computations of contact forces with the ground will
allow for the study of optimal snake motions in three dimensions, accounting for
the work done against gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.