* 1811891
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Kara Feilich, Feilich                 Kara           L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This research will examine how the structure of American
freshwater habitats relates to the diversity of fishes that live in those
habitats. Depending on the physical features of any given watershed, there may
be different species, traits, or evolution represented by the fishes in that
environment. Any one of these aspects of a fish community can be prioritized by
conservation policy makers in their efforts to preserve the United States'
remarkable and economically significant fish fauna.

The fellow will use digital radiography and geometric morphometrics to measure
body shape from over 900 species of native freshwater fishes. The species
composition of each National Hydrography Dataset subwatershed will be determined
from existing range maps and occurrence data from the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility. Morphological diversity, species richness, and
phylogenetic diversity of each subwatershed will be calculated in order to
determine relationships among different diversity metrics. These variables will
then be mapped onto the conterminous US using geographic information services,
along with climate and other environmental variables compiled from EPA and USGS
datasets. Spatial autoregressive models will be used to determine how, if at
all, diversity is related to these environmental parameters. The fellow will
receive training in the use of GIS and hydrologic data, community level trait
modeling, and experience working with North American freshwater fish systematics
and historical biogeography. This work will result in the creation of a
comprehensive, open-access compendium of the morphological diversity of US
freshwater fishes. This compendium will allow researchers from around the world
to ask their own diverse questions about the evolution and biogeography of shape
diversity and environmental effects on shape evolution. In addition, data and
findings from this research will be used to create K-12 educational outreach
materials for teaching freshwater biology and ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.