* 1811487
* From Common Measures to Measures in Common: A Convening to Enhance Measurement of Outcomes of Afterschool STEM Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Bronwyn Bevan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Over the last decade there has been significant growth in the number of
afterschool programs that offer science activities to youth. Measuring the
quality and contributions of these programs to youth learning is important to
both the afterschool organizations and the communities that support them,
including participating youth and their families. To address the range and
evolving interests and capacities of all young people within a community, there
are, by necessity, a wide range of types of afterschool science programming.
Such programming may vary by focus (e.g., botany, astronomy, computer science,
engineering, or zoology), structure (e.g., hands-on, place-based, on-line, or in
partnership with local industry) and other factors. Across the range of
programming, there are different intended learning goals and opportunities for
students. For these reasons, a range of measurement tools are needed to monitor
the quality and outcomes of wide range of afterschool science programs. To
explore the current state of evaluation and measurement tools for use in
afterschool science programs, the University of Washington, in partnership with
the Afterschool Alliance and the National Girls Collaborative, will design and
host a conference for afterschool STEM leaders, researchers, and evaluators.
This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This conference is grounded in
the programmatic priorities and strategies of afterschool organizations. The
goals of the conference are to (a) articulate and map the range of intended
outcomes of afterschool STEM programs; (b) identify how existing measurement and
evaluation tools map on to intended outcomes; and (c) identify overlaps,
complementarities, and gaps in the available tools in order to provide guidance
to (i) practitioners on how and why to select current evaluation tools and (ii)
researchers on directions for future tool development. Tangible convening
products include: &lt;br/&gt; *A detailed, visual representation ("intended
outcomes map") of the range of outcomes afterschool programs are seeking to
achieve, related to student learning, educator capacity, program quality, family
impacts, learning ecosystems connectivity; &lt;br/&gt; *A taxonomy of current
evaluation instruments aligned to these outcomes, with an explanation of how
they overlap or differentiate both methodologically and theoretically;
&lt;br/&gt; *The identification of the areas where further work is needed,
including further specification of learning outcomes and future development of
evaluation tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.