* 1811055
* Comparative Genomics Approach to Pathway Discovery and Engineering in Tomato Trichomes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Craig Schenck, Schenck                 Craig          A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Craig Schenck is "Comparative Omics Approach to
Pathway Discovery and Engineering in Tomato Trichomes" The host institution for
the fellowship is Michigan State University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Robert Last.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolites produced in spatial and temporal
manner, are the drivers to plant form and function. These metabolites are
assembled from organic building blocks in a complex web of enzymatic reactions
and allow plants to thrive in diverse environments. Many specialized metabolites
are involved in ecological interactions, but also provide humans with diverse
metabolites of nutritional and medicinal importance. The diversity and taxonomic
restriction of plant specialized metabolism allows for discovery of novel
biochemical reactions, and investigation of evolution on a macro and micro
level. Fundamental understanding of the production of biologically active plant
specialized metabolites will have broad impacts on improving nutrition and
performance of crops. Specifically, increasing biologically active plant
metabolites in agronomically important species provides a means to enhance crop
defenses and productivity. This project will provide a fundamental understanding
of how enzymes and metabolic pathways evolve, the principles of which can be
applied to agriculture and extended to understand evolution in other biological
systems. Training objectives include functional genomics, analytical chemistry,
and bioinformatics. Broader impact activities include mentoring and training
graduate and undergraduate students and organizing outreach events to raise
public awareness of the plant sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants produce a
myriad of lineage-specific specialized metabolites (e.g. alkaloids, terpenes,
etc.), which are synthesized from essential primary metabolites like amino
acids. Many specialized metabolites are involved in ecological interactions, but
also provide humans with diverse metabolites of nutritional and medicinal
importance. Evolution of specialized metabolism tends to occur more quickly than
evolutionarily constrained primary metabolism. This recent evolution in plant
specialized metabolism has given rise to hundreds of thousands of structurally
diverse metabolites found in the green plant lineage. The diversity and
taxonomic restriction of plant specialized metabolism allows for discovery of
novel biochemical reactions, and investigation of evolution on a macro,
metabolic pathway, and micro, enzyme, level. Sugar esters (acylsugars) are a
group of specialized metabolites restricted to many species within the
nightshade family (Solanaceae) that consist of a sugar core decorated with
diverse acyl chains and have plant defense and commercial properties. The acyl
chains attached to acylsugars vary in number, length, and branching pattern,
which gives rise to natural variation in acylsugar types and abundance within
Solanaceae. Branched-chain amino acids are the direct precursors of C4-C5 acyl
chains, but synthesis of longer acyl chains requires elongation. However, the
biochemical mechanisms responsible for chain elongation remain unknown. This
project will leverage the wealth of data encompassing the Solanaceae to identify
biochemical mechanisms and evolutionary processes leading to the diversity of
acylsugars. Using comparative genomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics,
biochemistry and traditional genetics, this project aims to identify and
biochemically characterize the acyl chain elongation pathway in tomato and
closely-related wild relatives, validate in vitro biochemistry by testing the in
vivo function of the identified enzymes, and engineer the Solanum acyl chain
elongation pathway in Nicotiana benthamiana to reconstitute the pathway and
enhance production of biologically active acylsugars. All data obtained through
this project will be submitted to publicly available websites and repositories
and manuscripts will be published in open access
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: biochemistry, specialized metabolism,
defense compounds, acylsugar, chain elongation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.