* 1811901
* Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with Nemo-3 and Super-Nemo Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Karol Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 158,559.00

Neutrinos are fascinating elementary particles and understanding their
characteristics may explain why there is more matter than anti-matter in the
universe. Neutrinos have very small mass and zero electric charge so they could
be their own anti-particle, and that is their key to unlocking the matter vs
anti-matter content of the universe. This award focuses on determining if
neutrinos are their own anti-particles using the NEMO-3 and SuperNEMO
experiments developed by the Neutrino Ettore Majorana Observatory (NEMO)
collaboration. A prototype of the SuperNEMO design will be commissioned soon,
and this award will support the research of a graduate student who will earn his
dissertation using the newly commissioned equipment. The research will include
background analysis, energy resolution improvements, and a search for
neutrinoless double beta decay. The student will develop highly technical skills
that will allow him to contribute to STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NEMO-3 experiment collected data by employing about 10 kg of thin isotopic foils
surrounded by a wire drift chamber for 3D particle tracking in a 25 G magnetic
field and scintillator blocks to measure the energy of electrons. This unique
technique provides several observables for each registered event, offering a
powerful means to identify double beta decays and to reject background
processes. SuperNEMO will further exploit the NEMO-3 technique. The goal of
SuperNEMO is to use 100 kg of Se-82 or some other isotope to probe the half-life
for neutrinoless double beta decay at the level of 1x10^(26) years in a
500kg*year exposure, corresponding to the effective neutrino mass in the 50 meV
range. The research supported by this award will include the commissioning of
the first SuperNEMO module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.