* 1811276
* Developing A Program Model for High School Science Research, Communication and Education Experiences in Living Laboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Rebecca Kipling, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 11/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The Museum of Science, Boston (MOS) and Boston University (BU) will conduct a
Pilot and Feasibility Study project that leverages the current Living Laboratory
(LL) model and expand it to engage high school students (teens) in experimental
psychology research, science communication and science education activities. In
LL, which is now an extensive network of museums and university researchers
across the country, scientists and museum staff collaborate to engage children
in studies on the museum floor and educate caregivers about the research. Multi-
site implementation and evaluation of LL has also documented positive impacts
for undergraduate researchers. Many sites are eager to extend these benefits to
high school students by engaging them as practitioners within the model and by
providing them with opportunities to engage in current research, education and
communication, thereby helping to foster stronger youth identities with science
and its applications in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands a
ten-year LL partnership between MOS and BU to: 1) pilot a program in which high
school students both conduct scientific research and engage the public in
learning about science; 2) explore strategies for museums and universities to
collaboratively engage, support and mentor high school students in science
research, communication and education activities; 3) document curricular, other
programmatic, and evaluation materials; and 4) convene professional participants
to provide feedback on pilot materials, and assess the viability of implementing
similar programs at additional sites. Guided by developmental evaluation, these
activities will generate knowledge for the field, and act to increase
professional capacity to integrate experiences for teens at multiple LL sites in
future projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.