* 1811729
* AF: Small: RUI: New Directions in Kolmogorov Complexity and Network Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Marius Zimand, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 236,222.00

Data communication in systems with multiple senders and receivers raises
difficult problems caused by the possibility of complex data correlation
patterns, network topologies, and interaction scenarios. Traditionally, these
problems have been tackled using tools from Information Theory (IT), which
assumes that the data has been produced according to a certain generative model.
In practice, most of the time the generative model is not known. Even if it is
known, it is often more complicated than the models typically used in
theoretical studies. This project will use tools from Algorithmic Information
Theory (AIT, also known as Kolmogorov complexity), which equates the information
in a piece of data with its minimal description length. The advantage is that
the new approach does not rely on any model, and consequently the results
obtained this way are valid in more general circumstances. The problems that
will be studied are of interest to computer scientists, electrical engineers,
and mathematicians. The project will promote a deep and dynamic exchange of
ideas between these communities. This project will produce new insights in
Kolmogorov complexity and communication complexity. These areas have
applications in computational complexity, machine learning, constructive
combinatorics, and other fields. The results will likely have an impact in many
of these areas. The project will allow undergraduate and graduate students to
participate in research activities that have a strong theoretical flavor and the
promise of real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is timely
and realistic because it has recently become apparent that some interesting
questions (for instance, source coding of non-ergodic sources), which cannot be
approached with tools based on Shannon entropy, can be solved in the AIT
framework. In the other direction, there has been recent progress in some
classical problems in Kolmogorov complexity inspired from results and techniques
from IT. The project will: (1) isolate, understand, and develop certain aspects
of Kolmogorov complexity that are particularly relevant for data communication;
(2) use the newly-developed tools to make progress in outstanding problems in
network communication such as channel coding, network coding, interactive
protocols, and others; and (3) use the insights from the communication setting
to advance the theory of Kolmogorov complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.