* 1812554
* NeTS: Small: MegaIoT: Enabling Thousands of Concurrent Transmissions in Low-Power Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Shyamnath Gollakota, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 532,000.00

Recent advances have enabled low-power radio and backscatter communication
systems that enable Internet connected sensors and devices that can operate
reliably for more than ten years. However, existing systems do not scale well
with large-scale deployments of these devices. The project introduces algorithms
that can decode thousands of concurrent transmissions from low-power radio and
backscatter devices in city-wide wireless deployments. This enables wireless
networks that operate at orders of magnitude lower latency and higher throughput
and achieves sensor-networking infrastructure in cities that can potentially
scale to millions of devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the proposal
introduces a novel coding technique called distributed chirp spread spectrum
modulation that works below the noise floor, operates on low-power radios as
well as backscatter devices and can decode all concurrent transmissions at the
receiver using a single FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) operation. The proposal
addresses practical issues such as timing and frequency synchronization as well
as the near-far problem given the extreme low power requirements of these
devices. Finally, a test-bed of these low-power devices will be deployed and the
feasibility of concurrent transmissions from hundreds to thousands of devices
will be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.