* 1812576
* Moving beyond pedagogy: Developing elementary teachers' adaptive expertise in using the epistemic complexity of science
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Brian Hand, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,884,239.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)
emphasize the integration of scientific knowledge and the practices of science,
a recognition that science classrooms are complex learning environments. Meeting
this expectation requires teachers to move beyond traditional routines of
practice to become adaptive experts who can adjust their teaching to maximize
learning in varied classroom situations. A teacher who has adaptive expertise is
defined as someone who can self-assess and strategically adjust decision-making
before, during and after teaching episodes. To become adaptive experts, teachers
must understand the foundational ways that scientific knowledge is advanced and
develop knowledge of, and practices related to, using argument, language, and
dialogical environments--individually and collectively--as tools for learning
science. To effectively use these tools requires teachers to shift from viewing
science teaching as the transfer or replication of knowledge through routines of
practices to one in which students are participants in a more cognitively based
approach to learning. How teachers develop adaptive expertise for NGSS-aligned
learning environments is still little understood. This project will examine the
complex nature of the relationship between these learning tools and teacher
orientation that enables teachers to develop adaptive expertise over the course
of a multi-year professional development program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will work with 150 Grade 3-5 teachers in Iowa and Alabama to implement a
three-year professional development program to assist teachers develop adaptive
expertise. Through implementation of an argument-based inquiry approach focused
on development of adaptiveness, teachers will be supported as they shift their
expertise from routine to adaptiveness. Project data will include teachers'
implementation of the approach, their understanding of science argument, and
their shifting epistemic orientation. The project will examine selected case
studies of teachers to better understand the variations in development of
adaptive expertise. The project outcome will be a model of adaptive expertise
that can be used by in-service and pre-service educators to advance teacher
practices towards adaptive expertise. The aim is to design ways to transfer
adaptive expertise to students in STEM. The mixed-method project will integrate
analyses with a focus on understanding complexity, using large-scale
quantitative data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.