* 1812856
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Dark Side of NGC 5128
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Jay Strader, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2021
* USD 47,596.00

The investigators will study the outskirts of the nearest giant elliptical
galaxy, named Centaurus A, to learn how the galaxy built up its stellar and dark
matter mass over cosmic time. The investigators have measured the positions of
nearly all the luminous star clusters associated with Centaurus A, and will
precisely measure their velocities using large ground-based telescopes. Using
observations of the collection of star clusters, and their motions around
Centaurus A, the investigators will measure the dark matter density profile of
the galaxy, and search for remnants of smaller galaxies that have merged with
Centaurus A. The important goal of their observations is identifying large star
clusters which are the remnants left over from smaller galaxies after they have
been devoured by the larger Centaurus A. By studying the motions of these star
clusters in detail, along with the smaller galaxies it has destroyed, they will
have a complete inventory of the 'dark side' of Centaurus A. Their results will
be applied to studies of all galaxy populations. The investigators will present
the science results from this program to visitors at the National Science
Foundation's Kitt Peak National Observatory, by implementing a new docent
training program at the visitor center. The investigators will travel to Bryce
Canyon National Park and present their results, through summer internships,
which ultimately teach 16,000 visitors about the night
sky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The currently favored cold dark matter model makes
clear predictions for the sub-halo mass function and dark matter density profile
of galaxy-sized halos, but quantitatively verifying these predictions is
challenging. Centaurus A's dark matter density profile will be measured, using
the kinematics derived from a nearly complete sample of star clusters, and the
results compared to recent simulations that suggest galaxies with recent mergers
and active galactic nuclei should have shallow dark matter profiles. By
combining the star cluster kinematics with an already existing red giant branch
star map, the visible, accreted substructures will be identified and weighed.
Finally, a complete sample of ultra-compact dwarfs will be analyzed, including a
search identifying them as the central compact remnants of stripped dwarf
galaxies. Accounting for this population of sub-halos is a novel aspect of this
program, and one that has largely been neglected when testing galaxy formation
models. These efforts will test major predictions of the cold dark matter model
at sub-galactic scales in our nearest elliptical galaxy
neighbor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.