* 1812415
* Research and Education with GlueX
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Richard Jones, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 363,000.00

The GlueX experiment at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(Jefferson Lab) searches for evidence of a new class of particles called hybrid
mesons, which are expected to exist based on the Standard Model of particle
physics. The best existing theory calculations for hybrid mesons predicts that
27 such mesons should exist within the mass between 1.8 and 2.5 GeV/c. GlueX has
been built to study this full mass region with excellent sensitivity, using a
high-intensity polarized photon beam and a state-of-the-art detector capable of
identifying these new particles from the momentum distributions of their decay
products. The GlueX group at University of Connecticut consists of the PI, one
PhD student, and two undergraduate student researchers. This team is responsible
for producing the diamond targets that generate the polarized high-energy photon
beam from electrons accelerated in the Jefferson Lab accelerator, making sure
they meet the stringent requirements in terms of crystal quality and flatness.
The group also constructed and maintains the tagging "microscope" detector that
is used to measure the photon beam energy. Support received under this grant
enables the UConn team to travel to Newport News to support the operation of the
GlueX experiment over the next three years, and to work on the analysis of GlueX
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental searches for hybrid mesons over the past
20 years have mostly come up empty, except for one or two outstanding
candidates. One plausible reason for this is that prior searches have focused on
the wrong mass region, guided by older model calculations which indicated that
the masses of the lightest hybrids might be less than 1.5 GeV. Within the past
decade, improved predictions have emerged, pointing to a higher mass region 1.8
- 2.5 GeV for the lightest 3 hybrid nonets. GlueX has been built to study this
full mass region, with excellent mass resolution and high statistics, in photo
production by polarized 9 GeV photons. During the past three years, GlueX has
completed commissioning and initial physics data-taking phases. Over the next
three years, the experiment will collect a major part of the full dataset
required to complete its primary physics mission, and will complete an initial
survey of the resonance landscape over the mass range of interest, focusing
initially on a small number of exclusive final states that are favored for
hybrid decays. The UConn group supports the analysis effort by authoring and
maintaining the physics simulation package for GlueX, managing shared computer
resources for physics simulation, and participating in the shared data analysis
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.