* 1812693
* Direct and Inverse Electromagnetic Scattering Problems for Complex Periodic Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Dinh-Liem Nguyen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 130,000.00

The interaction and scattering of light by periodic structures at the nanoscale
&lt;br/&gt;is a topic of great significance in the area of nanophotonics and
metamaterials &lt;br/&gt;technology. With the current rapid development of this
enabling technology, there &lt;br/&gt;is a high demand on new mathematical
theories and computational algorithms &lt;br/&gt;for both direct and inverse
problems of the light scattering by periodic complex &lt;br/&gt;media or
periodic metamaterials. This project aims to develop such theories
&lt;br/&gt;and algorithms. Results from this project will advance knowledge,
understanding &lt;br/&gt;and imaging techniques in the technology of
nanophotonics and metamaterials. &lt;br/&gt;For instance, the mathematical
theories and the computational algorithms developed &lt;br/&gt;for the direct
problems are extremely useful for the simulation, fabrication and
&lt;br/&gt;maintaining of optical devices. The imaging techniques developed for
the inverse &lt;br/&gt;problems can be potentially of practical use for non-
destructive tests, which help &lt;br/&gt;to detect and characterize discrete
flaws in optical components and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
contains two main areas of study: the mathematical and numerical
&lt;br/&gt;analysis for direct scattering problems, and the development of
efficient inversion &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for inverse scattering problems. More
precisely, for the direct problem, &lt;br/&gt;the PI and his colleagues will
work on the following topics: 1) develop volume integral &lt;br/&gt;equation
formulations for direct scattering problems for periodic complex media; 2)
&lt;br/&gt;develop fast integral equation-based numerical solvers for the direct
scattering problems; &lt;br/&gt;3) study interior transmission eigenvalues for
periodic complex media; 4) study &lt;br/&gt;well-posedness of the scattering by
chiral metamaterials. The proposed research &lt;br/&gt;for the inverse problem
includes the topics: 1) develop sampling methods &lt;br/&gt;for imaging of
periodic complex media; 2) develop sampling methods for the detection
&lt;br/&gt;of local defects in photonic crystals; 3) develop globally convergent
methods for &lt;br/&gt;the identification of material parameters for photonic
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.