* 1812916
* Collaborative Research: Conference on Integrating Computational Thinking with K-12 STEM Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Marcos Caballero, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 3,744.00

The American Association of Physics Teachers and Michigan State University will
develop a three-day conference to evolve a research-driven strategy for the
application of computational approaches and computational thinking in physical
science education and closely-related disciplinary areas. The conference will
bring together 35 participants, including physical and life science educators,
education researchers, and computer science educators as well as representatives
from other disciplines who have worked on integrating computational thinking in
their secondary school disciplinary courses and who have practical experience
with the challenges and opportunities afforded by computational education and
the critical competencies and skills needed to prepare students in future
computational science careers. The conference will develop a set of open
research questions whose answers will provide evidence for the effectiveness of
computational thinking integration and to articulate the common features of the
computational thinking skills and competencies developed by the computer science
professional community and by the physics, physical sciences, and computer
science education communities. Having students develop computational thinking
competencies will have a major influence on college and career readiness and the
enhancement of the nation's computational workforce. The results of the
conference will provide advice to secondary school educators about how to
develop STEM and computer science education programs that foster the development
of computational thinking for students, potentially affecting millions of
students across the nation. This project is in response to NSF Dear Colleague
Letter, DRK12: Advancing STEM + Computing (17-149) and is supported by the STEM
+ Computing Program that advances research and development of interdisciplinary
and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of computing within science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning for
preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings. STEM+C supports research
on how students learn to think computationally to solve interdisciplinary
problems in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational thinking
includes the use of computational skills and methods to articulate and solve
essential problems in a range of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines, and to aid in developing a deeper understanding
of core disciplinary ideas and crosscutting concepts to solve problems that will
benefit society. The conference participants will identify similarities and
differences among definitions of computational thinking and formulate a series
of education research questions focusing on scaffolding computational thinking
development in students (with an emphasis on secondary school physics and
physical science students), professional development for teachers and faculty
members, and assessing the effectiveness of various strategies in enhancing
students' skills in computational thinking. The research questions will also
address how computational thinking enhances students' understanding of the
physics and physical sciences disciplines. Topics will include the vertical
alignment of secondary STEM curricula that integrate computational thinking,
appropriate learning progressions, standards, and assessment of the
effectiveness of the curricula in fostering computational thinking and deepening
the understanding of STEM content. The participants will also discuss how to
develop a STEM + computer science education culture that fosters the pervasive
implementation of computational thinking that has broad application to students.
The project will make use of existing secondary school frameworks for
computational thinking as articulated by elements of the 2012 Framework for K-12
Science Education and the 2017 CSK12 Framework at the secondary level, similar
frameworks at the higher education level, and the early results of education
research into integrated computational thinking in several NSF-funded projects.
Direct outcomes from this conference will include an analysis of alignment of
content, skills, and assessments/research metrics to enhance the existing
projects, as well as a set of open research questions that will guide funding
programs and computational thinking education research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.