* 1812790
* Support for Student Travel for the Spring 2018 Technical Meeting of the Eastern State Section of the Combustion Institute
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Jacqueline O'Connor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award is to partially support the travel expenses of graduate and
undergraduate students in attending the 2018 Spring Technical Meeting of the
Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute. This conference, to be held
at the Penn State University, is a gathering of combustion researchers in
academia, industry, and government from the East Coast region of the United
States. The technical program of the conference consists of a series of plenary
lectures, contributed oral presentations, and information social gatherings.
Experiences in attending technical conferences are extremely beneficial to
students. These experiences will not only help with the students' professional
development, but also stimulate their critical thinking in formulating future
research directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its effect on energy
conversion and environmental quality, the understanding of combustion processes
and practical combustion systems is of paramount importance to society. Exchange
of information at conferences increases the rate at which research breakthroughs
can be made to make combustion more efficient and cleaner with fuel-flexibility.
A particular focus of this conference is on graduate and undergraduate students
by providing an opportunity for these students to present and get feedback on
their research. This award will be used to offset the travel expenses of non-
local students in an effort to increase student participation at the meeting,
particularly students from underrepresented institutions that may not have the
financial means to fully support student travel to conferences.