* 1812425
* 2018 and 2019 US Ignite Application Summits - Bridging Academic Research and Community Stakeholders for Increased Impact
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Joseph Kochan, US Ignite, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 325,248.00

US Ignite Application Summits in 2018 and 2019 will create a public forum for
demonstration of advanced applications that are designed to take advantage of
next-generation networking technology. The Summits will serve to illustrate the
important role that advanced networks play in the emerging smart and connected
communities / Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem and provide a unique
opportunity to facilitate partnerships among university-based researchers,
industry and community leaders. The applications that will be showcased as part
of the summit will also demonstrate how advanced networking technologies support
economic growth and prosperity, improvement of quality of lives and delivery of
healthcare services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The US Ignite Application
Summits in 2018 and 2019 will also complement the Smart and Connected Community
program. By co-locating the Application Summit with the NSF Smart and Connected
Community (S&amp;CC) program principal investigators' (PI) meeting, there will
be increased opportunity for transition of technologies to communities as well
as additional insights into both community needs and the state of the art in
smart applications and S&amp;CC PI research. The Application Summits will also
provide a venue for community leaders spanning rural and urban regions of
various size to interact with application developers and researchers in panel
discussions, poster sessions, and technology demonstrations. They will also give
exposure to applications that other local governments and their project partners
have developed, and enhance opportunities to transfer research products across
communities. The Application Summits in 2018 and 2019 will serve to build
research capacity by disseminating information, lessons learned and best
practices across the research community and its partners in municipal
government.