* 1812396
* RUI: Precision Test of Fundamental Symmetries via Light Pseudoscalar Meson Decays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Liping Gan, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,580.00

Understanding how quarks are confined to form protons and neutrons and searching
for physics beyond the standard model (BSM) are two of the most challenging and
exciting frontiers in physics. The major goal of this project is to perform
cutting-edge experiments at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(JLab) to explore both fundamental issues through precision tests of fundamental
symmetries in the decay of particular subatomic particles, mesons. The results
from these experiments have the potential to shed light on critical questions
such as: the origin and dynamics of quark confinement, the nature of dark
matter, and the mystery of the asymmetry of matter-antimatter in the universe.
This project will also offer great opportunities to engage undergraduate
students in research. It will create a research-enriched learning environment,
explore new approaches to recruiting prospective students, and develop new
courses which are research related. Students will work in an international
collaboration, which will enhance their international experience and allow them
to gain gain global perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of
this project include: (1) publish the results from the PrimEx-II experiment
(E-08-023), a precision measurement of the pi-zero lifetime; (2) prepare and
perform the PrimEx-eta experiment to measure the eta radiative decay width (eta
decay to two photons) (E-10-011); (3) develop an upgraded FCAL-II calorimeter
for the newly approved JEF experiment (E12-12-002A) to study eta and eta-prime
decays with emphasis on rare neutral modes in Hall D; and (4) continue the
responsibility for maintaining and operating the low-granularity pair
spectrometer detectors to control the photon beam in Hall D at JLab. The
symmetries of QCD are manifested in their most unambiguous form in the sector of
light pseudoscalar mesons pi-zero, eta, and eta-prime. Precision measurements of
their properties are crucial to understanding the QCD symmetry structure at low
energy, as well as the origin and dynamics of QCD confinement. In addition, the
measurements of various rare and forbidden decays of the eta and eta-prime will
provide sensitive probes for sub-GeV dark gauge bosons (a leptophobic vector
B-prime and an electrophobic scalar meson) and C-violating, P-conserving new
forces, which will extend our knowledge of the dark sector and explore new
sources of CP violation needed to explain the matter and anti-matter asymmetry
in the universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.