* 1812531
* The Evolution of Galaxy Fueling and Feedback in the Last 7 Billion Years
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jessica Werk, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/28/2022
* USD 614,090.00

Most of the atomic matter in the Universe courses through the dark, vast spaces
between galaxies. This diffuse gas cycles into and out of galaxies multiple
times. It will form new stars and become swept up in violent stellar end-of-life
processes. Astronomers believe that this gaseous cycle lies at the heart of
galaxy evolution. Yet, it has been difficult to observe directly. This project
will include analysis of new telescope observations of hundreds of galaxies and
their associated gaseous halos. Combining these data with large computer
simulations will greatly advance the current picture of galaxy evolution. In
addition, the analysis will track how the composition of the gas evolves over
billions of years of cosmic history. This program includes an educational
component focused on training University of Washington students in scientific
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by recent advancements in UV
instrumentation and computational capabilities, observations and simulations of
the diffuse gas in the circumgalactic medium (CGM) are a new frontier of galaxy
evolution studies. This study will directly address key questions about the
physical connection between galaxies and their CGM. The observational dataset
combines high-resolution HST/COS UV spectra of 30 z=1 QSOs with deep, optical
spectroscopy and imaging from Gemini and Keck telescopes of hundreds of
foreground galaxies per QSO field. The comprehensive galaxy-absorber catalogs
produced by this study will: (1) be 5 times larger than all previous low-
redshift samples combined; (2) cover an epoch that has never before been
systematically surveyed (z = 0.3 -1; spanning approx. 5 Gyr), and (3) expand the
physical distances probed in the halos from 0.5 -3 times the virial radii. In
total, this program will constrain the physical properties of gas physically
associated with a large, varied sample of galaxies at redshifts ranging from
0.1-1 and compare these quantities with cosmological, hydrodynamical
simulations. This program will serve as a benchmark for the next decade of CGM
studies. In collaboration with faculty and staff at Seattle Central College
(SCC), this program will also establish a multifaceted undergraduate research
program designed to facilitate STEM student transfers between local community
colleges and the University of Washington and retain, mentor, and financially
support transfer students. This research and mentorship program will foster
education in STEM and broaden participation in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.