* 1812987
* CSR: Small: IOQL: an I/O Interface for Near-Data Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Hung-Wei Tseng, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,515.00

As data sets grow, the overhead of moving data around different units in
computers significantly affect the execution time of applications. Performing
computation near the source location of data as much as possible can
fundamentally minimize the demand of data movement. However, doing this is
difficult with the existing computer systems. This project will develop a
Input/Output Query Language (IOQL) to provide a natural language and interface
for users to easily describe the tasks to compute near data storage. The IOQL
infrastructure optimizes and coordinates the allocation of all tasks in the
system. IOQL will boost the performance of many critical datacenter
applications.

IOQL will achieve its goal through presenting a query language with easy-to-
understand syntax, application programming interfaces for popular programming
languages, a query engine that optimizes and assigns tasks among heterogeneous
computing resources during runtime, kernel modules to interact with data
storage/memory devices with computing facilities and architectural support of
IOQL. IOQL will evaluate the proposed concepts by implementing real system
prototype with extended data storage devices and memory controllers. This
project will measure the performance, power and energy consumption for data-
intensive compute kernels, machine learning frameworks and database systems.

IOQL will be made compatible with existing computing systems, especially data
centers, to address the demand of real-world applications for financial (e.g.,
business intelligence), scientific (e.g., simulation), and public health (e.g.,
genomics) applications. The design of IOQL minimizes the amount of additional
costs of supporting the proposed tasks but maximizes extensibility of the
framework, making IOQL an ideal long-term solution for similar problems.

This project will publish research results in related peer-reviewed conferences,
journals and workshops that allow public to access. This project will also make
the stabilized source code of IOQL and all related modules available on
https://github.com/ESCALNCSU. The research group plans to retain all related
data for at least three years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.