* 1812064
* Collaborative Research: Algebraic K-Theory, Topological Periodic Cyclic Homology, and Noncommutative Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Blumberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2022
* USD 275,315.00

Algebraic topology began as the study of algebraic invariants of geometric
objects which are preserved under certain smooth deformations. Gradually, it was
realized that these algebraic invariants (called cohomology theories) could
themselves be represented by geometric objects, known as spectra. A central
triumph of modern homotopy theory has been the construction of categories of
ring spectra (representing objects for multiplicative cohomology theories) which
are suitable for performing constructions directly analogous to those of
classical algebra. This move has turned out to be incredibly fruitful, both by
providing invariants which shed new light on old questions as well as by raising
new questions which have unexpected connections to other areas of mathematics
and physics. The project funded by this grant carries out this program in the
setting of a rich invariant called algebraic K-theory and related theories known
as topological Hochschild, cyclic, and periodic homology. The project studies
applications of these theories to a broad range of questions in number theory,
algebraic geometry, and geometric topology, as well as algebraic topology
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research continues a broad research program
aimed at applying recent work of the PIs on algebraic K-theory and trace methods
to study a wide variety of basic problems in number theory, noncommutative
algebraic geometry, and symplectic topology. It also includes a project to
develop the foundations of equivariant derived algebraic geometry, which has
applications to organizing computational phenomena observed in the study of
topological modular forms. The PIs' recent work has resulted in a complete
description of the homotopy groups of K(S) (in terms of other known spectra) and
a canonical identification of the fiber of the cyclotomic trace via a spectral
lift of Tate-Poitou duality. The PIs have a program to apply this work to
provide novel evidence for the Kummer-Vandiver conjecture. If successful, this
would provide another example of input from algebraic topology addressing
questions in number theory. The PIs previously applied their work on the fiber
of the cyclotomic trace to resolve conjectures in the p-adic Langlands program
about the (co)homology of stable congruence subgroups. The PIs describe a series
of projects that would use homotopy theoretic data about the fiber in the study
of the p-adic Langlands program. Other recent work of the PIs established a
Kunneth theorem for topological periodic cyclic homology (TP) of dualizable dg
categories. This result has already had interesting applications in
noncommutative algebraic geometry, as a consequence of regarding TP as a kind of
noncommutative Weil cohomology theory. The grant includes a project to establish
this viewpoint and to apply TP in noncommutative algebraic geometry. Based on
conversations with Abouzaid and Kragh, the PIs have started exploring
applications of algebraic K-theory and TP to symplectic topology via the wrapped
Fukaya category. The PIs describe a series of projects that leverage their
expertise and prior results to study fundamental questions in this area. PI
Blumberg has previously worked with Mike Hill to develop the foundations of the
theory of equivariant commutative ring spectra. PI Mandell is one of the
foremost experts on topological Andre-Quillen homology (TAQ). In collaboration
with Basterra, Hill, and Lawson, the PIs study equivariant TAQ as part of a
broader program to develop the foundations for equivariant derived algebraic
geometry. If successful, this program will provide an organizing principle for
phenomenological data coming from work on topological modular
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.