* 1812573
* Collaborative Research: Nonlocal Models of Aggregation and Dispersion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jian-Guo Liu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 211,000.00

In many models of physical reality, coherent system states emerge and are
maintained through a balance of countervailing influences. Effects that
concentrate, aggregate, or focus are generated by nonlinear mechanisms.
Competing influences that diffuse, disperse or fragment are often due to linear
action. This project addresses several problems which involve a dynamic balance
of this kind, whose solution will require the development of new and useful
mathematical tools. These problems arise in connection with investigations in
animal ecology, image analysis, optimal transportation, fluid dynamics, and
stochastic models of interacting agents. The new mathematical ideas to be
developed promise to be of strong interest to researchers in a variety of
disciplines. The project will also engage students and young researchers, and
lead to results to be communicated at seminars, conferences, summer schools, and
lecture series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project's research will
focus on understanding dynamic phenomena that concern four topics strongly
motivated by applications and the present state of theory in partial
differential equations: (1) A fundamental merging-splitting model of group-size
distributions, arising in H.-S. Niwa's analysis of empirical data on fish school
size in the mid-ocean; (2) Least action principles for volume-preserving shape
deformations and their connection to (regularized) optimal transport metrics,
motivated by modeling dynamics of constant-density crowd configurations; (3) A
novel type of weakly singular shock wave dynamics in a regularized model for
shallow water equations describing waves on scales large compared to the water
depth; (4) How coherent waves and patterns form through gradient-like dynamics
in a proposed new model of nonlocal dispersion and nonlinear focusing, related
to fixed-point formulations for computing wave shapes in a variety of nonlinear
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.