* 1812971
* RUI:  Dual regulated control over the catalytic and membrane binding activity of acyl protein thioesterases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Randal Johnson, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,269.00

Palmitoylation is the reversible attachment of long lipid chains to proteins. It
controls essential biological functions including cell signaling, immune
regulation, and ion transport. Detachment of these lipid chains and recycling of
membrane bound proteins is performed by acyl protein thioesterases (APTs), a
conserved class of enzymes linked with cancer progression, neural degeneration,
and bacterial pathogenicity. This research project will investigate the
biological regulation of APTs, focusing on the role of protein flexibility and
dynamics in controlling APT activity. The complex regulation of APT activity
presents an intricate system for understanding how protein dynamics can regulate
protein function. The dynamic regulation of APTs also has applications in
understanding essential signaling pathways and disease states across human and
bacterial systems. The research will also provide training opportunities for
multiple undergraduate students within the investigator's laboratory and for
broader investigations within linked classroom undergraduate laboratories. For
classroom applications, an inquiry-based molecular biophysics laboratory will be
added to the biochemistry major at Butler University and will be assessed for
its effect on student learning and STEM career outcomes. This course and its
outcomes will also be integrated with a previous NSF funded inquiry-based
laboratory in biochemistry studying protein structure and function. To reach the
broader community, a molecular biophysics symposium will be held at local
undergraduate research conference and hands-on demonstrations of basic protein
structure will be presented to young scientists at a public event aimed at
exciting K-12 students about scientific discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;APTs
catalyze the depalmitoylation of S-acylated proteins attached to the plasma
membrane. An APT homologue from a gram-negative pathogen exists in
conformational equilibrium between a closed and open state that is hypothesized
to regulate its biological activity. Interconversion between these closed and
open states is dependent on the structural dynamics of a flexible loop
overlapping the active site. The structural properties of this flexible loop
provide a straightforward model for how the enzymatic activity of APTs could be
regulated and localized at the plasma membrane. The goal of this project is to
understand the interplay between the protein loop dynamics and regulation of the
catalytic and membrane binding activity of human and bacterial APTs. The central
hypothesis is that structural rearrangement of this flexible, hydrophobic loop
dually controls the catalytic and membrane binding activity of APTs. To address
this hypothesis, a series of studies will be conducted to understand the loop
dynamics, structural transition, and biological importance of hypothesized
structural rearrangements within human and bacterial APTs. Confirmation of the
dynamic nature of this flexible loop and its dual roles will provide a novel
model for controlling the biological function of APTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.