* 1812625
* A Study of Wave Patterns
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Peter Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 390,000.00

It is familiar to everyone that waves typically organize themselves into certain
identifiable patterns. For instance, a stone dropped into a pond produces
concentric rings of ripples, and the wake of a ship has a characteristic
V-shape. Although they may be harder to see in everyday experience, other types
of waves like electromagnetic waves frequently also produce such patterns. This
means that wave patterns might be understood from the mathematical study of
certain underlying models of wave motion that are common to several different
types of physical systems. In a similar way, understanding wave patterns from
first principles is a worthwhile pursuit because such patterns occur frequently
in so many physical circumstances, ranging from the very small (e.g. optics or
quantum waves on the scale of atoms) to the very large (e.g. gravitational waves
on the scale of the galaxy). This project is a systematic investigation of wave
patterns arising in mathematical models of wave propagation, and it aims both to
catalogue the various wave patterns that can occur in a given model and to
determine the range of models and physical situations in which a given pattern
can arise. As one example application, the outcomes of this project will
contribute to our understanding of rogue waves, large disturbances of the sea
surface that appear out of nowhere and disappear just as suddenly, but which can
cause great damage to ships, unless they are anticipated and avoided or
otherwise mitigated. Some parts of the project will serve as vehicles for the
training of junior researchers such as undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and
apply methods from the theory of completely integrable systems to the study of
wave patterns. The key mathematical methods are tools of complex, functional,
and asymptotic analysis, and the results of the research will be relevant to the
fields of nonlinear wave propagation, integrable systems, and special functions.
Specific models to be studied include the three-wave resonant interaction
equations, the focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation, the Davey-Stewartson
equations, and the family of Painleve equations. The project will study both
regular wave patterns, i.e., modulated wave trains spontaneously generated from
smooth initial conditions, and universal wave patterns, i.e., special structures
appearing in double-scaling limits that do not depend on initial conditions (and
perhaps not even on the equation of motion). Specific goals include the
development of new techniques for the investigation of wave patterns via
asymptotic analysis in integrable systems consisting of multiple coupled fields
or in multiple space dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.