* 1812474
* From Mountain to Sea: Creating a Culturally-Relevant, Multi-Faceted Summer Science Program to Facilitate a Community of Learners at the Salish Sea Research Center
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Melissa Peacock, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 499,998.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase
the education and research capacities in the fields of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) at institutions of higher education that
serve the nation's Indigenous students. TCUP's funding of projects that address
these goals expands opportunities for Native people to pursue challenging
degrees and rewarding careers in STEM, to conduct research studies on culturally
significant topics, and fosters generational appreciation for STEM education. In
alignment with TCUP's goals, Northwest Indian College's (NWIC) project "From
Mountain to Sea: A Culturally Relevant Summer Science Program at the Salish Sea
Research Center (SSRC)" engages undergraduate students with research and faculty
mentors in community-relevant scientific research related to water quality for
the waters surrounding the Lummi Reservation in northwestern Washington state,
and its impacts on food sovereignty. The project links academic-year STEM
curricula from NWIC's Bachelor of Native Environmental Science degree (BSNES)
with culturally relevant research at the SSRC, developing students' expertise
and confidence as researchers, while generating knowledge important to the local
community and broader society about harmful algae blooms (HABs). Participation
in the project prepares students for service in natural resources leadership
roles and/or to pursue a STEM graduate degree. Research findings will be widely
disseminated to community stakeholders and to the professional community through
presentations at conferences and publications. An institutional outcome of this
project will be the development of a sustainable program that engages Indigenous
knowledge and scientific learning, while supporting students in earning a BSNES
degree at NWIC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmful algae blooms (HABs) are a concern
for the Coast Salish People due to the effects of HABs on water quality and
shellfish, a culturally important food source for many American Indian tribes
living in the Pacific northwest. Anthropogenic nutrients from industry and
agriculture, coupled with climate change effects like rising temperatures and
recurrent drought events, increase the likelihood for longer duration and more
frequent HABs. The Natural Resources Department of the Lummi Nation and the
Salish Sea Research Center of Northwest Indian College are actively partnered in
studies of HABs, which can cause serious public health and economic issues when
HAB toxins rise to dangerous levels in shellfish. This project engages NWIC
undergraduate students in the research partnership as summer interns conducting
culturally-relevant studies of HABs in the waters surrounding the Lummi Nation.
Student interns will disseminate their findings through publications and
presentations in community and professional forums. Participation in the project
prepares NWIC's STEM students to enter environmental science professions and/or
matriculation to graduate school in environmental STEM disciplines. On an
institutional level, the project builds NWIC's research capacity at the land-sea
interface and improves the cultural congruence of its STEM curriculum to better
serve its students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.