* 1812426
* NeTS: Small: IP Interconnection Arrangements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Scott Jordan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Interconnection agreements between Internet Service Providers (ISPs), transit
providers, and content delivery networks (CDNs) allow broadband users to
transmit traffic to, and receive traffic from, everywhere on the Internet. These
agreements are based on a combination of technical issues (e.g. the locations to
and from which the provider agrees to route traffic and the amount of traffic
exchanged in each direction) and economic issues (e.g. the perceived value of
the arrangement and any fees involved). Historically, interconnection agreements
consisted of settlement-free peering agreements (between network providers at
the same tier) or paid transit agreements (between network providers of
different tiers). However, changes in Internet topology resulting from mergers
between access and backbone networks and the proliferation of CDNs have resulted
in most Internet traffic now flowing through interconnection points between
access networks and CDNs. These traffic flows are often subject to a new
category of paid peering agreements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past five
years, disputes over interconnection agreements have occasionally led to
failures to augment interconnection capacity, which in turn have harmed the
experience of consumers. This project will construct a modern model of Internet
interconnection that incorporates both the relevant technical and economic
factors. The model will be used to explain and guide new forms of Internet
interconnection arrangements. The project will also develop methods to
illustrate when Internet interconnection agreements may be used in
anticompetitive and discriminatory manners.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of two interrelated efforts. In the development of models of Internet
interconnection, the project will investigate the cost factors that should
affect interconnection arrangements, including the destinations to which a
network operator will route traffic, the volume of traffic, the network cost
along that path, and any transit payments required. The project will also
investigate the value factors that may affect interconnection arrangements,
including the destinations to which an interconnection partner will route
traffic, the volume of traffic, and the value of that traffic based on the
application. The project will then analyze the variation of the feasible ranges
of prices for paid peering with network costs, the maximum that a party is
willing to pay, routing and traffic ratios, and competitive
pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, in the development of analytical models
of competitive versus anticompetitive behavior, the project will evaluate the
characteristics of a variety of interconnection agreements, including the
minimum number of interconnection points, routing requirements, capacity
augmentation requirements, determinants of payment, and conditions for
termination. The project will examine the impact of interconnection prices on
broadband providers, content providers, and Internet users, and the resulting
impact upon engineering decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected
to contribute substantially to the development of network modeling and analysis
techniques that integrate technical and economic factors. The expected outcomes
of the project will lend insight into commercial interconnection arrangements,
as well as into related public policy issues when disputes harm the experience
of consumers. The project will also contribute to informing policymakers and
their staff about the technical aspects of telecommunication
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.