* 1812445
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations of Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Shearer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,777.00

This project concerns research into mathematical models of physical systems,
such as the dynamics of avalanches, motion of water waves, the underground flow
of fluids, and the motion of small liquid drops on a gel. The models are chosen
for their novel mathematical interest, and for the physical relevance of the
system. Part of the research, notably granular avalanches and droplets, relates
the mathematics to physical experiments. Applications contained in this project
include carbon sequestration, a means of storing the greenhouse gas carbon
dioxide in liquid form in deep underground salt water aquifers; the motion of
cells in biology by a process called durotaxis; the formulation of models of
granular materials such as soils, agricultural bulk grains, pharmaceutical
materials. The mathematical challenge is to find models that facilitate the
stable representation of granular flow, for example in draining a grain bin and
hopper avoiding failure of the containing structure. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research in this project on nonlinear partial differential equations concerns
properties of the equations modeling a variety of applications in mechanics. One
aspect is to explore fundamental properties of dispersive equations,
generalizations of the KdV equation, via the Whitham equations. The interest
here is in equations for which the Whitham system fails to be hyperbolic, or for
which the nonlinearity is degenerate, on hypersurfaces. Numerical simulations
exhibit a range of nonlinear wave interactions that will be explored
analytically. Novel models of flow in porous media and gravity currents in
carbon sequestration exhibit unusual effects that were recently explored in
student projects. The next steps aim to establish the rigorous mathematics
behind these wave effects. Research on granular materials will build on a recent
breakthrough in our understanding of how to formulate continuum models for which
the time dependent equations are well-posed. This has been a problem in the
field for at least thirty years. The continuing research will specify
constitutive laws in the new framework and test them against prototype special
flows, in numerical simulations, molecular dynamics representations and physical
experiments. Finally, a student project on the motion of droplets in durotaxis
has made progress on the corresponding static problem and is ready to move onto
dynamics, in which the droplet surfs a ridge created through deformation of the
underlying flexible substrate. This project is proceeding in tandem with
physical experiments on contact lines and surface tension, at the interfaces
between water, a gel, and air.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.