* 1812944
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Scalable and Topologically Versatile Material Point Methods for Complex Materials in Multiphysics Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Eftychios Sifakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,710.00

Computational simulation of natural phenomena is a ubiquitous tool in the
natural sciences (environmental modeling, prediction of earthquakes or
avalanches), bio-mechanics (modeling the musculoskeletal system, organ function,
or tissue damage), manufacturing (product design, prototyping, and verification)
as well as in computer graphics/animation. This project advances the science of
simulation using a technique called Material Point Methods (MPM), by increasing
the number of materials and range of phenomena that can be simulated, and
optimizing the performance of numerical algorithms used for simulations at
larger scales. The enhancements from this project will enable studies in terrain
dynamics, design and prototyping of vehicles and agricultural implements
interacting with complex soils, modeling of material failure and fracture
scenarios including biological settings such as skin tearing, surgical
incisions, or vascular rupture. The optimization and scaling will allow
computational studies of simulated physical systems at levels of resolution that
were previously only afforded to large enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project extends MPM simulation to: a) materials with multi-phase interactions
influenced by thermodynamics; and b) media with complex multi-scale geometric
features, including porosity (e.g. water-soil interactions) or aggregates
dominated by grains of non-spherical geometry. This project extends MPM
simulation to phenomena that include intricate frictional contact (beyond the
no-slip contact model embedded in traditional MPM), dynamic crack propagation,
and de-cohesion. This research thread leverages the team's prior work on non-
manifold data structures for storing implicit geometry representations, allowing
the background grids of MPM to incorporate a richer set of topological features
(e.g. tears and incisions) than those incorporated by conventional array-based
regular lattices. Finally, this research boosts the scale of MPM simulations
that can be accommodated in modern multiprocessors, improving detail, resolution
as well as parallel efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.