* 1812164
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Daniela Palmer, Palmer                  Daniela        H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
will investigate the genetic mechanisms and evolutionary forces shaping the
differences between males and females, which are fundamental to the origins and
maintenance of biological diversity. The Fellow will leverage the natural
variation in the chromosomes that determine male vs. female in geckos to test
classic evolutionary theory. The chromosomes that determine male vs. female are
specialized chromosomes that trigger male or female development, and occur in
two major systems. In XX/XY systems like humans, XY individuals are male, but in
ZZ/ZW systems, ZW individuals are female. This fundamental difference in
inheritance has sparked major theoretical predictions about the contrasting
genetic mechanisms and evolutionary pressures shaping XY versus ZW systems. The
Fellow will use geckos, which have evolved XY and ZW systems multiple times, to
examine untested classical predictions using a novel and state-of-the-art
comparative approach. The Fellow will broaden student participation in
bioinformatics activities that explore genome biology and computational science,
and will develop networking opportunities for underrepresented students seeking
international research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;XY/XX and ZW/ZZ
chromosomes arise as recombination is suppressed between a pair of autosomes,
which subsequently diverge from one another in sequence and expression. Theory
predicts key differences in the evolution of XY and ZW chromosomes and the roles
they play in adaptation, dimorphism and speciation. In geckos, XY and ZW systems
have evolved independently upwards of 17 times. The Fellow will conduct a
comparative analysis of XX/XY and ZZ/ZW chromosome evolution using multiple
independently evolved gecko XY and ZW systems. The Fellow will test the role of
chromosomal inversions in recombination suppression between these chromosomes,
and how cessation of recombination differs between XY and ZW systems. Next, the
Fellow will investigate how recombination, selection, and drift shape divergence
in these chromosomes. Finally, the Fellow will study the evolution of XX/XY and
ZZ/ZW biased gene expression and how this process differs between XY and ZW
systems. Together, these studies build an integrated mechanistic view of XX/XY
and ZZ/ZW chromosome evolution and the fundamental forces acting across the
entire genome. The Fellow will develop cutting-edge skills in research,
mentoring, and communication, and will engage diverse audiences in genome
evolution and global research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.