* 1812537
* CSR: Small: Heterogeneous Storage Systems with Emerging Technologies for Solving Big Data Problems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Du, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,100.00

The past decade has witnessed tremendous advances in computing, communication
and storage technologies. With the unprecedented connectivity provided by
Internet, many new data-driven applications have emerged and are being
developed. The information technology (IT) infrastructure of this new era calls
for low cost and high-performance storage, flexible ways of processing data for
decision making and information retrieval, and keeping data for extremely long
durations. This project intends to address certain aspects of these challenges.
That is, 1) developing heterogeneous storage systems with low cost and high
performance based on emerging storage technologies and 2) leveraging active
storage devices for supporting decision making and information retrieval. An
active storage device is a storage device having some additional, but limited
processing power and can process data locally on the device. Active storage
devices can be used to effectively filter out the unnecessary data from storage
to memory to support decision making and information retrieval.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will encourage innovative and creative
thinking for integrated solutions that combine emerging storage
technologies/devices to build storage systems supporting decision making and
information retrieval, enhancing the fundamental understanding of large scale
data management in big data era, and quickly developing prototypes to
demonstrate the capabilities of these designs. This project is also closely
collaborated with a number of industrial companies through NSF Industry-
University Cooperative Research Center for Research in Intelligent Storage
(CRIS). The outcomes of the project can be quickly adopted by storage industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected project outcomes include fostering the
advancement of science and technology especially for data-driven type of
scientific research, making society more efficient with big data
solutions/applications, and creating better ways of managing and migrating huge
amount of available data with better performance and lower cost. Through
collaboration with storage industry, the project will provide an ideal hands-on
learning and development environment to teach both graduate and undergraduate
students important system building and experimental skills that are critical for
today's IT workforce. The project outcomes will be incorporated into classroom
teaching of both course projects and the core courses in computer science and
data science programs for both graduate and under-graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the project include managing algorithms
for new storage technologies/devices, new storage architectures, different
storage systems designs, new data models, information access methods/algorithms
and new ways to deliver information and making decisions. The research outcomes
will be deposited and available to public in
http://cris.cs.umn.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.