* 1812382
* NSF-BSF: The Study of Nuclear Physics with Intermediate Energy Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ralf Gothe, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,214,480.00

Although ninety-eight percent of the mass of ordinary matter is due to the
strong subatomic force, the present theory of that force (Quantum
Chromodynamics) is still not fully understood. This award supports the study of
the strong force by probing the substructure of matter. Almost the entire mass
of an atom is concentrated in its tiny nucleus, which is made of nucleons that
are either positively charged (protons) or electrically neutral (neutrons).
These subatomic particles, however, are not elementary but are themselves
composite objects made of quarks held together by glue particles (gluons). The
structure of nucleons is a manifestation of the strong force, which is indeed
the strongest force known. This project helps to address overarching questions
about the origin of most of the visible mass in the universe, the nature of
neutron stars, the properties of dense nuclear matter, and the structure of
nucleons. Answering these and related questions is a complex task requiring
dedicated experimental observations and careful testing of theoretical
predictions against measured observations. This research will help discovery in
and advance understanding of nuclear physics, and will promote teaching,
training, and learning. The preparation of junior scientists plays a central
role in the supported activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nuclear physics
research program at the University of South Carolina (USC) is based at the
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab) in Newport News, Virginia
and the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland. At JLab, the group uses
high-energy electron and photon beams along with sophisticated particle
detectors, that were developed, in part, at USC, as powerful microscopes to
study the structure and interaction of baryons. This research program will
continue to provide crucial high-precision,polarized and unpolarized, electro-
and photo-production observables that will pin down present problems in strong
QCD. Complete and mostly complete meson-photoproduction measurements will settle
in an almost model-independent way lingering problems in baryon spectroscopy and
in particular verify the SU(6)xO(3) three quark baryon structure. Alternatively,
the structure of baryons can be probed through their interactions in scattering
processes. The study of strong interactions involving the strange quark is
essential to understand the properties of neutron stars. This project carries a
comprehensive study of hyperon photo-production off deuterons. The extensive set
of single- and double-polarization observables will provide long-needed
information from experiments on the hyperon-nucleon interaction. The properties
of hadrons are modified in the medium as a consequence of the partial
restoration of chiral symmetry and many-body effects. The bound proton
electromagnetic form factors in He-4 may be modified compared to those in the
vacuum as revealed for the first time by the group's earlier measurements. The
upcoming USC experiment on He-4, H-2, and H-1 at JLab will confirm or refute
these results. The observations of such phenomena are potentially transformative
in the way we view hadrons and their interactions in nuclear matter. At PSI, the
group is preparing the MUSE experiment. This precision experiment will address
the proton-radius puzzle by scattering muons and electrons off the
proton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.