* 1812541
* Collaborative Research: Trans-Amazon Drilling Project
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Katherine Freeman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 125,885.00

Tropical South America is a key region on Earth, and the Amazon-Andean
rainforest hosts over half of all terrestrial plant species. How this great
biodiversity arose remains one of the foundational problems in modern science,
and the question has spurred scientific research and debate since the pioneering
work of Darwin and other naturalists of the 19th century. This project will
obtain drill cores from the ancient sedimentary basins of the equatorial Amazon
region of Brazil, an area that extends from the Andes to the Atlantic Ocean
margin. This "Trans-Amazon Drilling Project" will span most of the width of
continental South America and its offshore shelf. Each drill hole is planned to
reach about 2 km deep, recovering the approximately 70-million-year history of
the region. A large international team of scientists will apply an array of
methodologies to study these cores in order to document the changes in plant
species across the Amazon basin throughout its geological history and to
determine how the evolution of the physical environment (including climate
variation, uplift of the Andes, and development of the Amazon River) shaped the
generation and distribution of plant and animal diversity. Collaborations with
Brazilian partners will provide relevant educational material on Amazon geologic
and biotic history, including ongoing educational programs for primary and
secondary students, museum exhibits on unraveling long-term history via
drilling, and outreach to enhance public appreciation of how geologic history
influenced the forest and its species, thereby stimulating greater interest in
conservation of this invaluable resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forests and
associated biota of the Amazon-Andean rainforest have evolved together with the
physical landscape, closely linking processes in Earth's interior with climate,
surface landscapes, ecosystems, and biodiversity. This project will investigate
the geologic and climatic evolution of the entire near-equatorial Amazon region
of Brazil, from the Andean foreland to the Atlantic Ocean margin, and the impact
of that history on biotic evolution at regional to global scales. Drilling will
occur in ancient sedimentary basins aligned along the modern Amazon River in a
transect of sites that span the entire near-equatorial Amazon region of Brazil,
from the Andean foreland to the Atlantic Ocean. This transect will span 40 to 73
degrees W longitude, thus encircling nearly 10% of Earth's equatorial
circumference. This project will address fundamental linkages between the
geology and biology of the Amazon region, including: (1) the changes in plant
diversity across the Amazon Basin throughout the Cenozoic history of the
angiosperm-dominated megathermal forests; (2) the evolution of the physical
environment, including climate, tectonism, and landscape change, and how this
has shaped the distribution of neotropical plant diversity and the origins of
its species; and (3) the origins of the Triassic-Jurassic Amazonian diabase
sills and the global environmental impact of the Central Atlantic Magmatic
Province (CAMP) intrusions, one of the most significant igneous events in Earth
history. Drill cores from this project will be archived at a NSF-supported
facility for future access by researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.