* 1812326
* Research in Theoretical Hadronic Physics and Related Topics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Carl Carlson, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 234,642.00

Nuclear Physics is the field of physics that studies the atomic nucleus
constituents (protons and neutrons) and the interactions that hold them
together. In this context, this project will investigate a number of fundamental
topics of interest in nuclear theory. Specifically, the project will focus on
providing a better understanding of the proton structure. One of the outstanding
problems is the proton charge radius puzzle, triggered by the fact that
measurements using electrons and muons give rise to different values of the
proton charge radius. Seeking a resolution to this puzzle, the PI and his
collaborators will calculate crucial corrections needed to understand
experiments performed at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(JLab) (USA) and experiments proposed at JParc (Japan). The PI will involve
undergraduate students in these projects, and continue fostering research
connections between universities and national labs (especially W&amp;M and
JLab).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study nuclear structure-dependent
corrections to the Lamb shift in muonic He-4, supporting the extension to He-4
of the muonic hydrogen Lamb shift measurements which led to the proton radius
puzzle. This project will also study models for light mass muon specific new
particles, seeking a model that would encompass the constraints on such
particles, pursuing first models inspired by suggestions of Froggatt and
Nielsen. Regarding pion form factors, they are measured in the reaction e+ p
-&gt; e pi n, with an extrapolation to the pion pole, and a background from non-
pole terms that must be modeled. Given that the related pi + p -&gt; (lepton
pair) + n process is anticipated at JParc, the PI and his collaborators will
make numerically clear the relevant backgrounds. The PI will also study twisted
photons, which have structured wave fronts that allow high angular momentum
(many h-bar) in the direction of motion, and which can be produced at hadron
scale energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.