* 1812887
* Prospective Elementary Teachers Making for Mathematical Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Eileen Fernandez, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 422,195.00

What teachers know and believe is central to what they can do in classrooms.
This study takes an innovative approach to documenting how teacher knowledge can
be enhanced by incorporating a design experience into pre-service mathematics
education. The study's participating prospective teachers will use digital and
fabrication technologies (e.g., 3D printers and laser cutters) to design and use
manipulatives for K-6 mathematics learning. The goals of the project include
describing how this experience influences the prospective teachers' knowledge
and identities while creating curriculum for teacher education. Also, because
more schools and students have access to 3D fabrication capabilities, teacher
education can utilize these capabilities to prepare teachers to take advantage
of these resources. Prior research by the team demonstrated how the process of
making a manipulative can support prospective teachers in learning about
mathematics and how to teach elementary mathematics concepts. The project will
generate resources for other elementary teacher education programs and research
about how prospective elementary teachers learn mathematics for teaching. The
Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three research questions.
First, what forms of knowledge are brought to bear as prospective elementary
teachers make new manipulatives and write corresponding tasks to support the
teaching and learning of mathematics? Second, how does prospective elementary
teachers' knowledge for teaching mathematics develop as they make new
manipulatives and write tasks to support the teaching and learning of
mathematics? Third, as prospective elementary teachers make new manipulatives
and write tasks to support the teaching and learning of mathematics, how do they
see themselves in relation to the making, the mathematics, and the mathematics
teaching? The project will employ a design-based research methodology with
cycles of design, enactment, analysis and redesign to create curriculum modules
for teacher education focused on making mathematics manipulatives. Data
collection will include video recording of class sessions, participant
observation, field notes, artifacts from the participants' design of
manipulatives, and assessments of mathematical knowledge for teaching. A
qualitative analysis will use multiple frameworks from prior research on
mathematics teacher knowledge and identity
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.