* 1812279
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* John Sproul, Sproul                  John           S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Repetitive DNA
makes up a large fraction of the total DNA in most organisms. Although it has
sometimes been called "junk DNA", studies show that repetitive DNA is critical
to many processes including how genes are regulated, genome evolution, aging,
and disease. Despite its critical role, repetitive DNA is understudied. This is
largely because software programs available for studying repetitive DNA can be
difficult to use and their performance has not been compared against uniform
standards of success. This project aims to address these challenges and simplify
the process for scientists to study repetitive DNA using the best available
programs. As scientists can better study repetitive DNA and its role in aging,
cancer, and other processes affecting human health, society will in turn
benefit. This project will place the fellow in an ideal setting for studying
repetitive DNA alongside leading experts in the field. The project will also
deliver career building opportunities to five students from underrepresented
groups by engaging them directly in the research, and will promote mentorship of
additional students within the department. Added diversity of individuals in
science improves the quality of scientific research, and benefits society as
privilege gaps close and individuals of all backgrounds have access to their
desired careers.

The applicant will build a workflow for benchmarking transposable element (TE)
annotation programs against well-studied animal, plant, and fungus model
species. Using simulated and empirical datasets generated from these models, the
applicant will evaluate a panel of available TE annotation programs to measure
their effectiveness at annotating TE insertions across model species, and across
TE families. Following performance testing, the best-performing programs will be
wrapped into a pipeline designed to be portable and easily expandable. The
applicant will demonstrate the utility of this pipeline by profiling repetitive
DNA in a diverse family of beetles (Carabidae) to test hypotheses of transposon
biology in the group. Students mentored under the project will be trained in
basic command-line and bioinformatic skills, as well as molecular bench work
including DNA extraction and library preparation. The fellow will receive
training in computational biology, computer programming, and transposon biology,
as well as opportunities to hone mentoring skills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.