* 1812037
* Genes Controlling Wax Biosynthesis in Sorghum bicolor: Potential for Improving Crop Performance and Value
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Lucas Busta, Busta                   Lucas
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Lucas Busta is "Genes Controlling Wax Biosynthesis in
Sorghum bicolor: Potential for Improving Crop Performance and Value". The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Edgar Cahoon, David R. Holding and Chi Zhang.

Sorghum bicolor is a multi-use crop with exceptional water- and nitrogen-use
efficiency whose expanded use will likely decrease water and fertilizer
consumption and create a more sustainable agricultural system. In sorghum,
natural waxes cover aerial plant surfaces where they protect against dry
climates and increase water-use efficiency. Waxes accumulate in sorghum to
levels higher than nearly all other plant species and sorghum kernel waxes are
an emerging industrial bioproduct that can be extracted during grain processing.
Understanding the processes that regulate sorghum wax biosynthesis and
accumulation will enable scientists and plant breeders to (1) potentially
transfer some of sorghum's water efficiency to other crops such as maize; and
(2) rapidly navigate routes to high-wax sorghum lines with enhanced grain value.
This project seeks to identify the genes and gene networks that control sorghum
wax deposition. Training objectives include functional genomics, biochemistry,
bioinformatics, and plant breeding. Broader impact activities include the
mentoring and training of undergraduate chemistry students in the analysis of
plant chemicals as well as developing a hands-on active learning module and a
hands-on laboratory workshop for educating children, adults and young women
about the economic, nutritional, and environmental benefits gained through the
study of plant chemistry, plant diversity, and crop improvement that will
inspire interest in STEM fields, education, and careers.

The goal of the project is to combine wax biochemistry with genomics and
bioinformatics to identify genes controlling sorghum wax deposition via two
complimentary specific aims: (1) identify high-confidence sorghum wax gene
candidates by correlating epidermis-specific transcriptomes and comprehensive
wax profiles, then evaluate their functionality by performing complementation
tests in Arabidopsis wax mutants; and, (2) use bulked segregant RNA-seq mapping
to pinpoint causal mutations in existing sorghum mutants affected in both kernel
and leaf sheath waxes (as putative transcription factor mutants). In addition to
initiating and catalyzing future sorghum wax research and the further
development of applications for sorghum wax knowledge, the whole tissue and
epidermis-specific gene expression data collected in this project will be made
accessible through public repositories as well as through the Sorghum Epidermis
Gene Expression Almanac, online server that will be developed as part of this
project where users can query sequences against the sorghum transcriptome and
view the expression of similar genes in whole tissue and the epidermis of
sorghum leaves, leaf sheathes, and developing kernels.

Keywords: sorghum, wax biosynthesis and deposition, functional genomics,
Arabidopsis mutants, biochemistry, gene expression profiling

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.