* 1812310
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Daren Card, Card                    Daren
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the Fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The Fellow's research will focus on better understanding how
the loss of an important and complex trait 'limbs' occurs in a group of
Australian lizards that are adapted to sandy environments. This work will
provide the most thorough study of limb morphology patterns across this large
group of species using dozens of existing museum specimens. The research will
also leverage developmental data and genetic information to begin to understand
the molecular mechanisms that cause changes in limb shape. The Fellow will
gather most of these data during an extended visit to the South Australian
Museum in Adelaide, Australia and Museum fur Naturkunde in Berlin, Germany. The
Fellow will also gain experience mentoring undergraduate and graduate students,
including individuals from underrepresented groups. Public and educational
outreach will also be pursued through the production of teaching lessons for
high school and college students that convey fundamental biological concepts in
genetics, development, and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of limb
loss is an important adaptive transition among animals. How such complex traits
evolve, and how and why they are evolutionarily plastic in some lineages, remain
fundamental questions in biology. Limb reduction or loss has also occurred
numerous times in tetrapods, most frequently among lineages of squamate
reptiles. This raises the question of whether adaptive traits are constrained
and canalized in vertebrates, leading to convergent phenotypic and molecular
patterns across limbless taxa. This project will address these important
evolutionary questions by studying limb reduction and loss within a genus of
Australian lizards (Lerista) by testing hypotheses about the genetic
underpinnings of limb morphology and patterns of morphological, genetic, and
developmental evolutionary convergence. The Fellow will use an integrative
approach combining morphological, developmental, and genomic data to (1) discern
the number of independent morphotype series present in Lerista, (2) characterize
the anatomical and molecular signatures associated with pentadactyl limb
development within this genus, (3) identify the putative molecular bases of limb
reduction within this clade, and (4) resolve the degree of morphological and
molecular convergence mediating parallel limb evolution. The Fellow will be
trained in gathering morphological and developmental data, will significantly
extend his genomics knowledge and skillset, and will be provided opportunities
to mentor and educate younger scientists and students in the life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.