* 1812495
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrated Framework for System-Level Approximate Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ahmed Louri, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

Nanocomputing is encountering fundamental challenges with respect to performance
and power consumption; it requires different computational paradigms that
exploit specific features in the targeted set of applications as well as an
integrated framework for assessing the interactions between hardware and the
processing algorithms (software). Approximate (inexact) computing has been
advocated as a novel approach for nanocomputing design. Approximate computing
generates results that are good enough rather than always fully accurate and
correct outputs. Recent advances at circuit level have shown that there is an
urgent need to investigate and enable at system-level the flexible utilization,
improvement and close monitoring of approximate resources; this allows the
efficient and integrated interaction of algorithms and hardware to meet the
multiple and often conflicting figures of merit of high performance, lower power
consumption and reduced inaccuracy. The goal of this project is to develop
approximate computing systems that are capable of adjusting performance by
exploiting relationships between hardware and software (referred to as intra-
level) in different applications such as cognitive processing, DSP, big data and
scientific processing for which data can be adaptively utilized and manipulated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an organized effort that combines recent
advances in technology with architectural enhancements into an integrated
framework for approximate computing that will tackle the critical challenges of
emerging computer designs in a comprehensive manner. This framework consists of
new functional and computational primitives of hardware resources and related
algorithms to allow an evaluation at system-level to meet the desired metrics
for approximate computing. Intra-layer relationships such as number
representation (such as floating point and logarithm) and accuracy by employing
dynamic approximation schemes and data remediation for both communication and
computing are also analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.