* 1812619
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Preference Elicitation and Device Scheduling for Smart Homes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Yeoh, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,998.00

A home automation system (HAS) is an automated system that controls a home's
smart devices with the objective of improved comfort, improved energy
efficiency, and reduced operational costs. The home automation problem involves
determining user preferences and constraints, scheduling smart devices to
satisfy user constraints and minimize energy costs, and proposing to users
schedules for these devices and responding to users' changes. As interactions
between users and their HASes are likely to be limited, it is not practical for
the system to elicit all preferences and constraints prior to scheduling user
and home devices. The overall goal in this project is to design an HAS that can
find acceptable solutions for users within a bounded number of interactions
between the user and system. Towards that end, this project investigates
techniques that elicit a small number of preferences and constraints that are
key in finding good solutions for the user. If users are unhappy with the
proposed solution, they can provide additional preferences, which will guide the
search for a new solution. Through investigations of the home automation
problem, this project will make the necessary foundational contributions to the
field of cyber-physical systems, especially in the algorithmic techniques that
take into account interactions with human users. Findings from this project will
improve the design of future systems and guide the development of commercial
HAS, which has the potential to impact future smart and connected
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to find acceptable solutions within a
bounded number of user interactions, this project will (1) model the bother cost
of interacting with human users; (2) improve preference elicitation techniques
by incorporating bother costs in their optimization; (3) use a portfolio of
matrix completion algorithms and leverage their diversity to approximate
unelicited preferences and their corresponding degrees of uncertainty; (4)
design robust and scalable algorithms that find schedules based on uncertain
preferences; and (5) propose visual and verbal interfaces that take into account
bother costs while presenting and explaining those schedules to
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.