* 1812391
* Collaborative Research: Asymmetry is Destiny: Structure and Fate of Wolf-Rayet Binary Systems
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Nordsieck, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,716.00

Supernovae are the most energetic explosions known. The very most energetic
supernovae (SNe) are thought to form from the direct collapse of a rapidly
rotating star into a black hole. The types of stellar systems which produce
these SNe are not well understood. The very hot, massive stars known as Wolf-
Rayet (WR) stars are capable of producing features observed in such SNe
explosions. However, the role of WR stars in binary star systems in producing
supernovae has not been observationally studied in detail. The investigators
will use large telescopes to show how the light from such SNe explosions is
polarized; this will help determine how the explosion occurred. They will then
use computer models to better understand and interpret material flowing out from
the supernovae. They will organize a summer camp for middle-school girls of
color, following up with mentoring throughout the school year. They will then
assess the feasibility of establishing such a program at USNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the method of spectropolarimetry to
observationally determine the morphology of the winds in WR binaries.
Spectropolarimetry probes the scattering history of polarized emission lines,
revealing their formation and scattering locations within the system. Existing
polarimetric observations of the V444 Cyg system, a prototypical WR+O eclipsing
binary, suggest that a shock-cone structure exists due to the collision of the
two stars' winds. The study will quantify this behavior in similar systems and
determine the range of morphological characteristics winds in WR+O display.
Monte Carlo modeling will allow the team to interpret the results, predict
polarimetric signatures from interacting binary stars, and compare the results
to current theories of WR winds and binary evolutions. They propose to continue
a successful pilot project using the RRS instrument on the South African Large
Telescope to construct well-sampled polarization phase curves for ~15 WR binary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.