* 1812356
* Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay and Axion Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Wenqin Xu, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 377,662.00

Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay (NLDBD) is the only experimentally viable way to
probe the particle-antiparticle nature of neutrinos. If neutrinos are their own
antiparticles, the empirical conservation of total lepton number will be
immediately violated, which will shed light on the fundamental question of
matter over anti-matter excess in the Universe. Further, NLDBD is the key to
understanding the beyond Standard Model non-zero neutrino mass. A next
generation NLDBD experiment will have a significant potential to observe this
long-sought decay, with far reaching implications that can revolutionize our
understanding of the Universe. The PI's involvement in NLDBD experiments is
aligned with the state's goal of economic development and allows the state to
benefit in the exciting research occurring at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility (SURF). Using the USD High Performance Computing (HPC) platform to
solve cutting-edge physics problems will train USD students in computation
skills that are in great demand in a modern society. The planned activities will
engage local communities and will leverage existing NSF infrastructure
investments at USD to foster a diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support research activities contributing to the operation of the
Majorana Demonstrator (MJD) NLDBD experiment. It will also support R&amp;D
efforts that address critical questions for the Large Enriched Germanium
Experiment for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay (LEGEND) project, one of the
proposed next generation NLDBD experiments. Research activities will include (1)
support for onsite operation at SURF and offsite monitoring, and (2) search for
solar axions using correlated signals from multiple detectors. The R&amp;D
efforts for the LEGEND experiment focus on developing and performing simulation
studies to gain a quantitative and comprehensive understanding of muon-induced
backgrounds for LEGEND. The low background in the MJD experiment also allows the
search for solar axions. Axions were postulated to solve the strong charge
parity problem in the nuclear force. The search for axions could deepen our
understanding of the nuclear force. This award will allow competitive searches
of solar axions at MJD using a method correlating signals from multiple High-
Purity Ge (HPGe) detectors developed at USD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.