* 1812961
* Collaborative Research: New Avenues to Cosmic Acceleration
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Dragan Huterer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 172,096.00

This project will consist of a theoretical investigation into the nature of dark
energy - the agent that causes the accelerated expansion of the universe. This
will be accomplished through the twin tools of fundamental particle-physics
theory, along with cosmological observations, which include galaxy clustering,
the hot and cold spots in the microwave background, and the bending of light by
galaxies (gravitational lensing), to improve our knowledge of the mechanism
responsible for the current period of acceleration. The project will focus on
providing a further stress test of the data to search for any evidence of
alternative theoretical explanations for the cosmic acceleration, including
modifications of the General Theory of Relativity. Important to the success of
this program is an outreach component, which will be coordinated with the SUPA
program at Syracuse University. The outreach will include communicating our
results to local high school students and more broadly to improving the science
curriculum throughout the state of NY and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
quality of data from cosmological probes of Dark Energy (DE) continues to grow
at an impressive rate, whereas theoretical progress in our understanding of the
underlying mechanism behind cosmic acceleration has been far more modest. As the
accuracy of cosmological measurements continues to improve it is crucial to
establish an economic and systematic way in which to use data to guide
theoretical efforts to reveal the nature of DE. The Effective Field Theory (EFT)
of DE provides such an approach. By focusing on the fundamental symmetries of
different DE models, rather than the details of a particular model realization,
the EFT groups DE models into universal classes based on their general
properties. This approach is analogous to the use of EFT methods in particle
physics and condensed matter, where it has been very successful in connecting
theory and experiment. This project will focus on developing the EFT of DE to
establish whether the EFT framework is robust enough to provide a uniform
approach to the study of DE. On the practical side, the investigators will work
to establish a parameterization of the EFT that is best suited for bridging the
gap between fundamental theory and cosmological
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.