* 1812351
* CSR: Small: Runtime Verification of Concurrent Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Vijay Garg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 414,844.00

Debugging and testing distributed multithreaded software is a notoriously
challenging task. This project develops techniques that facilitate a programmer
to locate a software bug by determining if there exists an alternative
computational thread of execution or a schedule of the executing processes that
may violate a global assertion regarding the correctness of the programs. The
project also investigates techniques for enumeration, detection and
representation of global states of a distributed multicore program that satisfy
a given predicate. The project solves fundamental problems in offline and
runtime verification of concurrent programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has four main components. First, it explores space-efficient algorithms for
enumerating the global states of interest. Second, the project studies the
design and implementation of parallel algorithms for predicate detection. Third,
a slice of a computation in the poset model with respect to a predicate is the
smallest computation that includes all global states satisfying the given
predicate. The project develops general slicing techniques and associated
algorithms. Fourth, slicing algorithms for posets are used to detect temporal
logic formulas expressed in Basis Temporal Logic interpreted over the lattice of
reachable global states. The project develops algorithms for online verification
of such formulas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The society is dependent on software that
is increasingly becoming parallel and distributed. Debugging this software is
error prone and cumbersome. This project will not only improve programmer
productivity but also reduce bugs in such programs. In addition, the project is
developing methods than can analyze the computation to ensure that it satisfies
all global constraints before accepting its result. The project will also
develop techniques for analysis of a poset model that has wide applications
including combinatorial optimization problems. There is a strong educational
component for this project. Techniques developed in this project will be
incorporated in the courses on concurrent and multicore
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will be shared in
the form of technical reports, journal articles, conference papers, and
dissertations. Whenever allowed by the journals and conference proceedings
publishers, drafts of the research papers will be available at the
investigator's website. The computer software generated in this project is
available at http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~garg/runtime-
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.