* 1812412
* LSAMP BD: Strategic Advancement of Rising Scholars (STARS) Nominated by the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NE-LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Mohamad Metghalchi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,074,998.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate studies in STEM
programs leading to the STEM doctoral degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern
University (NU) is the host site for the 2018-2020 BD program for the Northeast
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NE-LSAMP) under the leadership
of the University of Connecticut. Strategic Advancement of Rising Scholars
(STARS) is the first post-baccalaureate program at NU that supports a student
cohort of 12 underrepresented minority (URM) STEM graduate students from LSAMP
campuses across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STARS program incorporates
a six Rs model of recruitment, reflection, resources, recourse, retention, and
rise. Students receive rigorous academic and experiential research training that
support completion of the STEM Ph.D. and the transition to a competitive career
in academia and industry. Faculty STEM mentor training and development along
with culturally relevant STEM mentoring and evaluation are prominent features of
the program that includes linkages to the National Mentoring Research Network
(NMRN). Formative and summative evaluation activities include evaluation and
assessment of the project's implementation and student outcomes. Project results
and annual evaluation reports will be disseminated through the Northeast
Alliance and NU's website and at STEM professional conferences. In conjunction
with NU's Department of Computer Sciences, a new on-line long-term system is
proposed for development to track students during and after participation in the
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term impact of the BD activity is
reflected in America's STEM workforce, both in academia and in industrial
research and development. By nurturing future STEM leaders, the value added is
seen in the visibility of underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering, increasing representation and providing role models and STEM
leadership for the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.