* 1812476
* EAGER:   Development of a High-Resolution, Multi-Century Paleo-Fire Reconstruction from Tropical Australian Stalagmites
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Rhawn Denniston, Cornell College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2020
* USD 51,645.00

Fire plays a critical role in ecology, especially in the dry tropics such as the
savannas of northwestern Australia. The pace and extent of the burning of
vegetation and litter (biomass) in a region reflects both human activities and
the amount and timing of rain and lightning. Attempts to understand historic
rates of biomass burning are hampered by few continuous records, records of fire
at annual resolution, and records that span multiple centuries. This project
explores a new method of recording the occurrence of historic fires by measuring
traces of organic chemicals produced by fires that are captured within cave
stalagmites. The project focuses on stalagmites in a well-studied cave in
northwest Australian to develop a multi-century-long record of fire activity. In
addition, these stalagmites provide a detailed record for constructing a
3000-year history of summer monsoon rainfall. By combining the records contained
in the stalagmites, researchers will provide the first millennial record of the
role of human activity and monsoonal rains in shaping the landscape and ecology
of the dry tropics. This new methodology is a potentially transformative
approach to characterize fire occurrence, and would be of general value in
understanding the historic role of fire in other regions of the planet. Such
information is extremely useful to land managers. This project will also provide
research training for students at a primarily undergraduate US institution.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), including fluoranthene, pyrene,
benzo(a)pyrene and indeno(1,2,3-c,d)pyrene, are produced by burning of biomass
and are characterized by high persistence in the environment. PAHs have been
recovered from lake sediments spanning several millennia and prior studies have
used them to reconstruct fire histories of the surrounding watershed. The
investigators have developed a novel method for the extraction of PAHs from
stalagmites and preliminary PAH analyses using high resolution 230Th-234U dating
methods of the stalagmite carbonate were consistent with satellite maps of burn
scars in revealing that 2004 was the only year to experience a burn over the
cave. PAHs in these stalagmites may thus represent an important new high-
resolution record of prehistoric fire activity in tropical karst regions such as
Western Australia and can complement the monsoon rainfall reconstructions
extracted from the same samples. This EAGER award will extend the analysis of
fire-related organic compounds in these stalagmites through the 17th century to
capture changes in burn activity associated with (1) changes in land use
associated with European settlement in the 1880s, and(2 changes in monsoon
activity associated with the transition from the Little Ice Age to the Modern
Era.