* 1812764
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Geospatial Analysis of Alpine Glacial Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Laura Larocca, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2021
* USD 18,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project will use geospatial
analysis to evaluate the extent of changes in remote alpine glaciers from the
early 20th century to the present. The analysis will use satellite images and an
archive of recently recovered air-photos from historical expeditions. Findings
from the study will contribute to the limited knowledge of alpine glacier
histories in remote regions, with implications for future estimates of ice loss
and global sea-level change. The research will capitalize on a unique collection
of historical air-photos, which have been underutilized as a source of data,
thereby providing an opportunity to assess alpine glacier change on a regional
scale. This study will foster a new international collaboration with the Natural
History Museum of Denmark and engage undergraduate students in polar geospatial
research. The doctoral student and her advisor will develop workshops for K-12
STEM teachers from the Chicago public-school district. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most previous studies of remote glaciers have been
restricted to the satellite era of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Thus,
the long-term, Holocene, history of these glaciers and ice caps is generally not
well known, despite their importance to global sea level. Of particular
relevance to the future, their sensitivity to sustained periods of past warming
is poorly understood. To facilitate improved estimates of past glacier activity
as well as future glacier change, the doctoral student will utilize historical
air-photos, Landsat and Worldview satellite data, as well as several open-
sourced digital analytical tools to reconstruct historical glacier extent and
area, and model glacier Equilibrium Line Altitude (ELA). In combination with the
related research which reconstructs long-term Holocene glacier histories using
lake sediments in the same region, this complementary geospatial analysis will
place 20th and 21th century glacier variability into a longer-term perspective.
Although this research project will focus on alpine glaciers in South Greenland,
it is highly relevant to understanding the impacts of global environmental
change more broadly. The study aims to develop improved approaches for the
historical analysis of glacial change, which will be useful for natural resource
management in many other locations, including within the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.