* 1812917
* 2018 Colloidal, Macromolecular and Polyelectrolyte Solutions: The Science and Application of Soft Materials in Hard(er) Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,06/30/2018
* Eric Furst, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,100.00

This award supports travel for early career scientists to attend a technical
conference. The conference is titled "2018 Gordon Research Conference and
Seminar on Colloidal, Macromolecular, and Polyelectrolyte Solutions: Soft
materials meet hard materials: Properties, processing, and applications". It
will bring together roughly 200 leading scientists in Ventura, CA to discuss new
research on soft materials. Soft materials include coatings, biofilms, food, and
plastics. The conference will focus on applications related to
biopharmaceuticals, advanced aerospace materials, energy production, and
consumer products. The conference has a strong track record of professional
development for young scientists, and is preceded by a seminar that will provide
multiple opportunities for networking, discussions, and mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference, which is held every other year, has a
strong interdisciplinary tradition and will include physicists, materials
scientists, chemical and mechanical engineers, and chemists. The focus of this
conference is on the interface between soft and hard materials, and the science
and technology of how soft and hard materials meet and function together. The
topic was chosen because of the rapid scientific advances in the area and the
area's translational potential. Examples include the adhesion of biofilms, the
durability of coatings, and the sensory properties of food. Sessions will
explore emergent themes from applications, friction and adhesion in dispersed
systems, bonding and fracturing, toughening polymers and colloids, bacteria on
hard and soft surfaces, and processing colloidal, macromolecular, and
polyelectrolyte solutions. The Gordon Research Seminar will include
presentations by leading scientists on early career development, poster sessions
for student researchers, and informal opportunities for students to meet peers
and network with leaders in the field. There will be small group mentoring
sessions, including round table discussions of roughly a dozen students each,
and covering topics including technical writing, public oration, and beginning
and sustaining a career in entrepreneurship.