* 1812942
* Student Travel Support for the 2018 International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Murali Annavaram, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) is a flagship
conference in the area of computer architecture. The 2018 annual conference,
along with several collocated workshops on related topics, will take place in
Los Angeles, CA. The conference is an important venue for reporting current
research on important topics addressing grand challenges in computing resulting,
e.g., from the impending Moore's law slowdown of performance of computing
machines. The topic is the main focus of the program area of the SHF cluster of
the CISE/CCF division at NSF, and thus ISCA is a venue where major results of
research supported by the program gets presented, discussed, debated and future
direction of research are charted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
approximately 100 students by defraying part of their cost for travel and
attendance for ISCA 2018. Since attendance to ISCA can be viewed as an integral
part of computer systems design education and research in academia, the proposal
would go a long way towards supporting workforce development in the important
area information technology. The conference is also attended by leading
researchers from technology companies (e.g., IBM, Intel, Microsoft etc.), and
provides a basis for interaction between academia and industry, thus potentially
enhancing technology transfer on problems of current and future societal needs.
The grants to 100 students seek to enhance the diversity of the attendees, thus
maintain a balance between underrepresented and other groups among the
participants supported from the grant. Upon completion of the project, the
awardee will submit a report to NSF with details of student experiences and the
details of the expenditures towards supporting them to attend the conference and
workshops collocated with it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.