* 1812601
* Bridging Across Scales to Model Cone Phototransduction
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Heidi Hamm, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,223.00

Rods and cones in the retina mediate vision. While rods detect white light,
cones are designed for color vision. Their role is crucial in high acuity vision
as underscored by their loss in age-related macular degeneration leading to
blindness. A common feature of these cells is their intricate geometrical
structure, consisting of about one thousand thin pancake-like folds (discs)
through which light is transformed into electrical pulses (phototransduction)
for the brain to "see." Light is captured by receptors/pigments residing on
these folds, and transformed into a current between interior and exterior of
these cells, by a cascade of biochemical steps. These steps involve amplifiers
of the light signal (transducers and effectors) and carriers of the signal
(second messengers) diffusing within these folds. A mathematical understanding
of these processes is complicated by the numbers of these folds (about one
thousand) and their thickness (a few nanometers). The mathematical theory of
homogenization seeks to replace the complex geometry with a simpler, cylindrical
structure while preserving all the biochemical and biophysical functions of the
original system. The transduction cascade must be reliable/stable for
consistency of visual perception, and sources of instability and stabilizing
mechanisms in the cascade can be broken down and analyzed via mathematical
modeling. This interdisciplinary investigation involves mathematics
(homogenization), computational sciences (finite element code writing),
biochemistry (activation/deactivation cascades), and physiology (diffusion of
second messengers). The project involves students and postdoctoral trainees and
will be disseminated through training courses and seminars. This research is
funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Biology
Program and the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cones capture light
in the red, blue and green wavelength, and as such, besides their geometrical
shape, their biochemical and biophysical functions are different than rods. In
particular they never saturate, they have a faster and smaller response, they
are little sensitive to dim light and have a faster deactivation. The
photoresponse is generated by diffusion of the second messengers calcium and
CGMP in the cytoplasm within the lipidic discs. To overcame the intricate
geometry of the discs (about a thousand, each a few nanometers thick) we propose
an homogenization process, by which the number of discs goes to infinity and
their thickness goes to zero, while the volume available for diffusion remains
unchanged, and the biochemical and biophysical functions are preserved in the
limit. The limiting "homogenized" cone becomes cylinder-like, with no discs, and
the diffusion process is separated into interior and boundary diffusion on the
homogenized domain. The activation/deactivation process is modeled by a
continuous-time Markov chain tracking the various steps of the cascade. The
resulting model is hybrid as it contains a deterministic part (homogenized
diffusion of the second messengers) with a random input (stochastic steps of the
activation/deactivation cascade). This permits one to analyze the mechanism by
which random deactivation events turn into a stable photoresponse, and identify
the causes of variability and variability suppression. A database of parameters
will be created to populate the model and effect numerical simulations to be
compared with experimental data, including lack of saturation, low sensitivity
and faster deactivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.