* 1812543
* Transforming American Indian and Alaska Native STEM Learning via Indigenous Knowledge Translation, Education, and the Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Jamie Donatuto, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,615,541.00

American Indian and Alaska Native communities continue to disproportionately
face significant environmental challenges and concerns as a predominately place-
based people whose health, culture, community, and livelihood are often directly
linked to the state of their local environment. With increasing threats to
Native lands and traditions, there is an urgent need to promote ecological
sustainability awareness and opportunities among all stakeholders within and
beyond the impacted areas. This is especially true among the dozens of tribes
and over 50,000 members of the Coast Salish Nations in the Pacific Northwest
United States. The youth within these communities are particularly vulnerable.
This Innovations in Development project endeavors to address this serious
concern by implementing a multidimensional, multigenerational model aimed at
intersecting traditional ecological knowledge with contemporary knowledge to
promote: (a) environmental sustainability awareness, (b) increased STEM
knowledge and skills across various scientific domains, and (c) STEM fields and
workforce opportunities within Coast Salish communities. Building on results
from a prior pilot study, the project will be grounded on eight guiding
principles. These principles will be reflected in all aspects of the project
including an innovative, culturally responsive toolkit, curriculum, museum
exhibit and programming, workshops, and a newly established community of
practice. If successful, this project could provide new insights on effective
mechanisms for not only promoting STEM knowledge and skills within informal
contexts among Coast Salish communities but also awareness and social change
around issues of environmental sustainability in the Pacific
Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a five-year period, the project will build
upon an extant curriculum and findings codified in a pilot study. Each aspect of
the pilot work will be refined to ensure that the model established in this
Innovations and Development project is coherent, comprehensive, and replicable.
Workshops and internships will prepare up to 200 Coast Salish Nation informal
community educators to implement the model within their communities. Over 2,500
Coast Salish Nation and Swinomish youth, adults, educators, and elders are
expected to be directly impacted by the workshops, internships, curriculum and
online toolkit. Another 300 learners of diverse ages are expected to benefit
from portable teaching collections developed by the project. Through a
partnership with the Washington State Burke Natural History Museum, an exhibit
and museum programming based on the model will be developed and accessible in
the Museum, potentially reaching another 35,000 people each year. The project
evaluation will assess the extent to which the following expected outcomes are
achieved: (a) increased awareness and understanding of Indigenous environmental
sustainability challenges; (b) increased skills in developing and implementing
education programs through an Indigenous lens; (c) increased interest in and
awareness of the environmental sciences and other STEM disciplines and fields;
and (d) sustainable relationships among the Coast Salish Nations. A process
evaluation will be conducted to formatively monitor and assess the work. A cross
cultural team, including a recognized Coast Salish Indigenous evaluator, will
lead the summative evaluation. The project team is experienced and led by
representatives from the Swinomish Indian Tribal Community, Oregon State
University, Garden Raised Bounty, the Center for Lifelong STEM Learning, the
Urban Indian Research Institute, Feed Seven Generations, and the Burke Museum of
Natural History and Culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.