* 1812451
* Workshop: Constructal Theory after 20 Years of Exploration and what the Future Holds?
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Gerard Jones, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 12/31/2019
* USD 49,810.00

This Workshop is dedicated to the Constructal Law, a new physics theory
emanating from the contemplation of how natural systems evolve in time, and its
implications to thermal transport processes. The forming of river basins, the
shaping of mammal lungs, the percolation paths of coffee brewing, the growth of
tree roots and branches, the complexity of blood vessel networks, all have
similarities in their evolution: to exist, it seems, they must morph toward
structures that facilitate access to what flows. The bringing together of
thermal transport processes experts in Constructal Law is paramount to measure
the impact so far of this new law in thermal transport processes, to determine
how it can better contribute to the thermal transport knowledge base, and to
identify how this area will evolve in the near future as to guide its
dissemination. It is also an opportunity for the community to organize and plan
around constructal law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observations of natural systems
resulting in the constructal law can be applied to engineering systems as well,
to anticipate how complex thermal transport systems should evolve so they
continue to exist. This concept is intrinsically related to the Thermodynamics
of energy and entropy balances, via the work (energy) needed to flow and the
dissipating heat resulting from it. Diffusion, convection, and radiation are
also intrinsically related to constructal law, as they are the most important
heat and mass transport processes affecting thermal systems. The contributions
of each in new thermal transport processes should not be dictated by materials
or manufacturing limitations alone, but should also account for how they will
contribute to facilitating access to what flows. The new paradigm born out of
constructal law is for the thermal designer not to avoid geometric complexity;
rather, to embrace and explore it, to recognize the importance of new form-
function relationships as to facilitate access to what flows. The main outcome
of this workshop is expected to be a clear direction of constructal law and its
implications to thermal transport processes.