* 1812211
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Ryan Lepak, Lepak                   Ryan           F
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The development of methods to quantify mercury stable isotopes
provides new insights into sources of pollution in ecosystems. This powerful
tracer reveals whether mercury accumulated in fish tissues was derived from
local weather sources, long-distance atmospheric sources, or regional human
activities. To date, use of mercury isotopes in fish has been restricted solely
to near present-day samples. The remarkable archives of fish tissues preserved
in museums can expand the size and the time-scale for analyzing mercury in fish.
However, these archives have never been used for large-scale assessment of
mercury contamination. This proposal will be one of the first to assess mercury
contamination in multiple different collections of fish. Recognition of mercury
as a global threat, due to neurotoxic effects in humans and wildlife, has led to
efforts to reduce mercury contamination in many nations. The data from this
proposal can help to better understand where these levels of mercury are coming
from, which can help to inform mercury management and mitigation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three core elements: 1) A
rigorous experimental test of how chemical preservation affects the
concentration and isotope ratios of mercury in fish. 2) Comparing recent and
historical collections from Africa?s Lake Victoria (where erosion, gold mining,
and aquaculture have increased mercury) and Lake Tanganyika (where anthropogenic
inputs of mercury are minimal) to reconstruct changes in mercury sources and
concentrations in these massive lacustrine fisheries. 3) Quantifying pollution
through time for major riverine fisheries worldwide. These approaches will use
archived specimens to reveal the spatiotemporal evolution of global
contamination of freshwater fisheries. After developing correction factors for
interpreting results from preserved tissues, we will resolve the impact of human
activities relative to natural geogenic inputs of mercury. Using fish rather
than sediment cores to infer temporal shifts in mercury bioaccumulation will
sidestep assumptions about bioavailability that have complicated previous
approaches. Coupling mercury concentrations and isotope data will give insight
to sources of intensive pollution, and the resulting geography of health threat.
Findings will be conveyed to national fishery management authorities and the
United Nations Global Mercury Program, to develop targeted mitigation
strategies. The information can also motivate local education efforts to make
subsistence anglers aware of the threat to their family's
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.