* 1812423
* 3D Parton Structure of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Peter Schweitzer, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,141.00

The objective of this research is to advance the understanding of the internal
structure of hadrons, which include protons, neutrons, and other subatomic
particles described in terms of quarks and gluons. One of the central goals of
modern nuclear physics research concerns the 3-dimensional imaging of the
internal structure of the proton and atomic nuclei. To achieve the objective the
investigator and his students will conduct theoretical and phenomenological
projects which aim at revealing the 3-dimensional structure of protons,
neutrons, and atomic nuclei in terms of quarks and gluons. This research will
advance the development of the theory tools necessary to understand experiments
which are in preparation at the Thomas Jefferson National Laboratory, the
Brookhaven National Laboratory, and other facilities world-wide. The broader
impacts of the research program include training of graduate students and
offering research opportunities for undergraduate students, and include outreach
activities at a wide variety of levels from K-12 to college level. Public
lectures will be given to inform the population of the latest research in
nuclear and particle physics, what physicists learn from that, and how the
society will benefit from it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical tools to
describe the internal structure of hadrons in terms of quarks and gluons, the
degrees of freedom of quantum chromodynamics, are provided by parton
distribution functions which can be accessed in high energy scattering
experiments. In order to address 3-dimensional imaging two theoretical
approaches are explored: transverse momentum dependent distributions (TMDs), and
generalized parton distributions (GPDs). These complementary approaches provide
powerful tools to access so far unexplored aspects of the nucleon structure,
including spin-orbit correlations of partons and the mapping of strong forces
exerted on partons inside the nucleon. The theoretical research will address the
flavor asymmetry in the polarized quark sea, TMDs of valence and sea quarks,
GPDs and studies of the energy-momentum tensor, and the exploration of chiral
symmetry breaking effects for the partonic structure of the nucleon. The
applications of this research include mapping of strong forces inside the
nucleon, and the description of exotic tetra- and pentaquark hadronic states
recently observed at LHC and other experiments. This research will support
experimental programs at Jefferson, Brookhaven, and Fermi National Labs, and
contribute to the planning of the Electron-Ion Collider, the next generation
research facility envisioned by the U.S. nuclear physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.