* 1812964
* Workshop:  Roadmap for Reliable Ensemble Forecasting of the Sun-Earth System; NJIT, March, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Rafal Angryk, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,976.00

This 1-year project is to enable the participation of solar data providers,
expert modelers of solar phenomena, and computer scientists from the US at the
Roadmap for Reliable Ensemble Forecasting of the Sun-Earth System workshop,
which will be held at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in March of 2018.
This dedicated workshop is intended to lay down a research roadmap that will
target the great science challenge of tightly coupling the solar observations
and modeling with new-age computer research to discover new fundamental
knowledge from big volumes of data, while stimulating computer science with new
research challenges. The workshop will provide consensus feedback from the solar
and computer science communities, which will help establish scientific
priorities and research directions, and also promote future transdisciplinary
collaborations between both fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solar data
challenges and cutting-age computer science approaches to data processing and
analysis identified during this workshop will drive subsequent activities aiming
to implement novel cyberinfrastructure solutions and stimulate transdisciplinary
research. The workshop is aimed at advancing discovery and understanding, while
promoting education and collaborative work in transdisciplinary environments,
which will directly impact the participants' careers. Such activities will
facilitate the transfer of innovative data analysis, data visualization, data
driven modeling, and data analytics to other fields of research that may benefit
from similar frameworks and approaches to problems solving. The workshop covers
scientific topics that are both fundamental and timely: they address not only
the basic goal of discovering new knowledge, but also the practical application
of that knowledge to mitigate impacts of solar activity on the near-Earth space
environment.Â  Furthermore, it directly addresses Goal 5 of National Space
Weather Action Plan, namely "improve space-weather services through advancing
understanding and forecasting," by aiming to develop a roadmap for reliable
ensemble forecasting of the Sun-Earth system. The roadmap will be made publicly
available online on the workshop website.