* 1812292
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Julie Miller, Miller                  Julie          S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The goal of
this project is to understand the role of group size in the evolution of self-
organization in ant colonies. Across social insects, larger colony sizes are
associated with greater organizational complexity, but we still don't know how
enlarging group size causes this pattern. Colony organization may result from
natural selection to reduce potential gridlock of large groups, targeting
individual behaviors or the shape of the colony's nest, both of which may govern
interactions. Alternatively, complex organization may instead be a beneficial
by-product of increasing group size. The fellow will test these hypotheses by
comparing species of ants with different colony sizes. The findings from this
research will help elucidate the evolutionary forces structuring groups more
generally, from cell aggregations to animal societies. The fellow plans to
broaden participation of under-represented groups by partnering with teachers at
her former schools to create classroom workshops in which students collect data
for this project, thereby creating opportunities for underrepresented K-12
students to participate directly in research, and will extend the same outreach
opportunities to other minority-serving LA public schools partnered with UCLA's
MESA School Program.

The project has three, interrelated objectives that examine how colony
organization has evolved in response to increasing group size. First, the fellow
will distinguish whether increasing colony size leads to costly versus
beneficial changes by enlarging the groups of small-colony ant species
(Temnothorax) and comparing them to naturally large colony species of equivalent
size (Tapinoma, Linepithema). Second, the fellow will determine the contribution
of nest architecture in structuring colony organization by housing colonies in
subdivided or single-chambered nests. To facilitate comparison between distantly
related ant species in the above objectives, the fellow will generate
standardized metrics of (1) colony organization from social networks of nutrient
flow and (2) colony functionality by assessing how well foragers respond to the
nutritional needs of the entire colony. The fellow will learn to fluorescently
label these nutrients and track them within the colony using computer vision.
Third, the fellow will investigate which aspects of nest architecture have been
adapted for large colony size. The fellow will lead k-12 students in to complete
this final objective by allowing classroom ant colonies of various sizes to
excavate nests in observable structures. The fellow will use the classroom ant
colonies to facilitate educational workshops that will be targeted to help
satisfy national teaching standards in STEM fields (NGSS) at the appropriate
grade level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.