* 1812899
* CHS: Small: Modeling Cyber Transportation and Human Interaction in Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 08/23/2017,11/30/2018
* Changxu Wu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2018
* USD 138,342.00

The human element will constitute a critical component of tomorrow's Cyber
Transportation Systems (CTS), either as drivers interacting with wireless
messages in connected vehicle settings or as driver-passengers when vehicles are
automated. Given that no engineered system will work perfectly all of the time,
this raises important questions relating to the nature of the interaction
between CTS and the human driver. Whereas the focus of the current literature
has primarily been on hardware and software, in this pioneering project the PI
and his research team will instead explore human-CTS interaction as the central
design consideration. In accordance with this vision, they will develop and
experimentally validate an innovative computational framework (mathematical
model) for CTS that quantifies the effects of system design parameters on the
key elements of human cognition and performance, which in turn will enable the
derivation of design requirements and optimal parameter settings for connected
and automated vehicles in order to maximize human
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For connected vehicles the model could be employed
to determine minimal notification requirements (e.g., message transmission
reliability) so as to maintain driver alertness and minimize driver
distractions. For automated vehicles, the framework could be utilized to derive
the minimal acceptable system reliability, optimal re-practice to minimize motor
skill decay, and optimal lead time and design of the messages informing a driver
to take over control of the vehicle (machine to human driver hand-over). Project
outcomes will provide researchers in the field with the first tool to understand
the fundamental mechanisms of human-CTS interaction (e.g., the impact of system
reliability on human acceptance and trust), by predicting the effects of
technology on driver behavior. The software will be open source, so that CTS
researchers can easily modify their designs and/or explore the effect of
modifying existing features and/or adding new ones as changes in technology may
warrant.