* 1812118
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Joshua Marceau, Marceau                 Joshua         O
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This funding
will directly fund a Native American (Salish) Postdoc research project. Virus
research is fundamental in the understanding of life and evolution. Viruses have
evolved together with their natural hosts and an established virus/natural host
pair make a good model system to study these interactions. This project will
focus on the study of a newly discovered mouse herpesvirus (murine roseola
virus) which can be used to gain insights into the viral lifecycle of an
understudied genus of viruses (roseolaviruses) and has broad applications to the
study of other emerging human and animal viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most ubiquitous viruses found across multiple taxa of animals are those of
the family Herpesviridae. These viruses are widely distributed and are found in
both invertebrates and vertebrates. Many of the herpesviruses can coexist within
their natural host without killing the host organism and some species of
herpesviruses are reported to be capable of integration into host chromosome.
Despite the prevalence of herpesviruses across the animal kingdom, there are
basic questions about several of the clades of herpesviruses that remain
unanswered. For the roseolaviruses, transmission of virus between cell types and
the impact of sub-lethal infection on cell function remain a mystery. The
purpose of this project is to further investigate a recently described murine
roseolavirus (MRV). The project will define (1) tissue tropism and replication
kinetics (2) changes in morphological, electrophysiological, immunological
characteristics in infected cells, and (3) employ a recombinant roseolavirus to
determine the viral and host factors that govern species specificity. The
results of these experiments will define baseline parameters in the virus/host
infection model that can be perturbed to: (1) study virus host interactions that
drive viral lifecycle and host immune responses. (2) Define tissue tropism,
replication kinetics and associated diseases in MRV/Mouse model to offer insight
into herpesvirus/human infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.