* 1812359
* Hard Scattering Processes in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Andreas Metz, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the microscopic theory of the strong
interactions that allows us to understand how hadrons, such as the proton,
neutron and pion, are formed. In turn, nucleons (protons and neutrons) make up
more than 99% of the mass of the visible matter of the universe. Nucleons are
composed of quarks and gluons (partons), the fundamental particles of QCD. The
structure of the nucleon is studied using high-energy scattering processes at
state-of-the-art experimental facilities in the USA and abroad. This project
will provide theoretical guidance and help analyze experimental data generated
at those experimental facilities. Furthermore, the PI will mentor graduate
students and engage in outreach activities addressing high school students,
teachers, and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
primarily concentrate on two topics in hadronic physics. First, a new fit of the
transversity distribution will be performed for di-hadron production, which is
generally considered a very clean channel. After a careful leading-order
analysis, the transversity will be extracted in a collinear next-to-leading
(NLO) order framework. This requires, in particular, the first-ever challenging
NLO calculation of the relevant di-hadron observables in electron-positron
annihilation, lepton-nucleon scattering and proton-proton collision. This study
is expected to shed new light on the longstanding tension between information on
the nucleon's transversity from experimental data on the one hand and from
lattice QCD on the other. The second part of the project deals with partonic
Wigner functions. For a number of reasons, partonic Wigner functions have
attracted enormous interest over the last years. Despite their importance,
presently no experimental information is available on these objects. The main
focus will therefore be on observables for Wigner functions. This includes
numerical estimates of observables, the calculation of higher-order corrections,
and the search for new processes in which Wigner functions show up. Special
attention will be paid to the question about how a future electron-ion collider
(EIC) can further this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.