* 1812174
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Devin O'Brien, O'Brien                 Devin          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The research
plan focuses on the evolution of animal weapons (e.g., antlers, horns), which
are among the most extreme traits in the animal world. These weapons are often
massive in size and grow drastically out of proportion with the body. It is
therefore unsurprising that they have captured the attention of biologists for
centuries, since understanding more about extreme weapons sheds light on many
peculiar biological activities. Yet, despite such intense interest, surprisingly
little is known about how these traits evolve. In particular, 3 questions need
to be addressed: How do weapons evolve to such extreme sizes? What are the
scenarios that favor weapon evolution? And what genes underlie the evolution of
these traits? The research plan directly addresses these questions by exploring
the evolution, ecology, and genetics of extreme animal
weapons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research plan takes an
integrative approach to elucidate the evolution, ecology, and genetic regulation
of extreme morphology through the study of animal weapons. The program is
centered around the model weapon system Gnatocerus cornutus (broad horned flour
beetles) and contains 3 research objectives: (1) determine the evolvability of
extreme morphology by using artificial selection to develop lineages with
divergent weapon phenotypes, (2) measure the fitness consequences of variation
in weapon size by exposing these experimental lineages to ecological and social
condition hypothesized to influence the evolution of selected morphology and (3)
identify the genetic basis of weapon growth through QTL (quantitative trait
locus) mapping of derived lineages produced via artificial selection. The
fellowship also supports an associated outreach plan specifically aimed at
boarding participation of underrepresented groups in biology. The outreach plan
contains two objectives: (1) recruit undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups and train them in all aspects of the cross-disciplinary
research plan and (2) develop workshops to train and equip secondary school
teachers to conduct artificial selection experiments on weapons in the
classroom. Together, the research and outreach objectives provide the Fellow
with extensive training in multivariate selection experiments, and the
association mapping of complex traits. In addition, the Fellow also receives
training in how to effectively mentor undergraduates from diverse populations
and how to develop and execute productive outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.