* 1812558
* DMRG Studies of Frustrated and Doped Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2021
* USD 518,388.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
and the Chemistry Division jointly fund this award, which supports theoretical
and computational research and education aimed at understanding condensed-matter
and chemical systems that host strongly interacting electrons whose behavior is
governed by quantum mechanics. Fundamental understanding of the quantum
behaviors of these systems is crucial for developing novel materials and
molecules with tailored properties and can also lead to the prediction of new
states of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of novel algorithms and
software for solving the equations of quantum mechanics that describe systems of
many interacting constituents remains one of the most important theoretical
techniques. The PI is the inventor of one of the most prominent of these
algorithms, the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG), and continues
developing ITensor, a widely used software library for carrying out these
calculations. Building on the PI's work, a large international group of
scientists has extended DMRG to a new field of physics, tensor networks, with
applications ranging from chemistry to the physics of black holes and to the
quantum theory of gravity. The PI's current work is focused on quantum spin
liquids and on high-temperature superconductivity. Spin liquids are a novel
state of matter whose unusual properties could enable building a quantum
computer, which can solve certain problems exponentially faster than any
currently existing computer. High-temperature superconductivity is important for
both fundamental reasons as well as for applications. Conceptually,
understanding how high-temperature superconductivity works is considered one of
the most important problems in condensed matter physics. High-temperature
superconductors are already used in a number of important applications, such as
wireless communications and power transmission. Unraveling how high-temperature
superconductivity emerges in certain materials might enable the creation of
long-sought room-temperature superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
provides excellent opportunities for training the next generation of theoretical
scientists. The further development of the ITensor software library is making
DMRG and tensor-network methods available and useful for a broad range of
scientists that will not have to develop the software
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division jointly fund this award, which supports research and
education aimed at understanding strongly interacting quantum systems in
condensed matter, cold atoms, and chemical systems. The work consists primarily
of simulating model systems and of developing new algorithms for enabling these
simulations. The primary application of the work is to frustrated spin systems
and to doped fermion systems (such as the high-temperature superconductors),
which suffer from the sign problem that makes quantum Monte Carlo methods
ineffective. Of particular interest are spin liquid systems, a novel state of
matter that can occur in frustrated spin systems. Spin liquids exhibit
topological order, and their unusual properties could be used for eliminating
decoherence, a requirement for creating a quantum computer. Experimental studies
sometimes cannot distinguish between disordered spin systems and true quantum
spin liquids; this project will clarify which systems are true quantum spin
liquids. The project also involves studying high-temperature superconductors, in
particular the competition between stripes and other inhomogeneities with
superconductivity, and the nature of the pseudogap phase. Of particular interest
is studying the effect of long-range Coulomb interactions between electrons and
their effect on the competition between stripes and
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is the inventor of the density
matrix renormalization group (DMRG), one of the leading algorithms for
simulating 1D systems. Within the last decade, DMRG has become part of a larger
field, tensor networks, and has become closely associated with quantum
information science. The PI's work in algorithms now incorporates many of the
ideas of tensor networks. The PI will further develop ITensor, a widely used
software library for carrying out DMRG and tensor network
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides excellent
opportunities for training the next generation of theoretical scientists. The
further development of the ITensor software library is making DMRG and tensor-
network methods available and useful for a broad range of scientists that will
not have to develop the software themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.