* 1812481
* The Geometry of Transport in Symplectic and Volume-Preserving Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Meiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 383,263.00

Anyone who has poured cream into hot coffee has observed the complex patterns
that occur during the mixing of two fluids. It is perhaps surprising that the
underlying process is not fully understood, especially when the fluid motion is
laminar, i.e., either it is slow or the viscosity is high; then uniform,
efficient mixing is hard to achieve. Such laminar processes are important to
many applications including the development of micrometer scale bioreactors,
effective mixing of polymer and granular materials, spreading of pollutants in
the atmosphere, and even nutrient dispersal and spawning efficacy for life in
the sea. Laminar flows can cause chaotic motion of advected particles, yielding
rapid loss of accuracy for prediction of individual trajectories that turn out
to be extremely sensitive to the miniscule changes in environment. The
investigator and his colleagues study the design of efficient mixers by
developing an understanding of the causes of this sensitivity, and by developing
methods to globally optimize stirring protocols. The mathematics of these models
is closely related to that, ubiquitous for conservative motion in physics.
Techniques the investigator develops are used to predict the lifetime of
particles in accelerators, obtain rates for elemental chemical reactions,
calculate confinement times in plasma devices, understand the spectra of highly
excited atomic systems, and predict asteroid and spacecraft trajectories.
Graduate students will be trained through participation in this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsonic fluids are incompressible and
the resulting flows are volume-preserving. Though chaotic motion in
incompressible fluids is similar to that in Hamiltonian or symplectic systems,
there are profound geometrical differences due to the lack of a canonical
pairing between momenta and coordinates. The investigator studies how the
geometry of such dynamics changes when it is "nearly" symplectic, leading to
novel elliptic structures and to a discovery of the violation of the exponential
quasi-stability of nearly-integrable systems implied by Nekhoroshev's theory.
The studies include the development of techniques for understanding transport
through destroyed invariant tori and the long-time correlations engendered by
regular islands and accelerator modes. Mixing due to chaotic advection is caused
by stretching and folding, which promotes homoclinic tangles and structure so
fine that diffusivity can be effective even when small. The investigator and his
students will model this by a finite sequence of stirring events that determine
a mixing protocol. Optimization techniques under geometric and energy
constraints are used to extremize Sobolev norms that give measures of
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.