* 1812738
* Professional Development Supports for Teaching Bioinformatics  through Mobile Learnng
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Blanca Himes, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,036,108.00

Bioinformatics is an emerging area of research that develops new knowledge
through computational analysis of vast biological and biomedical data. This
project will investigate the professional development supports needed for
teaching bioinformatics at the high school level. Building from a robust
literature in professional development design research, project team will work
with biology and mathematics teachers to co-design instructional modules to
engage students with core bioinformatics concepts and computational literacies,
by focusing on local community health issues supported through mobile learning
activities. The overarching goal of the project is to help create an engage
population of informatics-informed students who are capable of critically
analyzing information and able to solve local problems related to their health
and well-being. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of instructional innovations. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will use a design-based
implementation research approach to identify the curricular and instructional
supports needed to achieve the teaching and learning goals through iterative
project revisions, employing mixed methods to evaluate teacher and student
learning processes and outcomes. Teachers from local high needs schools will
participate in a three-week summer workshop, where they will learn about state-
of-the-art bioinformatics content, project-based pedagogies that promote
computational literacy, and strategies integrate mobile technologies into
instruction. They will implement the instructional units during the year, and
the summer workshop will be revised and delivered to an expanded cohort of
teachers the following summer. The data collection and analysis conducted on
teachers' enactment of these modules will reveal the professional development
and implementation areas needed to support particular populations, specifically
underrepresented groups in STEM, to engage with bioinformatics learning and take
authentic action on local community issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.