* 1812332
* Heavy Quarkonia as Thermometer of Quark-Gluon Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Alexei Bazavov, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

The strong force is one of the fundamental forces in nature, described by a
quantum field theory called Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). This force is
responsible for binding elementary particles, called quarks, into protons and
neutrons, and the latter into atomic nuclei. Under normal conditions in our
everyday world quarks are always bound into composite objects and isolated
quarks are never observed. However, when strongly interacting matter is heated
to extreme temperatures (a million times the temperature in the core of the sun
and above) a novel phase of matter, called a Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP), appears
where composite objects melt and quarks become the deconfined fundamental
degrees of freedom. The PI will perform a first-principle study of how composite
states of heavy quarks, referred to as heavy quarkonia, behave in a QGP.
Theoretical knowledge of their properties and melting patterns provides
information about QGP and allows us to study the microscopy of QGP, the nature
of quark confinement and the strong force in general. The investigations in this
project are of great relevance for explaining the findings of the experimental
program of relativistic heavy-ion collisions, performed at the Relativistic
Heavy-Ion Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory and the Large Hadron
Collider at the European Organization for Nuclear
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to carry out first-principle,
parameter-free predictions of heavy quarkonia spectral functions that encode all
information about the quarkonia states, from the fundamental QCD Lagrangian. The
PI will develop novel theoretical and computational methods for performing Monte
Carlo lattice gauge theory computations with anisotropic Highly Improved
Staggered Quarks (aHISQ) action. The heavy quarks will be included in the
framework of Non-Relativistic QCD (NRQCD). The PI will also develop Bayesian
inference techniques for solving the inverse problem that arises when
reconstructing the spectral functions from the lattice QCD data. These new
methods will be explored, tested with the available lattice data, and
implemented in an open-source codebase. The main goal is to achieve predictive
results on the spectral functions with fully assessed statistical and systematic
uncertainties. The PI will mentor doctorate students involved in the research as
well as engage in public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.