* 1812838
* Superbursts: Multi-dimensional Simulations of Deep Carbon Explosions on Neutron Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Edward Brown, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2022
* USD 270,741.00

Neutron stars (NS) are the densest objects in the universe, other than black
holes, and have fascinated theorists and observers since they were first
conjectured. Despite a wealth of observations across the electromagnetic
spectrum over the last four decades, much of what happens in the deep interior
of NS remains inscrutable. Knowledge of neutron star physics is growing rapidly,
due to X-ray telescopes in space, laboratory nuclear experiments, and
gravitational wave detectors such as the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory (LIGO). A research group at Michigan State University will help
astronomers to better understand neutron stars by modeling the thermally
unstable ignition of carbon on the NS surface and the resulting explosion (a
"superburst") using a state-of-the-art multidimensional hydrodynamics computer
code. The models can reveal conditions in the outer layer of neutron stars, and
help answer some critical science questions identified in National Academy
reports: what is the nature of matter at exceedingly high density and
temperature?, and what controls the mass, radius, and spin of compact stellar
remnants? The planned work includes activities to recruit the next generation of
scientists and to inform the public, who ultimately support the scientific
endeavor. The group will develop educational resources to make it easier to use
open-source computer simulations to explore stellar physics and incorporate
discoveries made during the award into public talks at Michigan State's Abrams
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutron stars are unique natural laboratories
to study quantum chromodynamics at finite density and low temperature. A number
of recent observational, theoretical, and experimental developments have raised
new questions about the internal constitution of neutron stars. For low-mass
X-ray binaries, in which the neutron star accretes hydrogen- or helium-rich
material, X-ray observations of accretion-induced phenomena over timescales
ranging from seconds to decades provide important information about different
layers of the neutron star. During accretion, runaway thermonuclear burning of
the accreted material is observable as a Type I X-ray burst. The thousands of
X-ray bursts and the rarer and more energetic superbursts encode information
about the physics of dense matter and the workings of the accretion disk and
boundary layer. The researchers will use ignition models that account for
relevant heating and cooling processes in the neutron star crust. The
simulations will yield testable predictions for both the precursor burst
observed from some sources and the evolution of luminosity with time during the
superburst. The models will inform astronomers about conditions in the outer
layer of neutron stars, and may give information about the explosion's effect on
the accretion flow and the nature of nuclear flames in dense
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.