* 1812559
* CSR: Small: Transforming Mobile Devices into Active Sonar Systems for Medical Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jacob Sunshine, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The project converts mobile systems including smartphones into active sonar
systems by leveraging the speakers and microphones commonly available on
existing mobile devices. Using this approach, the system addresses long-standing
and increasingly urgent problems in two key healthcare domains:
pharmacologically-induced apnea diagnosis and assistive interfaces for patients
with muscular disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike medical ultrasound devices
that operate in the megahertz frequencies, microphones and speakers on
smartphones are designed for much lower frequencies. The project answers
fundamental questions about the feasibility of using active sonar on smartphones
to address medical applications. It will produce algorithms that track breathing
signals, required for pharmacologically-induced apnea detection, even in the
presence of movements from other parts of the body. Finally, the project will
result in algorithms that achieve tracking of the tongue motion from outside the
mouth using the reflections from the acoustic signals as processed by the
smartphone. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Medical conditions that result in fatal apnea
events have increasingly become a public health emergency. The project, if
successful, would achieve a mobile system that can detect these events, thus
providing an opportunity to potentially saving numerous lives. The second part
of the project will create a tongue-based interaction toolkit that would help
hundreds of thousands of patients with muscular disabilities to interact with
existing mobile devices, using only a software app - a capability that currently
does not exist. The resulting prototypes will be showcased at DawgBytes Summer
Camps and University of Washington Women's Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will be added to the project webpage. The
data will be stripped of any private information and will be added to the
project webpage. The resulting breathing signals and the benchmarks data from
our deployments will be added to the webpage for independent analysis. The
project webpage is at the following link:
http://apnea.cs.washington.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.