* 1812362
* GeoHazard: Modeling Natural Hazards and Assessing Risks
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Carla McAuliffe, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,830,452.00

As human populations grow and spread into areas where extreme natural events
impact lives, there is increasing need for innovative Earth science curriculum
materials that help students interpret data and and understand the factors and
risks associated with natural hazards. Studying the processes underlying these
naturally occurring events and the relationships between humans and their
environments would enrich the standard Earth science curriculum by providing
students with valuable insights about the potential impacts of extreme natural
events. This project will respond to that need by developing and testing a new
instructional approach that integrates a data analysis tool with Earth systems
models in a suite of online curriculum modules for middle and high school Earth
science students. Each module will be designed as a sequence of activities
lasting approximately 7-10 class periods. These will be stand-alone modules so
each teacher can implement just one module or several modules. The modules will
facilitate development of rich conceptual understandings related to the system
science of natural hazards and their impacts. Students will develop scientific
arguments that include risk assessment based on their understanding of real-
world data and the particular Earth system being studied. The project will
develop a set of computational models designed specifically to explore
geoscience systems responsible for natural hazards. An open-source data analysis
tool will also be modified for students to create and analyze visualizations of
the magnitude, frequency, and distribution of real-world hazards and the impact
of those hazards on people. Students will compare data generated from the Earth
systems models with real-world data in order to develop an understanding of the
cause and progression of natural hazards, as well as to make predictions and
evaluate future risks. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four-year, early
stage design and development project will be conducted in two phases. In Phase
1, design-based research will be used to iteratively design and test Earth
systems models. A team of five lead teachers will field test modules and provide
focus group feedback during the development phase of the curricula. These lead
teachers will provide input into the design and development of the tools, the
organization and structure of the curriculum, and provide suggestions about
classroom implementation to support the development of teacher support
materials. After the models are developed, four curriculum modules related to
hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, and wildfires will be developed, tested, and
revised. In Phase 2, a group of 30 teachers will participate in implementation
studies that will test usability of the modules across students from diverse
backgrounds and feasibility of implementation across a range of classroom
settings. Research will focus on understanding how to support student analysis
of real-world datasets in order to improve their conceptual understanding of
complex Earth systems associated with natural hazards. The project will also
examine the role of uncertainty when students make scientific arguments that
include predictions about the behaviors of complex systems and the uncertainties
related to risk assessment. The project aims to clarify student views of
uncertainty and how teachers can better support student understanding of the
inherently uncertain nature of systems, models, and natural hazards, while
understanding that models can be used to reduce impact. Questions guiding
project research include: (1) How do students use flexible data visualizations
to make sense of data and build and refine conceptual models about natural
hazards? (2) How do students incorporate data from models and the real world in
formulating scientific arguments; how do students use scientific uncertainty to
assess risks based on their understanding of a natural hazard system; and how do
students quantify and explain risks to humans and compare different sources of
risks? And (3) Do GeoHazard curriculum modules help students make gains in risk-
infused scientific argumentation practice and conceptual understanding
underlying natural hazards? To what extent, for whom, and under what conditions
is the GeoHazard curriculum useful in developing risk-infused scientific
argumentation practice and conceptual understanding?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.