* 1812152
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Bryan McLean, McLean                  Bryan
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This award supports an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology Research
Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research and training of
the fellow that will utilize biological collections in innovative ways. The
research takes a data-driven and collections-focused approach to understand
factors promoting the speciation process (i.e., formation of new species) and,
therefore, the generation of biodiversity. The effort will illuminate the extent
to which a reproductive bone structures may be involved in speciation in an
ecologically important group of rodents, the squirrels. Such bone structures
occur in some of the most diverse groups of mammals and may contribute to
speciation via selection processes. Despite decades of scientific curiosity,
however, the precise function of these bone structures is unknown in most
groups. The fellow will leverage methods to quantify patterns of bone evolution
including high-resolution imaging of museum specimens. This work will also
provide authentic research experiences for undergraduate students and will
broaden STEM participation at this level. Finally, this work will include
science communication events that will bring evolutionary biology learning
activities to the general public.

The research will leverage three ecologically distinct squirrel radiations (the
genera Sciurus, Tamias, Urocitellus) as model systems. Key insights into
mammalian evolutionary biology and selection process are expected via
integration of novel genetic, morphometric, and biodiversity informatics
datasets to test hypotheses on the role of reproductive structure specialization
in mammals. A comparative framework will be established using phylogenomic
methods to resolve phylogenies and past hybridization events. Evolutionary shape
variation in bacula from focal species will be documented using CT scanning of
specimens. Datasets describing bacular morphology will be captured and
contrasted with those describing external organismal phenotypes gleaned from
thousands of digitized museum records. Each will be analyzed in the context of
geographic and niche overlap of constituent species to reveal whether patterns
of bacular variation are consistent with a role in reproductive isolation of
closely related lineages. All datasets will be accessible online and linked to
original museum specimens, facilitating open access to the wealth of data
contained in biological collections. Training outcomes include research
opportunities focused on STEM-underrepresented undergraduates and dissemination
of research concepts and empirical results in popular science fora. Outreach
activities will increase public literacy on mammalian biodiversity and
evolution, the speciation process, and the importance of biocollections for
pressing scientific and societal issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.