* 1812071
* SaTC: TTP: Medium: Collaborative: RESULTS: Reverse Engineering Solutions on Ubiquitous Logic for Trustworthiness and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/13/2017,07/31/2022
* Shuo Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2022
* USD 484,177.00

Due to the globalization of the integrated circuit (IC) supply chain, the
reduction of manufacturing costs and the need for shorter time to market,
commercial-off-the-shelf ICs are now prevalent in modern electronic systems.
However, the wide usage of such components breeds major security and trust
concerns. Validating the security and trustworthiness of these components is
extremely challenging since the end user does not have access to the design
details. Furthermore, the cost to patch hardware level design flaws and/or
hardware Trojans always costs more than patching eventual software
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an automated
trustworthiness and security analysis framework to help end-users address their
concerns by reconstructing the behavioral description of commercial-off-the-
shelf ICs and analyzing such description for functionality identification and
detection of design flaws and/or potentially inserted hardware Trojans and
backdoors. This tool suite offers an all-in-one technology to allow engineers to
quickly go from physical circuit structure/netlists to behavior/specification
and validate the security and trustworthiness of any digital ICs, through data-
path and state register identification, state transition graph construction and
decomposition, data flow recovery, high-level behavioral design reconstruction,
and whitelist- and blacklist-based functionality determination and hardware
Trojan/backdoor detection. As a Transition to Practice (TTP) project, the
research team is also closely collaborating with an industrial partner in
developing, integrating, and validating the tool suite, so that a holistic and
practice-oriented hardware security tool suite is provided for protecting the IC
supply chain.