* 1812215
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mary Salcedo, Salcedo                 Mary
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Insects can be
thought of as tiny pumping machines, circulating hemolymph (insect blood)
through active mechanisms (pulsing hearts) and passive elements (wings). Little
is known about how insects create an internal circulatory flow. However, the
efficiency and delivery of blood throughout the insect is critical for
locomotion, immune functions, oxygen delivery and waste management. This
research informs basic, yet less-studied functions of insect physiology. By
understanding a complex system of circulation, this knowledge is also applicable
to several fields. For agriculture use, this research can quantify how quickly
pesticides reach important organs in insects. For biomedical and microfluidic
uses, this research can apply insect circulatory flow principles to make
efficient devices. This award equips the fellow with advanced training in
engineering and hands-on teaching and lesson plan development. The fellow,
trained in field biology and insect biomechanics will utilize their training to
bring active-learning lessons to classrooms of underrepresented high school
students and college students at Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous
flow of hemolymph within insect bodies and wings ensure that living tissue,
sensory structures remain functional. This research investigates how the
integration of active (pulsing insect hearts) and passive (structural features,
wing venation) influences the efficacy of the insect circulatory system and how
these components influence overall internal flow. The fellow will use the North
American grasshopper (Schistocerca americana), the darkling beetle (Zophobas
morio), and the European honeybee (Apis mellifera). These species are widely-
studied and span a broad size range. First, the fellow will quantify hemolymph
velocity within the wing circulatory network. Using x-ray visualization at the
Advanced Photon Source to visualize blood movement and fiber optic pressure
sensors to measure fluid pressures during active heart pumping, the fellow will
describe internal flow movement. Secondly, to understand hemolymph?s biophysical
properties and interactions with soft pumps (insect hearts) and rigid walls
(exoskeleton), this fellow will partner with researchers at Clemson University
to build a micro-rheology system at Virginia Tech, that determines hemolymph
viscosity. Lastly, in order to package this information for future use in insect
physiology, agriculture and biomedical device design, the fellow will create 3D
mathematical models of the insect fluidic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.