* 1812436
* Existence and Energetic Stability of Traveling Waves in the Presence of Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Samuel Walsh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,218.00

Traveling waves are solutions to time-dependent systems that propagate without
changing their shape. They are observed throughout the natural world and include
surface and internal waves in the ocean, ignition fronts in combustion theory,
and even stripe patterns in animal fur. Through their ubiquity, traveling waves
command the interest of researchers in nearly every corner of the physical and
biological sciences. This project aims to develop novel tools for constructing
large-amplitude waves, especially for the important case of pulses, which are
localized disturbances that travel through unbounded domains (such as tsunami
waves or rough waves). In a related direction, the project will apply and extend
a new theoretical framework for diagnosing stability of traveling waves
solutions, i.e., capacity of the waves to persist when subjected to a
disturbance. This project will advance the mathematical understanding of
traveling waves; the results will have implications to oceanography, fluid
mechanics, and combustion theory. More generally, the techniques developed by
this study are intended to provide a framework with considerable potential for
future applications to a broad array of disciplines. Graduate students will be
trained and actively involved in this research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to advance the mathematical understanding of traveling waves along
two parallel tracks: existence theory and stability theory. The first set of
activities concern the existence of large-amplitude traveling waves on unbounded
domains. While many tools currently exist for constructing small-amplitude waves
in a neighborhood of known explicit solutions, the non-perturbative regime is
far less well understood. This is particularly true for problems set on
unbounded domains, for which issues of compactness seriously frustrate what
tools are available. This project will develop a global bifurcation theoretic
machinery designed to overcome these obstructions using symmetry and
monotonicity properties. This new framework will then be used to address
important open problems in a variety of systems. Specifically, these
applications include (i) construct large-amplitude bore solutions to a two-phase
fluid system in a channel; (ii) prove the existence of large-amplitude traveling
waves evolving according to general non-compact symmetry groups, for example
scroll ring solutions to reaction-diffusion equations; and (iii) extend beyond
the appearance of internal stagnation points a family of large-amplitude
solitary stratified water waves constructed in earlier work. A second set of
projects will develop new systematic tools for diagnosing the orbital stability
or instability of traveling solutions to abstract Hamiltonian systems that
possess symmetries. This work aims to relax key hypotheses in existing theory to
allow more direct application to highly nonlinear systems like those governing
water waves. Using this machinery, it is planned to (i) prove the instability of
internal waves in a two-phase system confined to a channel and (ii) give a new
systematic proof of the stability and instability of Korteweg?de Vries solitons.
Moreover, a local well-posedness theory in the Hadamard sense for the water wave
problem with a point vortex will be provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.