* 1812282
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Fred Benham, Benham                  Phred          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Accurately documenting the impacts human activities have on
natural populations is a pressing goal in biology. However, in many cases we are
limited to studies of present-day populations that exist well after human
transformation of the landscape. This presents a major challenge for
understanding how different human activities impact populations. Museum
collections house long term series of specimens that often span historical,
human-induced changes. Recent DNA sequencing advances enable access to genomic
data from these specimens, providing an invaluable resource for directly
connecting population responses to specific human activities. This project
leverages a large series of historic specimens for tidal marsh Savannah Sparrows
collected along the California coast over the last 130 years. The fellow will
collect morphological and genomic data from these specimens to characterize
population responses to salt pond development and urbanization in the San
Francisco Bay area.

The fellow will develop a sequence capture array to generate genomic material
from Savannah Sparrow specimens collected from multiple localities along the
California coast and six time points between the 1880s and the present.
Morphological data will also be collected from these specimens. These data will
be connected with spatial and temporal data on climate and landscape
transformation to understand (1) temporal variation in allele frequencies at
loci locally adapted to salinity and temperature variation; (2) the impact of
tidal marsh habitat loss to changing patterns of population size and gene flow
among tidal marsh populations; and (3) the link between changing demography and
selective pressures with divergence in adaptive phenotypic traits. The fellow
will receive training in extracting and processing degraded DNA from museum
specimens, designing sequence capture arrays, and using the bioinformatic
pipelines required to process and analyze this data. Data will be linked to
specimens in the museum database Arctos, which will then be used to design
undergraduate educational modules that highlight the power of museum resources
for biological inference. Undergraduate students at UC Berkeley will be
recruited to work on this project. Finally, throughout the San Francisco Bay
area there is enormous effort currently underway to restore tidal wetlands. The
results from this work will inform management strategies about how much habitat
is needed to maintain population sizes and population connectivity at historic
levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.