* 1812035
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018: Evolution and development of  chemosensory systems in tetrapods
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Laurel Yohe, Yohe                    Laurel         R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The title of the research plan for this fellowship to Laurel
Yohe is "evolution and development of chemosensory systems in tetrapods". Most
animals have only a single smell system for processing chemical signals that
help them find food and mates, as well as avoid predators and noxious
substances. This fellow is investigating the reasons why tetrapods developed a
secondary olfactory sense system in their nose called the vomeronasal system.
Explanations for why two smell systems evolved in the first place are incomplete
and confounded by speculation. To complicate the story further, the vomeronasal
system has been reduced or lost in many lineages independently. The fellow will
apply innovative and non-destructive staining methods to museum specimens to
quantify and characterize the variation in these two olfactory systems'
function, from the developing nasal cavities of embryos to fully developed noses
of species that possess these two systems, including those species that have
lost the vomeronasal system. Understanding how these two systems evolved, and
why the vomeronasal system is lost in some species, can help our understanding
of chemosensory evolution and development specifically, but can also help us to
understand sensory evolution in general. This study will prepare the fellow for
a career as an independent research scientist, through the exposure and training
of pioneering methods and new disciplines that will help shape the future
research program of the fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of what is
known about the molecular and developmental mechanisms of smell comes from model
organisms. This project applies new staining and imaging methods to both adult
and embryonic non-model organism museum specimens to test longstanding
hypotheses on why selection on the vomeronasal system has relaxed in some
tetrapods but remains well conserved in others. First, the fellow will use a
non-destructive staining technology to a diversity of museum specimens to
quantify the sizes and volumes of different olfactory structures in groups of
organisms that are known to have differences in vomeronasal function. From this
data, the fellow can test hypotheses for why some species have the vomeronasal
system and some do not, such as having an aquatic lifestyle or being diurnal.
Second, the fellow will perform a comparative embryology study of nasal cavity
development in groups of organisms where variation in function exists,
identifying key ontogenetic stages in which vestigialization may occur. Third,
at the stages in which variation is thought to occur, the fellow will apply
comparative transcriptomics to identify the molecular basis for this variation.
The project will establish a new program that links students from New Haven's
community colleges to participate in research projects at Yale. This outreach
exposes students that often do not have direct access to research opportunities
to hands-on learning activities and research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.