* 1812741
* Collaborative Research: Anatomy of a Greenhouse World: The Early Eocene of the Green River Basin, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2024
* USD 221,850.00

The geologic record of past environmental change offers an illuminating glimpse
into the behavior of Earth's natural systems. The deposits formed in ancient
lakes are particularly useful in this regard for several reasons: they are
highly sensitive to climate change; they often contain relatively complete
geologic archives with relatively few gaps; and they can potentially be used to
document changes that occurred over time scales meaningful to humans. The Green
River Formation in the western U.S. offers an especially valuable record of the
most geologically recent period of prolonged greenhouse conditions, which
occurred approximately 50-53 million years ago during the Eocene Epoch. It is
famous for its rich assemblages of fossil vertebrates, insects, and plants, and
for containing the world's largest commercial deposits of soda ash and oil
shale. This research project will focus on evidence for repeated rapid warming
events during this time, by examining how river courses changed, the types of
sediment that accumulated within the lake, and variations in ancient soil
development and chemistry. Equally important, this study will build a time scale
of unprecedented accuracy and precision for these important deposits, based on
new radiometric dates of volcanic ash in the lake, the chronology of changes in
the Earth's magnetic field, and sedimentation patterns that were driven by
periodic oscillations in the Earth's rotation and orbit. Broader impacts of this
proposal will include development of local 2-hour field trips for middle and
high school students, enhanced through the use of innovative data visualization
technology on portable devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Early Eocene Climatic
Optimum (EECO) was a time of persistent global warmth, of which the cause
remains incompletely determined. Lake deposits of the Green River Formation
preserve a rich and previously untapped record that complements that contained
in marine sediments, and present an opportunity to advance the precision and
accuracy of the Early Eocene timescale. This project is an integrated,
multidisciplinary investigation focused on one of the world's richest and best
studied systems of ancient lake strata. The research will investigate three
principal questions: 1. How did the timing of terrestrial warming compare to
that inferred from the marine record, and to predicted patterns of the Earth's
orbital variations? Recent advances in radioisotopic dating can be used to
directly test the relationship of warming events to Earth's orbital changes, and
calibrate dynamic gravitational models of the solar system back to ca. 50
million years. 2. How did temperatures, seasonality, hydrologic cycling, and
weathering on land evolve during the EECO? One hypothesis is that warming was
amplified on continents relative to the oceans and was accompanied by more
equable temperatures year-round, whereas precipitation seasonality and intensity
increased. 3. How did the complex tectonic and magmatic evolution of western
North America impact the preservation of EECO climate signals? The research will
test the hypothesis that repeated, stepwise drainage reorganizations within the
tectonically-active uplands modified the hydrologic balance and sedimentary
deposits of the Eocene lake environment and its response to orbital
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.