* 1812982
* Integrating Computational Thinking in Mathematics and Science High School Teacher Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Margaret Cozzens, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,276,369.00

The Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science and the
University of Connecticut Neag School of Education will develop a comprehensive
online professional development program for high school science and mathematics
teachers. The program model will be designed for teachers to integrate
computational thinking into their science and mathematics practice. The research
will study how and under what conditions integrated science, mathematics, and
computational approaches will effectively develop teachers' understanding of
computational thinking; improve teachers' instructional practice; and will
transfer computational thinking concepts to their math and science students. As
a result of the project, teachers will be able to enhance student learning in
science and mathematics using computation to develop their own models,
algorithms, and tools to analyze real-world data and associated problems.
Teachers will engage in this online professional development model from across
the country, with research results and educational materials shared online,
through publications and education journals, and professional science and
mathematics education conferences. This project was submitted in response to the
NSF Dear Colleague Letter DRK12 Advancing STEM + Computing (17-149) and is
supported by the STEM + Computing Program that advances research and development
of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings.
STEM+C supports research on how students learn to think computationally to solve
interdisciplinary problems in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
and development will combine an online teacher professional development program
with research that investigates how well teachers learn computational thinking
in an online setting and how and under what conditions they transfer the
computational thinking concepts to students in their math or science classes.
The research will result in a well-designed model for an online, scalable
teacher professional development for the integration of computational thinking
in science and mathematics education and how teachers gain content knowledge and
pedagogical skills. Project results will include a cadre of teachers who
understand how to engage students in computational thinking concepts within the
traditional HS science and mathematics curriculum and who are able to use
computational approaches within the science and mathematics disciplines with
their students to solve disciplinary problems. Research results and professional
development materials will be available for use by teacher educators,
professional developers, and others developing HS programs in computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.