* 1812634
* Magnetic Evolution of Sun-like Activity Cycles
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Travis Metcalfe, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,545.00

The magnetic activity of the Sun becomes stronger and weaker over roughly an
11-year cycle, modulating the radiation and charged particle environment
experienced by the Earth as "space weather." Decades of observations have
revealed that other stars also show regular activity cycles. The solar cycle
appears to be an outlier, which may mean that the Sun is in a transitional phase
that occurs in all middle-aged stars. This research program at the Space Science
Institute will establish an observational foundation for understanding how
activity cycles change over the lifetimes of the Sun and stars, including
possible connections to planetary habitability. These developments will also
provide insight about the fundamental physics of magnetic dynamos, which operate
inside Sun-like stars, in exotic astrophysical environments, and in laboratory
plasmas. The research activities will directly contribute to the training of
young scientists in the techniques of astronomical data processing and analysis
of time series of observations, through the participation of summer students in
the research. The principal investigator will also continue his award-winning
monthly science column "Lab Notes" for the Boulder, CO weekly newspaper,
connecting recent science discoveries with the activities of local scientists
and the laboratories where they work.

The researchers will obtain, analyze, and interpret new time-series
spectroscopic Ca II H & K (Ca HK) observations of stellar activity in two
samples of stars with known rotation rates, designed to probe both the
precursors and the contemporaries of the Sun. For a sample of young solar
analogs from the Mount Wilson survey that rotate faster than the Sun, the
project will obtain queue-scheduled Ca HK observations over several years to
search for the relatively short activity cycles that appear to be the precursors
of the 11-year solar cycle. The second sample will focus on fainter stars with
asteroseismic properties and rotation rates already determined from NASA's
Kepler mission, including targets with a range of evolutionary states that span
the middle-age magnetic transition. The project will obtain queue-scheduled Ca
HK observations of this sample to characterize the onset and duration of the
transition, and to place limits on the variability of stellar activity at
various stages as the global dynamo shuts down. All of the observations will be
obtained using the Las Cumbres Observatory global telescope network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.