* 1812301
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mairin Balisi, Balisi                  Mairin
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Global change
has produced key challenges to ecosystems today. These are challenges that the
fossil record, which preserves biological responses to major disturbances over
thousands to millions of years, is well-equipped to explain. This project
focuses on two disturbances that impacted ecosystems approximately 10,000 years
ago: the end of the last Ice Age, and the extinction of very large mammals
(megafauna). These two events gave rise to abnormal present-day communities in
which the largest predators tend to be medium- to small-sized mesocarnivores,
like coyotes and bobcats. In the face of continuing global change and the
removal of large carnivores like grey wolves, mesocarnivores before and after
the dual disturbances present a natural laboratory for tracking how mammal
communities respond to large-scale ecological and environmental perturbation.
Set at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles, California, this project embodies a
double meaning for "community paleoecology": involving the diverse human
communities of modern LA in studying the diverse carnivore communities of
prehistoric LA. Using the paleontology of charismatic mesocarnivores as a
"gateway science" by which to introduce the scientific method, the Fellow will:
(1) train student interns from community colleges and UC Merced to identify and
describe fossil species; and (2) crowdsource collection of paleoecological data
by museum visitors, adding to a dynamic museum
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate living mesocarnivores in the
aftermath of climatic change and megafaunal extinction, the Fellow is
integrating radiocarbon dating, systematic taxonomy, geometric morphometrics,
and stable isotope analysis of mesocarnivores and their prey from California
ecosystems preserved over the past 50,000 years. The Fellow aims to: (1) build a
robust temporal framework, ranging from pre-Last Glacial Maximum to Holocene
post-extinction, on which to scaffold ecological inferences; (2) quantify
changes in mesocarnivore community structure and ecomorphology; and (3) weigh
the relative importance of climate versus extinctions in shifting mesocarnivore
feeding ecology. By integrating paleontology and community ecology, this
research will obtain deep historical insight into modern ecosystem function.
Additionally, this project enables the Fellow to: (1) refine skills in mentoring
and managing a research team; (2) develop collections-management and curation
experience through identifying and cataloging specimens; and (3) strengthen
outreach by innovating strategies for collections-based citizen
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.