* 1812399
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Network-Centric Mobile Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Wei Gao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2020
* USD 204,690.00

Mobile cloud computing (MCC) has been used to address the resource limitation of
mobile devices by migrating expensive local computations to the cloud. However,
transmitting data wirelessly from mobile devices to the cloud also consumes
energy. Hence, the key problem of MCC is how to minimize the energy consumption
while preserving the mobile application performance. Different from traditional
solutions which focus on reducing the cost of wireless transmission solely from
the application perspective, this project focuses on designing MCC schemes from
a network-centric perspective, by investigating, formulating, and mitigating the
impact of special characteristics of wireless networks on the energy efficiency
of MCC. The proposed research could benefit end users with various mobile
devices by extending their battery lifetime and improving their performance. The
results from this research are likely to foster new research directions on
supporting MCC from a network-centric perspective. The project will engage
under-represented students in the proposed research, and the scholarly discovery
of this project will be disseminated broadly to the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the performance of MCC by
mitigating the impacts of two special characteristics of wireless networks: the
long-tail problem at the wireless interface and the quality variations of the
wireless link. More specifically, this project consists of three closely
intertwined research thrusts: (i) reducing the amount of tail energy when
transmitting the program states to the remote cloud, while ensuring that the
performance requirements of mobile applications can be met; (ii) mitigating the
impact of wireless link quality on both energy and performance, and minimizing
the degradation of application performance when the wireless link quality is
low; and (iii) exploiting the difference of wireless link quality among mobile
users to further improve the energy efficiency of MCC via user cooperation. An
experimental testbed will be developed to investigate the practical impact of
wireless network characteristics on MCC and evaluate the proposed MCC schemes.