* 1812119
* Statistical Inference for Networks with Complex Topological Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Michael Schweinberger, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Understanding the structure of networks is critical to understanding and
predicting application phenomena involving networks, such as the resilience of
insurgent and terrorist networks and the impact of disease-transmission networks
on epidemics. In the past decade, tremendous progress has been made on
statistical inference for networks with simple topological features, such as the
number of connections in networks and the propensities of network members to
form connections. However, statistical inference for networks with complex
topological features, such as various forms of network closure that are believed
to be crucial, remains underdeveloped, because complex topological features
raise challenging conceptual, theoretical, and computational issues. This
project addresses fundamental questions underpinning statistical inference for
such networks. The statistical models and methods that are developed will be
made publicly available in the form of R packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is concerned with the foundations of statistical inference for
networks with complex topological features. It starts with a question that is at
the heart of statistical inference: What does it mean to observe more data from
the same source? The conventional answer is that more data are observed by
observing a larger and larger network. Some interesting insights have emerged by
studying growing networks. Among them is that models with complex topological
features may depend on the size of the network and that using the same model,
with the same parameters, for small and large networks may not be meaningful.
Despite such insights, the question of how to model a wide range of complex
topological features and how to conduct sound statistical inference remains
unanswered. This project attempts to provide answers and is based on the
following idea: If models with complex topological features depend on the size
of the network, then statistical inference should be based on networks of the
same order of magnitude. In other words, statistical inference should be based
on replication. At least two forms of replication are possible: replication
based on a single network consisting of many subnetworks or many networks of the
same order of magnitude, i.e., the size of the largest network is a constant
multiple of the size of the smallest network. Such network data, called
multilevel network data, has important applications; examples include networks
of armed forces consisting of units and subunits and school networks consisting
of schools and school classes. Multilevel network data offer outstanding
opportunities for modeling, methods, and theory. This project will take
advantage of these opportunities to elaborate novel multilevel network models
capturing complex topological features in networks, overlapping subsets of
nodes, and temporal networks. Statistical theory will take advantage of the
replicative nature of multilevel network data, which provides a path to the
first general statistical theory for networks with complex topological features.
Statistical computing will take advantage of the conditional independence
structure of multilevel network models and will develop large-scale parallel
computing procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.