* 1812746
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Certification for Semi-Algebraic Sets with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jonathan Hauenstein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Traditionally, computers can very quickly calculate with numbers that have a
limited number of digits to get answers that are accurate to a certain
precision, or they can much more slowly manipulate formulas and symbols to get
exact answers. Recently, a new class of algorithms, called numerical path
following algorithms, have been successfully applied to approximate solutions
for problems in algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and optimization that were
once thought to be purely symbolic in nature. The results of such numerical
computations are typically not certified, as they are generated using heuristic
methods that relax non-continuous properties of the input into continuous ones.
The aim of this research project is to give certification techniques for these
non-continuous problems and demonstrate that certificates can be computed with
not too much extra work given numerical data. An essential part and motivation
for this research is a variety of application areas in other fields such as
efficiently handling singularities in reliable geometric computation,
certification of optima for semidefinite programs, proving existence of
multistability in chemical reaction networks, and exceptional motion in
mechanism design. By investigating the practical limits of certifiable methods,
this project aims to help specialists decide when they can apply certification
methods for their purposes. Moreover, by developing new methods that reduce the
gap between certified and non-certified versions, researchers will have the
guarantee of certified methods in more of their computations. Integration of
education and research is essential to the success of this proposal with this
project supporting&lt;br/&gt;the inclusion of graduate and undergraduate
students in the research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research
is to certify and enhance the handling of polynomial equations and inequalities
with exact coefficients which have degenerate solutions known only
approximately. The difficulty is that, in many cases, the roots of the exact
system behave discontinuously under perturbations of the coefficients. Hence, in
these non-continuous cases, traditional numerical certification methods, such as
interval arithmetic or alpha-theory, cannot work alone. The study of these
degenerate cases is the main topic of this project with the fundamental idea to
combine numerical certification techniques with symbolic computations. This
project will use insights gained from numerical data to drastically improve the
complexity of the computation of exact, symbolic objects, and in turn, use
insights from symbolic computation to turn an ill-posed problem into a well-
posed one. The hybrid symbolic-numeric approach, using early termination upon
success, aims to reduce the complexity in comparison with purely symbolic
methods. New techniques for regularizing/deflating singular roots will simplify
computations related to singularities and improve applications including the
visualization of singular curves lying on a real surface. Additionally, this
project will improve the complexity of certification routines by exploiting
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.