* 1812658
* SimHUB: Enabling Multidisciplinary Collaboration with Containerization Technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Jian Tao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 11/30/2018
* USD 17,999.00

This award supports travel to enable collaborations among National Science
Foundation (NSF)- and Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)-supported
researchers. The PI, Dr. Jian Tao, will travel to Japan to collaborate with Dr.
Saneyasu Yamaguchi's research group from Kogakuin University to improve the
Input/Output (I/O) performance of container-based virtualization. Dr. Jian Tao
will also work with members from the South Big Data Regional Innovation Hub to
promote and support collaborations among US and international researchers on
coastal hazards research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing technologies,
especially containers built upon the containerization technologies, enable an
extremely flexible and portable computing environment that could be tailored to
meet a wide spectrum of computing requirements for scientific research. In order
to prepare traditional computational science communities for the existing and
upcoming cloud-like computing and networking systems, this collaboration will
enable the design and development of Simulation Hub (SimHUB), a web-based
computing platform for scientific applications on containers. It enables rapid
sharing and integration of modeling applications and computational tools among
connected communities. It also provides a collaborative platform for
multidisciplinary and integrative research.