* 1812028
* Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics of Spaces of  Non-Positive Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jean-Francois Lafont, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 190,000.00

Geometry is concerned with quantitative aspects of spaces. Negatively curved
spaces locally look like the surface of a saddle (in every pair of directions).
While this might be hard to visualize, spaces with this property are quite
prevalent, both in mathematics, and in nature. For these spaces, there is a
tight link between the geometry of the space and the topology (qualitative
aspects of the shape) of the space. There is also a natural associated dynamical
system, which records how a particle inside the space will move, and which
exhibits hyperbolic behavior - extreme sensitivity to initial conditions. For
example, if you put a marble on a saddle and see how it rolls, then two nearby
marbles can roll in very different directions. Again, hyperbolicity is a very
common type of behavior for dynamical systems. This research proposes to study
how the geometry, topology, and dynamics of these spaces interact and influence
each other.

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to work on a series of projects that are
loosely centered around the notion of non-positive curvature. These projects
fall into three broad categories. (1) Branched coverings: the PI plans to
systematically study branched covers of non-positively curved (or negatively
curved) locally symmetric manifolds, ramified over a codimension two totally
geodesic submanifold. The main goal is to understand whether or not these covers
support Riemannian non-positive (or negative) curvature metrics. (2) Complex
geometry: the PI plans to study several questions concerning complex manifolds.
He plans to create new closed negatively curved Kaehler manifolds. He wants to
investigate the topology of the space of almost complex, complex, and Kaehler
structures on a manifold. He also wants to give high dimensional examples of
almost complex manifolds that do not support complex structures. (3)
Geometry/topology problems: the PI wants to show that hyperbolizations always
produce spaces whose fundamental groups are linear. He would like to study the
Singer conjecture for Gromov-Thurston manifolds. He is interested in studying
non-arithmetic lattices in SO(n; 1), particularly the structure of totally
geodesic submanifolds inside nonarithmetic hyperbolic manifolds. He would also
like to find new obstructions for manifolds to support Anosov diffeomorphisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.