* 1812535
* EAGER - Integrating machine learning on autonomous platforms for target-tracking operations using stereo imagery
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Kakani Young, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2022
* USD 323,007.00

The ocean's midwaters (depths from 200 to 1000 meters where sunlight is dim) are
increasingly becoming an area of interest for scientific discovery and study.
Efforts to further explore this vast and incredibly important region in the
ocean involves the development of small, nimble, autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs) that can be used for a variety of missions. This proposal will use a
large database in video images collected over 25 years to train the vehicle to
identify and track targets in real-time using a pair of stereo cameras. This
project will involve a Postdoctoral Researcher who will be mentored by
collaborators at MBARI and Stanford, who are pioneers in applying machine
learning algorithms to underwater imagery. Results of this effort will be
disseminated via conferences, publications, and outreach through industry and
media partners. Media programs at MBARI and National Geographic Society will
produce YouTube videos and social media posts detailing the efforts, the
project's personnel, methods, and discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean's
midwaters represent the largest ecosystem on earth with unique inhabitants and
processes that link the surface waters to the seafloor. Efforts to further
explore this vast and incredibly important region in the ocean involves
development of AUVs that can be used for a variety of missions (e.g.,
transecting, tracking, fluid sampling). One of the key vehicle missions for
these autonomous vehicles is to track targets in real-time. The tracking
missions can be used for science questions as diverse as rates of marine snow
sinking and its impact on biogeochemical cycling, the fate of rising methane
from the benthos, and direct observations of organismal behavior to address
their ecology and biomechanics. In order to conduct these tracking missions,
robust algorithms are needed to identify and track targets as they change shape
and state in realtime.