* 1812919
* AF: Small: Geometry of Polynomials and Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Amin Saberi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project builds on sophisticated geometric and algebraic techniques to
develop new algorithms for classic problems in algorithms design. One example of
such problems is the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) which involves finding the
shortest tour between a large number of destinations and has applications in
logistics, planning, and vehicle routing. TSP is also used in chip manufacturing
and as a subroutine in Genome sequencing. Another application of interest is
online matching which is used by search engines or large online publishers for
allocating advertisement space. In addition to the potential for impacting large
industries like ride-sharing and online advertising, the proposed project aims
to develop analytical tools that are generally applicable and can lead to the
design of new algorithms for other applications. The project also includes an
education and outreach component which incorporates design and broad
dissemination of course materials on the subject. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on two types of questions: first, it studies the geometry of the
roots of polynomials with an algorithmic lens, and aims to develop polynomial-
time algorithms where the current theory only gives proof-of-existence. Second,
it expands the scope and applicability of this theory by proposing new problems
in combinatorics (like counting certain combinatorial objects) or discrete
optimization (like the traveling salesman problem). In particular, the project
includes the study of: (i) counting problems through the lens of polynomials and
the study algorithms for counting and sampling problems by encoding problem
instances using polynomials, (ii) the traveling salesman problem and the study
of a new conjecture that can potentially lead to algorithms with better
approximation ratio for this problem, (iii) online stochastic optimization where
a new approach using Fourier analysis to approximate the optimum solution for
this problem is proposed, and (iv) polynomial-time algorithms for finding roots
of certain families of polynomials that can lead to faster construction of low-
degree, high-connectivity graphs known as Ramanujan
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.