* 1812951
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: RUI: Synchronicity: A Framework for Synthesizing Concurrent Software from Sequential and Cooperative Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Stephen Freund, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,999.00

The nation's computing infrastructure utilizes multicore processors and
multiprocessor hardware across the entire spectrum of systems from small mobile
devices to huge data centers. These systems offer increased performance and
scaling over single-processor systems, but at a significant cost: writing
correct concurrent software is notoriously challenging. Programmers must take
extreme care to orchestrate synchronization between concurrently running threads
to avoid unintended interference while simultaneously eliminating
synchronization whenever possible to avoid performance bottlenecks. To address
this challenge, this project develops the Synchronicity tool to automatically
synthesize high-performance concurrent software from simple specifications of
the desired behavior. This research has the potential to reduce the costs of
developing computing infrastructure, by eliminating the costly process of
manually writing, testing, and reasoning about concurrent code, and it may
reduce the hardware resources and energy required to meet computing needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synchronicity starts with an initial programmer-provided
description of a software component suitable execution on a single thread. It
then uses counterexample-guided inductive synthesis to search for thread-safe
concurrent components conforming to that specification. Synchronicity verifies
thread safety using an extended form of Lipton's theory of reduction. Multiple
thread-safe concurrent solutions may be found, and Synchronicity automatically
ranks according to their performance on a programmer-supplied workload. The
project is committed to increasing access to science education for all students,
including women, under-represented groups, and first-generation college
students. The investigators include students from these groups in this research,
at both the undergraduate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.