* 1812341
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER: Understanding the Confluence: Social Identities in Engineering Education and Practice
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Javier Kypuros, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 75,272.00

Exploring social and cultural identities of engineering students and the ways
these identities affect students' progression towards engineering practice
Engineering education and practice continues to lack significant representation
and inclusion of women, Latinos/Latinas, African Americans, Native Americans,
Pacific Islanders, Native Hawaiians, and persons with disabilities, among
others. It is clear that new educational strategies need to be developed and
implemented in order to diversify the engineering profession. This project takes
a fresh approach in an effort to demonstrate the role students' individual
identities (i.e., intersections of race, ethnicity, gender, ability, sexual
identity, language, etc.) play in helping or hindering success in undergraduate
engineering and computer science programs. The project's results should reveal
tangible, practical themes which point to why some students pursue, persist, and
retain in the engineering profession while others do not. Research findings will
provide a foundation for future work focused on the identification, design, and
implementation of curricular and programmatic transformation in engineering and
computer science, towards the end of creating equitable, just educational
environments that intentionally recognize the various aspects of students'
identities, recognize the importance of social, economic and political power and
its differential, stratifying impact on lived experiences, and affirm students
across their differences.

It is hypothesized that students who identify along social categories that are
centered in US culture (e.g., white, able bodied, heterosexual, male, Christian,
socioeconomic affluence) will have a higher sense of belonging and self-efficacy
as they progress through their undergraduate engineering programs, relative to
those who identify with other groups. Both sense of belonging and self-efficacy
have been shown to be positively correlated to retention and to professional
identity formation. Because relational and structural power accrues to those who
most closely approximate the mythical norm, those who do not align with these
social categories may be compelled to assimilate or to withhold or even deny
integral parts of their social and cultural identities as a means to
successfully navigate engineering culture. This is referred to as "identity
severance" and it is hypothesized that it is negatively correlated to
persistence in engineering education and practice. Achieving the above stated
goal will require that we investigate both student and faculty perceptions of
intersecting social identities and their confluence with engineering culture. A
mixed methods approach will be used, combining both qualitative and quantitative
techniques in order to provide a more holistic understanding. By the end of the
grant, the following objectives will be met: (i) ascertain themes of identity
severance among engineering and computer science students from marginalized
communities that have the potential to affect the path towards becoming situated
within the engineering profession; and, (ii) identify the role faculty's
understanding of relational and structural power across difference plays in
helping or hindering students from marginalized groups successfully navigate the
path towards becoming situated within the engineering profession. This project
will be implemented collaboratively across three very distinct institutions --
Kapiolani Community College (a two-year tribal college), Oregon State University
(a Research I institution), and The University of Texas-Pan American (a Hispanic
Serving Institution). The three serve significantly different student
populations and regions, but most likely share manifestations of identity
severance that influence the success and persistence of engineering and computer
science students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.