* 1812343
* Higher-Order QED for Precision Electromagnetic Probes of Hadronic Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Andrei Afanasev, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,000.00

Crucial information about the properties of atomic nuclei, the main building
blocks of matter, is obtained from scattering of electron beams accelerated to
energies of billions of electron-volts. Electron accelerators such as the
Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) at the Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) are capable of recreating three-
dimensional images of not only an atomic nucleus, but also of its elementary
constituents - quarks - and their interactions. Such high resolution imaging is
needed to obtain key information about the still undiscovered physics guiding
formation of nuclear structure. However, the high resolution of electron probes
can be obscured by the fact that electromagnetic effects described by quantum
electrodynamics (QED) are only about a factor of a hundred times weaker than the
strong interactions within atomic nuclei. In this context, this project will
make possible precision corrections for electromagnetic effects into a self-
consistent analysis of electron scattering by nucleons and nuclei. In addition,
the PI will mentor students engaged in this state-of-the-art scientific research
in nuclear theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects will allow the
development of the theoretical framework needed to include higher-order
electromagnetic effects into analysis of key physics processes of charged lepton
scattering to be studied experimentally at Jefferson Lab and a future Electron-
Ion Collider. The effects of higher-order QED corrections for electron-proton
and electron-nucleus scattering will be examined in detail. In particular, the
PI and his collaborators will analyze multi-photon and radiation corrections for
elastic and inelastic electron scattering on a nucleon and nuclei. Particular
nuclear reactions and effects to be considered are: (a) Deep exclusive processes
on a nucleon: Effects due to two-photon exchange. (b) QED loop effects for T-odd
asymmetries of semi-inclusive deep-inelastic electron-nucleon scattering
(SIDIS). (c) Coulomb effects in single-spin asymmetries of electron scattering
from nuclei. (d) Lepton mass effects for two-photon corrections in elastic
scattering of electrons and muons on a proton. The PI will develop a user-
friendly web interface that will allow researchers in this field to run
calculations that will improve the accuracy of electron (and muon) scattering
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.