* 1812588
* CSR: Small: Ultra-Low Power Analog Computing and Dry Skin-Electrode Contact Interface Design Techniques for Systems-On-A-Chip with EEG Sensing and Feature Extraction
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Marvin Onabajo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Electroencephalography (EEG) is used for the analysis of many neurological
disorders such as epilepsy, sleep disorders, encephalopathy, and coma. Perpetual
monitoring and processing of EEG signals helps the treatment inside and outside
of the hospital environment. However, the power consumption involved in signal
acquisition, processing, and communication has remained high for wearable
wireless EEG devices. This research will develop an ultra-low power (ULP) EEG
acquisition and processing system-on-a-chip (SoC) using a new analog computing
technique instead of conventional digital processing system. This SoC will be
able to identify a seizure event in the analog domain, incorporating learning
and continuous signal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analog processing and
feature extraction capability will be realized with precise amplifier and filter
design techniques to achieve stabilities down to 10s of parts-per-million
(ppm)/degree for gains and filter cutoff frequencies. The feature extraction
method will measure the power levels in various EEG spectral bands by utilizing
these precise analog amplifiers and filters to detect the onset of seizures.
Power level threshold setting and simple vector model based training methods
will be implemented on-chip for seizure characterization and detection. A
capacitance cancellation scheme with online calibration will be devised to
acquire EEG signals with higher input impedance for brain-computer interfaces
requiring long-term monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this
research will improve the acquisition of EEG signals for predicting the onset of
seizures with small portable devices, which impacts 2% of the world's
population. The proposed SoC will be particularly beneficial in future
miniaturized wearable devices for continuous EEG signal monitoring outside of
hospital environments. Knowledge obtained from this project will be integrated
into graduate and undergraduate education; results from the project will be
disseminated through journal articles and conference presentations.
Undergraduate researchers and high school interns will be involved and trained
in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publicly shared data collected as part of
this research will be deposited into Northeastern University's Digital
Repository Service (DRS), which is a digital archive developed and maintained by
the library (https://repository.library.northeastern.edu). It provides security
for the files it stores, as well as access management controls and support for
various metadata standards to help ensure that data is as accessible and usable
in the present and the future. All project participants will have access to a
project management database stored on local servers with design and simulation
data. The project data will be maintained for at least 3 years after the
conclusion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.