* 1812409
* Neutrinoless Double-Beta Decay with Germanium Detectors: Majorana Demonstrator and LEGEND
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Matthew Green, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 418,601.00

The non-zero masses and neutral electric charge of neutrinos allows for the
possibility that neutrinos are their own antiparticles (i.e. Majorana
particles), in which case an ultra-rare form of nuclear decay known as
neutrinoless double-beta decay (NLDBD) may occur. If neutrinos are shown to be
Majorana particles, it would provide an explanation for the very small masses of
neutrinos; point to new physics at energies beyond the reach of our most
powerful colliders; and motivate an explanation for the prevalence of matter
over anti-matter in the Universe. This award supports software and
instrumentation research on an experiment to test the Majorana characteristics
of neutrinos and the next phase experiment, called LEGEND. Both experiments use
ultra-pure germanium detectors and are at the cutting edge of science. The PI
will train graduate students in novel techniques that will allow them to compete
in high-technology based careers. Additionally, the PI has an innovative program
in outreach to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LEGEND Experiment will use
the ultra-pure materials developed by the MAJORANA Collaboration and the liquid
cryogen active shielding developed by the GERDA Collaboration in the
construction of a phased-deployment ton-scale experiment with discovery
potential for NLDBD at half-lives beyond 10e28 years. This project will extend
LEGEND's sensitivity to NLDBD and dark matter by building on a full
understanding of the backgrounds in the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR and reducing
backgrounds associated with cosmogenic Argon isotopes in a liquid cryogen
compton veto. Specifically, the PI and his group aim to: construct a
comprehensive background model of the MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR NLDBD experiment
using Monte Carlo simulations and experimental data; investigate the feasibility
of germanium detector array deployment in a liquid neon environment to extend
the physics reach of LEGEND; and develop preliminary designs and background
models for the LEGEND-200 (200-kg) and LEGEND-1000 (1000-kg) phases of the
LEGEND experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.