* 1812521
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Assessment of Water Quality in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Roberto Rodriguez, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2018
* USD 9,581.00

PI: Fernando L. Rosario-Ortiz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research:
RAPID: Assessment of Water Quality in Puerto Rico After Hurricane
Maria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Maria made landfall in Puerto Rico (PR) on
September 20th, 2017. This hurricane's legacy continues to harm many Puerto
Rican citizens because of the devastating impact to this Island's infrastructure
and the continuing struggle to rebuild it. Given the impacts that Hurricane
Maria had on the water infrastructure, a unique and important opportunity exists
to conduct a detailed evaluation of water quality issues related to the
restoration of potable water service. There are two main concerns. The first
concern is regarding the water quality associated with centralized water
treatment and distribution that is governed by the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and
Sewer Authority (PRASA). In these systems, treatment issues associated with
start-up and return to normalcy will likely cause unpredictable water quality
that manifest itself in higher levels of potential pathogens, disinfection
byproducts and other organic contaminants through water distribution. In
addition, the integrity of the distribution system could be compromised by
changes in water quality that mobilize metals and potential leakage points.
These conditions result in an increased population exposure risk to potentially
toxic or pathogenic agents, with potential for wide spread public health
impacts. There is also the concern with the smaller community systems, that are
not associated with PRASA. Here, contamination of surface water, combined with
the collapse of the infrastructure, could have damaging
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this RAPID
proposal is to conduct a systematic survey and evaluation of water quality in
several Puerto Rican potable water systems, focusing on both chemical and
microbiological components. The main outcome from this project will be a point-
of-use water quality retrospective of the near-term aftermath of Hurricane
Maria, including an analysis of potential relationships between the chemistry
and microbiology compromised water treatment and distribution systems. The
proposed research will provide information on potential relationships chemical
and microbiological agents in a seriously compromised tropical setting. Given
the scope of water samples collected, this project will the engineering
community to better understand water related exposures relevant to public
health.