* 1812054
* Regression with Time Series Regressors
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Suhasini Subba Rao, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

The projects to be investigated are motivated by the following two different
problems. It is well known that sea ice in the Arctic is receding. Changes in
climate are thought to be a contributing factor. Therefore, it is important to
understand if, when, and how daily temperatures in the Arctic region are
impacting sea ice. The second motivation comes from neuroscience. Is it possible
to predict the decision a person makes based on biometric and neurophysiological
responses, such as eye dilation observed over time or an EEG? The objectives in
both examples are very different, however they are bound by a common theme; to
understand how data observed over time (usually called a time series) affects an
outcome of interest. These problems fall under the canopy of regression (a broad
topic in statistics), which is a widely researched area in statistics. However,
what distinguishes these problems from the classical regression framework is
that the regressors have a well-defined structure, which is rarely exploited in
most classical regression techniques. By modelling the time series, methods will
be developed that exploit the structure of the time series. This will facilitate
estimation in models that otherwise would not be possible. The approach will be
used to identify salient periods in the time series that have the greatest
impact on the outcome and can be used to physically interpret the data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there has been a growing number of data
sets, from a wide spectrum of applications ranging from the neurosciences to the
geosciences, where an outcome is observed together with a time series that is
believed to influence the outcome. Despite the clear need in applications, there
exists surprisingly few results that exploit the properties of a time series in
the prediction of outcomes. This project will bridge this gap by developing
regression methods that utilize the fact that the regressors are a time series
or are spatially dependent. To achieve these aims, many new statistical methods
will be developed. In signal processing, deconvolution methods are often used to
estimate the parameters of a two-sided linear filter. This is because the
deconvolution is computationally very fast to implement. However, there has been
very little exploration on the use of deconvolution methods within the framework
of estimating regression parameters. This project will develop deconvolution
techniques for (i) linear regression models, and (ii) generalized linear models
and when the regressors are stationary and locally stationary. The focus will be
on the realistic situation where the time series or spatial data is far larger
than the number of responses. Besides the computational simplicity of
deconvolution, by isolating the Fourier transform of the regression
coefficients, diagnostic tools to understand the nature of the underlying
regression coefficients will be developed. For example, the methods can tell
whether the coefficients are smooth, contain periodicities, or are sparse. The
project will develop inferential methods for parameter estimators that allow for
uncertainty quantification, construction of confidence intervals, and tests for
linear dependence. Included is a new technique for estimating the variance of
the regression coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.