* 1812714
* National GEM Consortium-American Society for Engineering Education Doctoral Research Showcase
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Norman Fortenberry, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

Working in collaboration with the National GEM Consortium, the American Society
for Engineering Education (ASEE) is hosting the GEM-ASEE Doctoral Engineering
Research Showcase from January 22-23, 2018 in Washington, DC. The target
audiences include 200 doctoral students, postdoctoral fellows, and new faculty
within fourteen months of their first appointment. Participants are engaging in
a full day of interactive breakout sessions devoted to (a) advancing a research
program and managing the research enterprise, (b) innovations in teaching and
the promotion of learning, (c) professional service opportunities, and (d)
maintaining a work-life balance. Participants are presenting their engineering,
computing, and interdisciplinary research in a poster session categorized based
on division names within the NSF Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE) directorates. Combined with the poster session
will be an "Agency/University Fair" that features representatives from federal
research agencies who might wish to support continuation or extension of the
participants' research as well as representatives from universities that are
seeking faculty hires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the showcase, participants
will be queried about the impact of the showcase on their knowledge and
proficiency with various faculty tasks as well as the impact of the
Agency/University Fair on their professional employment and research support
prospects. In addition, participating agencies/universities will be queried as
to the effectiveness of the showcase in advancing their objectives for
participating. A summary impact report will be distributed to engineering and
engineering technology deans and chairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
exposes engineering doctoral students, postdoctoral fellows, and new faculty to
the training and resources required for successful performance of academic
duties. Furthermore, this project will assist participants in building networks
for professional success and personal support, introducing them to sources of
research support, and, for the doctoral students and postdoctoral fellows,
potential avenues of academic employment. The immediate impact of this project
is that up to 200 future and current engineering faculty, representing twelve
percent of the current number of underrepresented minority engineering faculty,
will be better prepared for their roles in the professoriate. Moreover,
participants will gain a jumpstart on securing the research support that will
sustain a career of intellectual contributions to their fields. The potential
broader impacts of this activity include the enhanced retention and research
competitiveness of new engineering faculty, particularly those drawn from
underrepresented minority populations. The resultant increase in more diverse
role models for engineering undergraduates and more diverse viewpoints in
engineering faculty is expected to increase undergraduate persistence.