* 1812888
* Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Teaching in Rural Areas using Cultural Knowledge Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lynda McGilvary, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 930,892.00

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.The Cultural Connections Process Model (CCPM) will formalize,
implement, and test a process model for community-engaged educational resource
development for Indigenous populations. The project will collaborate with
Indigenous communities to create educational resources serving Inupiaq middle
school students and their teachers. Research activities take place in Northwest
Alaska. Senior personnel will travel to rural communities to collaborate with
and support participants. The visits demonstrate University of Alaska
Fairbanks's commitment to support pathways toward STEM careers, community
engagement in research, science teacher recruitment and preparation, and STEM
career awareness for Indigenous and rural pre-college students. Pre-service
teachers who access to the resources and findings from this project will be
better prepared to teach STEM to Native students and other minorities and may be
more willing to continue careers as science educators teaching in settings with
Indigenous students. The project will contribute to a greater understanding of
effective natural science teaching and science career recruitment of minority
students. The project's participants and the pre-college students they teach
will be part of the pipeline into science careers for underrepresented Native
students in Arctic communities. The project will build on partnerships outside
of Alaska serving other Indigenous populations and will expand outreach
associated with NSF's polar science investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCPM will
build on cultural knowledge systems and NSF polar research investments to
address science themes relevant to Inupiat people, who have inhabited the region
for thousands of years. An Inupiaq scholar will conduct project research and
guide collaboration between Indigenous participants and science researchers
using the Inupiaq research methodology known as Katimarugut (meaning "we are
meeting"). The project research and development will engage 450 students in
grades 6-8 and serves 450 students (92% Indigenous) and 11 teachers in the
remote Arctic. There are two broad research hypotheses. The first is that the
project will build knowledge concerning STEM research practices by accessing
STEM understandings and methodologies embedded in Indigenous knowledge systems;
engaging Indigenous communities in project development of curricular resources;
and bringing Arctic science research aligned with Indigenous priorities into
underserved classrooms. The second is that classroom implementation of resources
developed using the CCPM will improve student attitudes toward and engagement
with STEM and increase their understandings of place-based science concepts.
Findings from development and testing will form the basis for further
development, broader implementation and deeper research to inform policy and
practice on STEM education for underrepresented minorities and on rural
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.