* 1812126
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2020
* David Grossnickle, Grossnickle             David          M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The fellow is studying evolutionary patterns in early mammals
by examining fossil jaws. Since the Mesozoic Era, or the Age of Dinosaurs,
mammals have been able to expand into many different geographical locations.
However, how mammals were able to do this, and when they began their expansion
are still heavily debated. The fellow will investigate this topic by collecting
shape data on a large sample of fossil jaws from several natural history
museums. Mammal jaws are especially informative because their shape is
correlated with diet, thus providing clues about the mammals' ecologies. This
research will contribute to our understanding of the origins of modern mammalian
diversity. Further, the study focuses on evolutionary patterns before and after
the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) mass extinction event, thus offering information
on how mammals are affected by mass extinction events. The fellow will expand
the impact of this project by participating in numerous teaching, mentoring, and
outreach opportunities, including the Discoveries in Geosciences Field School
for K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is often hypothesized that early
mammals experienced an adaptive radiation following one of three globally
transformative events: (1) the rise of flowering plants ~80 million years ago
(Ma), (2) the K-Pg mass extinction 66 Ma, and (3) the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal
Maximum 56 Ma. However, previous research on these hypotheses often lack
ecological data or phylogenetic considerations, prohibiting proper testing of
adaptive radiations. Thus, the primary aim of this project is to use
ecomorphological and biomechanical data from jaw morphologies to examine
macroevolutionary patterns, allowing robust tests of evolutionary hypotheses and
providing novel insight into the origins of modern mammalian diversity. The
fellow will collect measurements and shape data on hundreds of fossil jaws from
the Cretaceous through Eocene (145-34 Ma), utilizing paleontological collections
from several natural history museums. Hypotheses on the timing of the early
mammal radiation will be tested by calculating morphological disparity patterns
through time and using phylogenetic modeling methods to assess potential changes
in the mode of evolution at different points in time. The fellow will be trained
in advanced phylogenetic comparative methods and quantitative paleontological
techniques, and results from this project will be presented at scientific
conferences and published in peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.