* 1812417
* Using Muons and Protons to Probe the Structure of the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Renee Fatemi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 554,995.00

The primary physics program supported by this award is the precise measurement
of the muon magnetic moment. The muon is a fundamental particle with
characteristics very similar to the electron, but with 200 times the mass. The
ultimate goal is to compare the experimental measurement with theoretical
predictions from the so-called Standard Model of Particle Physics. The current
Standard Model cannot explain many observed phenomena, such as the nature of
dark matter or the origins of the matter-antimatter asymmetry in our universe.
If discovered, a significant discrepancy between the experimental measurement
and Standard Model predictions could provide long awaited insights into the
nature of Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) physics. In addition, this award will
support investigations into how quarks and gluons fragment into the matter that
makes up our universe. It is now a well-established fact that protons are made
up of more elementary particles, called quarks and gluons, that are bound
tightly inside the proton. When liberated, the quarks and gluons break up and
produce a shower of matter and antimatter particles. Measurements supported by
this award will shed light on the number and characteristics of the particles
produced in these showers. The studies described here will provide graduate
students with the necessary tools and knowledge to obtain post-doctoral work at
other large colliders or smaller non-accelerator based collaborations.
Undergraduate students funded by this award will continue to have the rare
opportunity to experience the scientific culture and participate in experiments
at National Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The muon measurements will be
performed by the new g-2 collaboration at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory, which proposes to measure the muon anomalous magnetic moment to 140
parts per billion. A deviation from the Standard Model prediction at the
observed level could be explained by several BSM scenarios and the improved
precision will significantly constrain key parameters in supersymmetry, one of
the most widely discussed BSM models. The studies of proton structure
measurements will be carried out at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC)
at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The root(s) = 200GeV proton collisions
necessary for these experiments are only available at RHIC. Jet reconstruction
techniques will be used to measure yields of identified pions, kaons and protons
inside of fully reconstructed jets. These yields will provide critical input on
gluon and quark transverse momentum dependent fragmentation
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.