* 1812695
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Effective Numerical Algorithms  and Software  for Nonlinear Eigenvalue Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 138,993.00

The eigenvalue problem is a central topic in science and engineering arising
from a wide range of applications and posing major numerical challenges. For
decades, it has been the focus of numerous theoretical research activities for
developing various efficient numerical algorithms. These efforts have led to the
development of new software that is essential to assist the everyday work of
many engineers and scientists. In spite of progress made on solving the
eigenvalue problem, methods available for handling these problems remain limited
in their scope and they have not resulted in effective general-purpose software
so far. The primary goal of this project is to fill this gap by advancing the
state of the art in solution methods for nonlinear eigenvalue problems which are
both mathematically and practically far more challenging than the traditional
linear eigenvalue problems. The combined expertise of the investigating team is
well suited for exploring new algorithms in this arena, analyzing them, and
developing new effective software that can universally impact a wide range of
disciplines (engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology). The outcome of the
project are expected to open new and efficient ways to solve nonlinear
eigenvalue problems. A new suite of state of the art numerical routines will be
developed, fully tested, and publicly released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to advance the state-of-the-art in solution methods for
nonlinear eigenvalue problems. The new approaches that are envisioned are
expected to be particularly effective for solving large-scale problems using
parallelism. The main thrust of the project is the development of novel
eigenvalue algorithms based on generalizations of Cauchy integral type methods
for the nonlinear case, combined with projection methods such as Krylov and
subspace iteration. A starting point in this investigation is the FEAST approach
which will be adapted to the nonlinear context. Because the problems under
consideration are expected to be large and sparse, the team will investigate
methods that rely on domain decomposition where the original physical domain is
partitioned into a number of subdomains in order to exploit parallelism. Among
other goals, the team will carefully study the extension of the tools that are
exploited in the linear case, such as spectrum slicing (computing eigenvalues by
parts), block methods, and iterative linear solves, to the nonlinear
case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.