* 1812930
* Collaborative Research: A Regularized Poisson Boltzmann Model for Fast Computation of the Ensemble Average Polar Solvation Energy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Shan Zhao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 230,000.00

This collaborative research project will develop mathematical models and
simulation tools for studying the interactions between large biological
molecules, for example proteins, and surrounding water molecules modeling an
aqueous environment. The energy computation for characterizing such interactions
is complex because the structures of biomolecules are not completely fixed or
rigid, and the surrounding water molecules are also in constant motion. Thus, to
deliver quantities that are comparable with experimentally-measurable energies,
one must account for these conformational changes in the corresponding
mathematical description. A new theoretical model will be formulated in this
project by combining appropriate biophysical considerations with mathematical
advances, allowing simulations to mimic the effect of conformational changes in
both macromolecule and water atoms. The proposed mathematical development will
benefit researchers in molecular biosciences and biophysics. Moreover, the
proposed models and algorithms will be implemented in DelPhi, which is
distributed free of charge to academic users, to ensure extensive usage by
practitioners from mathematics, chemistry, physics, and biology. In addition,
this project will provide interdisciplinary research and training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students in biological modeling, computation and
mathematical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentally-observable solvation
energies are ensemble averaged. However, direct Poisson-Boltzmann (PB)
calculations of such energies require the generation of a representative
ensemble of structures in terms of thousands of snapshots, which is
computationally very expensive. Tremendous savings in computational time can be
achieved if one can calculate the ensemble average solvation energy by employing
a single structure by mimicking the effect of conformation changes of
macromolecules via heterogeneous dielectric distributions. In this project, a
novel super-Gaussian PB model will be formulated embodying three key
innovations: (1) incorporation of environment-dependent atomic characteristics
of macromolecules within the continuum electrostatic partial differential
equation (PDE); (2) development of a novel, regularized formulation to treat
singular charges, with new elliptic PDEs developed through rigorous mathematical
analysis: partial charges and water molecules (inside cavities, bonded to the
protein, and in bulk solvent) will no longer be modeled as homogeneous spatial
regions as in the current Gaussian model, but will reflect the flexibility of
the entire solute-solvent system; and (3) elimination of the need to determine a
sharp molecular surface, for macromolecules in both vacuum and water
environments. Model benchmarking and biological applications tests will be
carried out for validation, and the resulting tool will be incorporated into the
widely-used DelPhi program package for computing ensemble-average solvation
energies. This project is supported jointly by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences Mathematical Biology Program, the Division of Chemistry Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.