* 1812965
* CIF:Small: A Computationally-Enabled Rate Region Theory via Symmetry and Hierarchy
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Walsh, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 348,998.00

Three timely applied engineering problems - limiting delay in communications for
streaming media and remote control, coding information in data centers, and
squeezing more capacity out of wireless and wired networks - all have
fundamental limits that are dictated by a common family of underlying abstract
rate region problems in information theory and coding. The underlying goal of
this project is to advance the method of solution for these information
theoretic rate region problems into the modern results-oriented data-driven
massive computation age. Humans no longer tally large balance sheets, lay out
massive integrated circuits, factor matrices, or solve linear programs by hand.
Instead, we have recognized that computers are far better suited to doing these
things both accurately and rapidly. This project will demonstrate that
determining the coding rate regions that dictate the key design tradeoffs in
these applied problems is a problem that is also best solved with computational
methods. The research work to be carried out will enable the algorithms and
software the PI has developed to reach larger instances of these problems by
exploiting advanced notions of symmetry. Additionally, a hierarchical theory
that enables complicated larger instances of these problems to be solved by
combining computer generated solutions to simpler, smaller, constituents will be
further developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The abstract problems under study in
this award are to determine the capacity regions of networks under network
coding. Work under the project will proceed in three thrusts. The first thrust
will show with specific worked examples and driver routines in software, how
limits in distributed information storage systems, coded protocols for limited
delay streaming media and remote control over multipath routed networks, and
squeezing extra capacity out of wireless and wired communications networks, all
can be formulated as abstracted network coding problems. The second thrust will
utilize novel notions of symmetry of polyhedra to push algorithms and software
the PI has developed to determine network coding capacity regions to as large
problems as possible. The third thrust advances a structural theory enabling
capacity regions of large networks to be inferred through simple computations
combining carefully selected constituent networks. Throughout the project, care
will be taken to illustrate the ideas by showing how to reduce the applied
engineering design problems to a form that the algorithms and software that will
be developed can solve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.