* 1812369
* RUI: Nucleon Structure Studies via Electron Scattering at JLab 12 GeV
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Peter Monaghan, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,764.00

It has been established that protons and neutrons (nucleons) have a substructure
made up of elementary constituent particles called quarks and gluons. Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) is an established theory of how these constituents interact
giving rise to the strong nuclear force and the fundamental properties of
nucleons. The research program supported by this grant is aimed at improving the
fundamental understanding of nucleon structure. This goal will be achieved
through electron scattering experiments to be performed at the Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (JLab). These experiments will measure the spatial
distributions of electric charge and current in both the proton and the neutron;
this information is encoded in the nucleon electromagnetic form factors. A
fundamental understanding of the nucleon form factors in terms of QCD is one of
the outstanding challenges in nuclear physics today. Why and how do quarks forms
colorless hadrons with only two stable configurations, the proton and neutron?
One important step towards addressing this challenge is to characterize the
internal structure of the nucleon via form factor measurements. The anticipated
research activities will cover a range of both hardware and software projects.
These projects will provide outstanding research opportunities for undergraduate
students, furthering their education outside the classroom, preparing them for a
career in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and laying the
foundations for successful graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding
support for this research program will enable the PI and Christopher Newport
University students to contribute to a number of projects at JLab, aimed at
improving the fundamental understanding of nucleon structure. The proposed
projects include an experimental effort - the Super Bigbite Spectrometer program
(SBS) - and a phenomenology effort - CTEQ-JLab (CJ) - both of which address
fundamental questions of hadronic structure in the QCD framework. The SBS
program comprises high impact experiments studying the electromagnetic form
factors of both the proton and neutron at a much higher momentum transfer than
previously studied. The new data from the SBS experiments will allow a partonic
flavor decomposition of the form factors to be performed, which in turn can be
tested using calculations provided by the CJ effort. The PI is leading the
commissioning effort of one of the SBS detector systems, as well as contributing
to the analysis effort in the CJ project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.