* 1812933
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Wearable Fingertip Haptic Devices for Virtual and Augmented Reality: Design, Control, and Predictive Tracking
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Yu Sun, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 173,338.00

In the real world, people rely heavily on haptic (force and tactile) feedback to
manipulate and explore objects. However, in virtual and augmented reality
environments, haptic sensations must be artificially generated. Advances in both
sensing and feedback are needed to create more realistic virtual scenarios for
human interaction, education, and training. This research will implement
wearable fingertip haptic feedback systems that enhance human perception and
task performance in virtual and augmented reality, and will provide the field of
computer-mediated haptics with important new design and rendering insights for a
promising form of wearable haptic device. Successful development of fingertip
haptic devices and improved tracking methods will lower the cost of integrating
haptic technology into virtual reality, and yield more realistic and compelling
virtual experiences. Effective haptic feedback systems for virtual reality
utilizing the developed technologies will have broad impact by improving human
health and well-being through a myriad of applications such as training for
critical tasks like surgery and defusing of explosive ordnance, tactile
communication to enable design and e-commerce, and immersion in virtual worlds
for enhanced education and training. Project outcomes will be disseminated
through demonstrations of educational applications, expansion of an online
course on haptics, and publicly available software and data. Outreach programs,
public lab tours, and mentoring of female and minority graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
three main technical components. First, instrumented objects will be developed
that measure force interactions and integrate that data with external
measurements of finger pose. Second, new wearable haptic devices will be
developed that use a combination of local kinesthetic feedback and skin
deformation to provide realistic haptic feedback with minimal encumbrance.
Modular haptic device designs will facilitate rapid testing of various design
choices. Then the basic design will be optimized in terms of control strategy,
degrees of freedom, skin contact conditions, and finger grounding to best match
the real-world grasping and manipulation data collected earlier. Third,
predictive tracking algorithms will be developed for grasping based on
characteristic behaviors observed in real-world grasping and manipulation data.
All of the haptic devices and tracking methods will be evaluated both in virtual
and in augmented reality environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.