* 1812095
* Dynamical Evolution of Interacting Particle Systems: Mixing Times, Interface Fluctuations and Universality
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Eyal Lubetzky, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

This research project aims to study a range of problems on dynamical aspects of
systems of interacting particles, and en route to develop new tools in
Probability Theory to advance our understanding of their features in and out of
equilibrium. The motivating problems - several of which have been intensively
studied in statistical and mathematical physics as well as in computer science -
touch fundamental questions such as the convergence time to equilibrium at the
critical point of phase transition for classical models such as 2D and 3D Ising
and Potts models under different boundary conditions, cluster interfaces at
equilibrium (both interesting on its own accord, and crucial for the analysis of
the dynamics), and the role of the underlying geometry on the dynamics, or the
lack thereof - whereby dynamical features are universal on a broad class of
graphs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research direction focuses on the
classical Ising, Potts and FK model on d-dimensional tori, and examines two of
the most common Markov chains used to sample them/model their evolution -
Glauber dynamics and Swendsen-Wang dynamics. The phase transition that both the
dynamical and static models undergo has received much attention, yet various
basic problems have so far been out of reach of rigorous analysis in all three
temperature regimes (high/low/critical). The PI proposes to study several such
problems, including a power-law for mixing at criticality for the extremal
4-color Potts model in 2D vs. slow mixing in 3D, and establishing the cutoff
phenomenon for the FK model off-criticality. A second research direction aims to
understand properties of cluster interfaces in these models under various
boundary conditions (b.c.): The PI plans to study rigidity and fluctuations of
3D Ising and 2D Potts interfaces under prescribed b.c., towards showing fast
mixing for the 3D Ising model with plus b.c. and critical 2D q-state Potts model
with free b.c. for all q. The final proposed topic compares the behavior of
systems of interacting particles on lattices to other environments. For the SK
spin glass model, various features of the static measure are known to be
universal in the law of the interactions, and the PI proposes to establish an
analogous statement for Langevin dynamics; for branching Brownian motion, the PI
will investigate the law of the maximum in the presence of a periodic
environment affecting the particles; and for the stochastic Ising model, the PI
aims to show an aspect of sensitivity to initial conditions that is special to
lattices, contrary to the behavior on typical random regular
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.