* 1812252
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Chase Mayers, Mayers                  Chase          G
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. The proposed research seeks to better understand the symbiotic
bacteria that live inside the cells of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF). These
fungi play a major role in the nutrient absorption for almost all plants on the
globe. The pursuit of more productive, sustainably produced crops requires the
manipulation of plants, from breeding practices to genetics to modifying the
microbes associated with them. AMF provide dramatic benefits to plant growth,
making them important organisms to understand for the benefit of agriculture. It
was only recently discovered that almost all AMF have unusual bacteria living
inside of their cells. These bacteria form a symbiotic relationship with the
AMF, but these bacteria are not well studied. This research will provide
critical insight into the identity and function of these bacteria. The project
will involve undergraduate researchers at Cornell University from programs that
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in science. The fellow
will also produce a course on fungal symbioses that will serve as a model for
active team-based learning methods and shared online as an open educational
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the bacteria of a wide range of
different AMF, the research relies on the extensive collections of the
International Culture Collection of Arbuscular (Vesicular) Mycorrhizal Fungi
(INVAM) at West Virginia University, the largest collection of living AMF
strains in the world. The Fellow will receive training in the use and upkeep of
such strains. Specifically, the study aims to: (1) use single-fungal-cell next-
generation DNA sequencing to sample the diversity of bacteria present in members
of all known lineages of AMF; (2) produce phylogenetic analyses of DNA from
selected endosymbiotic bacteria and AMF and compare their ancestral
relationships, in order to discover historical patterns of association; and (3)
analyze genomes of selected endosymbiotic bacteria to find clues to their
function. This research is potentially transformative because we do not yet
understand these bacteria and how they might benefit or disadvantage the fungus-
plant symbiosis. This work will also benefit INVAM by providing additional
information about its accessioned strains and by serving as a model study for
the necessity of its collections. The Fellow will also develop necessary
experience in genomics and continue their broader scientific narrative in the
evolution of symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.