* 1812116
* Identifying Deeply Conserved Patterns of Epigenetic Modification and Imprinting during Seed Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Rebecca Povilus, Povilus                 Rebecca        A
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Rebecca Povilus is "Identifying Deeply Conserved
Patterns of Epigenetic Modification and Imprinting during Seed Development". The
host institution for the fellowship is the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Mary
Gehring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seeds are important for humans; seeds make up most
of our diets and are a key part of the ecosystems that we depend on.
Understanding what factors influence seed development is necessary to improve
seed crops (such as wheat, corn, rice, and soybean), as well as to ensure the
production of viable offspring when re-introducing genetic diversity into inbred
crop varieties. Only recently have technologies and systems been available to
elucidate the role that epigenetic modifications (chemical changes to DNA bases
and to associated DNA-packaging proteins) play during plant reproduction. While
epigenetic modifications have been shown to be important for seed development in
a small number of distantly related plant species, the actual patterns and
effects of epigenetic modification appear to vary substantially between species.
To predict how broadly epigenome-based technologies for crop improvement and
plant breeding can be applied, the patterns of epigenetic modifications that are
fundamental to all flowering plants, or are specific to particular lineages must
be determined. This project will provide an otherwise lacking foundation for
understanding how the role that epigenetic processes play during reproduction
has evolved across flowering plants. To do so, epigenetic modifications and
their association with gene expression during seed development will be
identified in the emerging model system Nymphaea thermarum, a member of one of
the most ancient flowering plant lineages. Training objectives include genomics,
epigenomics and bioinformatics. Broader impacts include outreach to local school
teachers through the Whitehead Partner program and the development and
distribution of a module for early-science education that explores the
importance of biodiversity and basic research to agriculture and food security.
This module will be presented as part of the Arnold Arboretum Summer Institute,
and will be available at
https://nthermarum.weebly.com/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to understand epigenetic modification and its impact on gene expression during
seed development. Specific objectives include 1) determining the dynamics of
epigenetic modification during reproductive development in N. thermarum through
immunolocalization of methylated DNA and histone marks, methylation-sensitive
DNA sequencing and chromatin profiling and 2) identifying genes that are
maternally- or paternally-imprinted during early embryo and endosperm
development using hybrid crosses and tissue specific gene expression analysis.
By comparing results from Nymphaea to information from model species, deeply
conserved patterns of epigenetic modifications and imprinted gene expression
will be distinguished from those that are derived within either monocots (such
cereal crops) or eudicots (such as Arabidopsis). Results of this project will be
published on open-access pre-print servers and peer-reviewed journals, and
information will be available on the website
https://nthermarum.weebly.com/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: seed development,
embryo, endosperm, epigenetics, Nymphaea, comparative genomics and
epigenomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.