* 1812823
* Promoting Engineering Problem Framing Skill-Development in High School Science and Engineering Courses
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bruce Wellman, Ohio Northern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,885.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This collaborative project involving Ohio Northern University, Ohio
State University, and Olathe Northwest High School will develop curricular
activities and assessment guidance for K-12 science and engineering educators
who seek to incorporate engineering design content into their biology,
chemistry, and physics classes. This work is important because students' limited
exposure to engineering activities can negatively impact their decisions to
enroll in STEM courses and to pursue engineering careers. Further, many states
are adopting or considering adopting the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS), a set of classroom standards which integrate engineering content into
traditional science disciplines. While high school teachers under these
standards are expected to incorporate the cross-cutting engineering content into
their courses, they generally receive little high-quality support for doing so.
If successful, the project could provide a powerful model of how to support busy
and resource-constrained STEM teachers, and create broader student interest in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Drawing from best practices on instructional
design, the project's main objectives are to: (1) design, field-test, and
evaluate the impact of 12 NGSS-aligned, engineering problem-framing design
activities on students enrolled in grades 9-12 science courses and (2) design
and conduct high-quality, sustained professional development that fosters
participating high school science teachers' ability to deploy the NGSS concepts-
linked activities. Data sources include student design artifacts, video of
classroom instruction, and surveys assessing student and teacher attitudes
toward engineering, student design self-efficacy and teacher self-efficacy for
teaching engineering content. These data will be analyzed to determine what
teachers learned from the professional development activities, how those
activities informed their teaching and in turn, how students' engagement with
the engineering activities relates to their engineering design skills and
attitudes. In terms of intellectual merit, the project aims to develop a
learning progression of students' engineering design problem-framing skills by
characterizing any observed change in students' design work and attitudes over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.