* 1812547
* Collaborative Research: DarkSide-20k: A Global Program for the Direct Detection of Dark Matter Using Low-Radioactivity  Argon
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hanguo Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,166,177.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery in
particle physics and cosmology, providing a unique window to learning about the
primary matter constituent of the Universe and of physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. This award is to support the NSF-funded DarkSide (DS)
groups for the construction and operation of DarkSide-20k (DS-20k), a direct
WIMP search using a Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber (LAr TPC) with an
active (fiducial) mass of 23 tons (20 tons).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LAr TPC
relies heavily on the utilization of argon obtained from underground sources, or
UAr. The planned Aria project for UAr purification may improve the worldwide
availability of valuable stable rare isotopes such as O-18, N-15, and C-13, used
for various medical, industrial and energy generation applications. The
production of hundreds of tonnes of low-radioactivity UAr for DS-20k and for
other technical uses requiring detection of Ar-37 for nuclear test ban
verification, and Ar-39, for radiometric dating. Special E&amp;O programs are
planned with focus on educating K-12 teachers about basic physics and how it
relates to dark matter detection, re-starting a summer school experience for
high-school and undergraduate students, as well giving research opportunities to
undergraduate students at participating underrepresented-minority serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DS-20k builds on the success of DarkSide-50
(DS-50), operating at LNGS since 2013, which produced two zero-background
science results using atmospheric argon (AAr) and then underground argon (UAr)
fills. DS-50 demonstrated an 39Ar reduction of 1400 in the UAr. Electron recoil
(ER) background was shown to be completely suppressed in the region of interest,
with discrimination better than 1 part in 1.5 x 10^7. These results demonstrated
the ability of large LAr TPCs to operate in an "instrumental background-free
mode" - a mode in which less than &lt;0.1 events (other than actual nuclear
recoils from elastic scattering of atmospheric and diffuse supernova background
neutrinos) are expected in the region of interest for the planned exposure of
DS-20k. DS-20k will have ultra-low backgrounds, with the ability to measure its
backgrounds in situ, and sensitivity to WIMP-nucleon cross sections of 1.2 x
10^-47 cm2 (1.1 x 10^-46 cm2) for WIMPs of 1 TeV/c2 (10 TeV/c2) mass, to be
achieved during a 5 yr run with exposure of 100 t yr.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.