* 1812600
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Analysis of Security and Countermeasures for Split Manufacturing of Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Azadeh Davoodi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2023
* USD 312,210.00

Integrated circuit fabrication has spread across the globe, with over 90% of the
world's fabrication capacity controlled by non-US companies. This project is on
studying the security of chip fabrication by an untrusted foundry. The
fabrication technique, known as split manufacturing, is based on partial sharing
of the chip design information with the untrusted foundry in order to protect
the intellectual property of the chip. With this technique, only a challenging
portion of the chip is manufactured at the untrusted foundry. The remaining is
completed by a trusted and smaller-scale foundry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
research tasks include: (a) use of machine learning techniques to decide an
appropriate "split level" to divide the chip design files into trusted and
untrusted portions; (b) developing design-aid tools to obfuscate the chip layout
files in order to make reverse engineering by the untrusted foundry infeasible;
(c) development and public release of a software tool to generate various split-
manufactured instances from the design files of the full chip, in order to
promote research in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the release of the
software tool, research findings will be published across communities related to
the fields of hardware security and Integrated Circuit design. Specific
components of the project are designed to promote involvement of undergraduate
students in research. Involvement of women and underrepresented students in
research will be pursued at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data and software
tools will be publicly accessible from
http://homepages.cae.wisc.edu/~adavoodi/split-man.htm and will remain active for
at least two years following the end date of the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.