* 1812184
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Renee Petipas, Petipas                 Renee          H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Biological nitrogen fixation is the process of converting
nitrogen gas to nitrogen that is used by the majority of organisms on Earth.
Nitrogen fixation is accomplished by bacteria. Plant-associated bacteria (called
rhizobia) are responsible for fixing 100 million metric tons of nitrogen in
nature, and provide a critical ecosystem service. However, anthropogenic
nitrogen inputs have the potential to change this bacteria-plant relationship.
The fellow will use historical museum specimens to understand how increases in
environmental nitrogen have changed the relationship between plants andplant-
associated nitrogen fixation bacteria. The fellow will focus on Legumes and
their rhizobia because these plants are important for ecosystem health and
function. In areas with high nitrogen deposition, legumes decrease in frequency
and are at risk for extinction. This project will better describe the legume-
rhizobia relationship in environments with high nitrogen conditions and
potentially illuminate conservation strategies and ways to preserve critical
ecosystem functions.

This project will incorporate biological collections to achieve two main
objectives: 1) To conduct population genomic analyses across space and time to
identify regions of host and symbiont genomes under selection and test whether
anthropogenic nitrogen increase alters these patterns. 2) To use revived
historical germplasm to experimentally test if there is evidence for
antagonistic coevolution between host and symbiont in high nitrogen
environments. This work will be done using contemporary and historical
collections of legume species, Medicago lupulina and their rhizobial symbionts,
Ensifer meliloti, that will be isolated from the roots of contemporary and
historical plant specimens. Biological collections are an untapped resource for
studying historical patterns of coevolution and as a source of material to
perform manipulative experiments to better understand coevolutionary patterns.
Collections can effectively act as a "time machine" allowing us a glimpse at the
trajectory of coevolution in the Anthropocene. Broader impacts of this project
include the development of protocols that allow researchers to revive historical
bacteria. These protocols will be made publicly available and revolutionize the
types of questions researchers can ask about mutualistic coevolution. The fellow
will also develop active learning exercises about coevolution. Active learning
is an incredibly effective pedagogical technique and one that leads to better
learning outcomes for women and underrepresented groups in the classroom, and
thus is one force that can be employed to level the playing field in academics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.