* 1812861
* SHF:Small: Collaborative Research: Understanding, Modeling, and System Support for HPC Data Reduction
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Qing Liu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 259,024.00

High-performance computing (HPC) enables high fidelity science missions that
capture microscopic phenomena that were impossible to study in the past. In
order to allow science missions to be accomplished in a timely manner, it is
critical to manage the massive datasets that HPC generates in efficient way so
that the time to knowledge can be shortened. This project aims to understand the
role and usage of data reduction in large computational applications. Research
and educational opportunities are provided to train a new generation of computer
scientists and engineers, particularly those under-represented groups, to ensure
the U.S. competitiveness in high-performance computing. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address a number of critical gaps in
using data reduction for HPC-based science missions. In particular, 1) the
impact of reduction error on scientific discovery is mathematically and
experimentally studied; 2) analytical models are formulated to estimate the
reduction performance, without forcing users to compress the full data. For
data-intensive applications, having this capability is important so that domain
scientists do not have to go through the cumbersome trial-and-error process to
figure out what reduction can offer; 3) the project provides potentially more
efficient data analysis and reduction capabilities for exascale computing. The
integrated research activities in this NSF project will significantly improve
the understanding and usage of data reduction on future
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.