* 1812831
* Scaling Laws and Optimal Design in Some Problems of Continuum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Ian Tobasco, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2020
* USD 94,674.00

The problems under investigation in this project are at the forefront of the
study of energy-driven pattern formation and more generally the Calculus of
Variations. The project is interdisciplinary by design - the problems cut across
the fields of materials science and fluid dynamics - and is motivated by both
practical and futuristic engineering applications. In materials science, for
instance, there is the potential for new biologically-inspired and growth-based
design mechanisms for building highly flexible but controlled solid membranes.
Regarding fluid dynamics, besides the potential for the design of new and
extremely efficient heat exchangers, the investigation is motivated by the
broader scientific challenge of deriving the scaling laws of naturally occurring
transport in turbulent fluids. As experience shows, these questions are very
difficult to solve on a computer by applying conventional numerical techniques.
There are oftentimes many nearly optimal answers, and each can be rather
complex. Rigorous mathematical analysis presents the possibility of knowing that
certain patterns are truly optimal overall: such information cannot be gleaned
using other non-rigorous approaches. Thus, the project is an important
contribution to the larger scientific community interested in understanding why
or how such complex patterns achieve global optimality. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two main parts: (a) The first class of
problems concerns the mechanics of thin elastic sheets, such as naturally
occurring ones like leaves and flowers, but also man-made versions which can be
orders of magnitude thinner than a standard sheet of paper. The thinner an
elastic sheet becomes the more easily it can be deformed, in particular through
bending forces, but extracting from such intuitive physical principles the
mathematical mechanisms behind the vast array of wrinkling, folding, and
crumpling patterns found in experiments is a clear and difficult challenge. The
investigator seeks to derive through rigorous mathematical analysis the
effective, coarse-grained models governing optimal elastic patterns in the
vanishing thickness limit. A key task is to obtain the scaling law of the
minimum energy in any natural parameters, and then to ask which patterns can
possibly attain such energy scaling laws. (b) The second class of problems
regards the design of incompressible fluid flows for achieving optimal heat
transfer. While hot objects submerged in fluid media do cool on their own, it is
natural to ask whether the efficiency of heat transfer can be significantly
enhanced by intelligent stirring of the surrounding fluid. Oftentimes, any
stirring protocol achieves some enhancement of heat transfer, but determining
which strategies attain maximal heat transfer overall is an intriguing and open
question. In the advection-dominated limit, which can be reached by increasing
the amount of power available with which to stir, such optimal strategies
exhibit patterns remarkably similar to those from problems of "energy-driven
pattern formation" in mathematical materials science. The investigator is
developing a precise and general link between these apparently related classes
of problems, and is exploring its ramifications for the study of the scaling
laws of naturally occurring turbulent transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.