* 1812478
* RUI: Compressive Sensing and Neuronal Network Structure-Function Relationships
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Victor Barranca, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 140,301.00

The human brain is a complex network of billions of neurons whose intricate
connectivity largely determines perception and behavior. To understand brain
function, it is therefore paramount to efficiently measure and analyze neuronal
network architecture. However, measuring the connectivity of large neuronal
networks remains a challenge both experimentally and theoretically. An often
more tractable approach to reconstructing connectivity in complex networks is to
instead measure the dynamics of neurons of interest, and then use mathematical
approaches to infer the network connectivity. This project will utilize the
widespread sparsity found in brain networks to develop an efficient mathematical
framework for reconstructing neuronal connectivity from limited measurements of
neuronal dynamics. Upon accurately recovering the architecture of neuronal
networks, this project will investigate how the sparse structure of natural
stimuli impacts the early development of neuronal connectivity and what
functional implication this has in the encoding of diverse classes of sensory
signals. Analyzing the neuronal dynamics that optimally encode network
connectivity and stimulus information, this project will provide new insights
into sensory processing and abnormal brain function. In formulating novel
methodologies for processing dynamic network data, this project will inform
advances in artificial intelligence and prosthetics. This work will actively
involve undergraduate students in all phases of research, promoting
interdisciplinary scientific collaboration and deepening the scope of applied
mathematics education for a diverse spectrum of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the increasing prevalence of network models
in the mathematical sciences, accurately measuring network structure and
understanding its relationship with network function is of broad scientific
importance. In neuroscience in particular, efficiently measuring large-scale
brain connectivity and determining its impact on cognitive function is
inherently challenging yet fundamental in characterizing the nature of
computation in the brain. This project will formulate a novel framework for the
reconstruction and characterization of neuronal connectivity by taking advantage
of the widespread network sparsity found in the brain and utilizing recent
advances in compressive-sensing (CS) theory. Key facets of the project are to:
(1) develop a novel CS-based mean-field approach for efficiently reconstructing
sparse connections in physiological neuronal networks based on underlying input-
output mappings embedded in the nonlinear network dynamics; (2) analyze the role
of the balanced network operating regime in CS reconstruction of recurrent
network connectivity; (3) investigate the basis for structural motifs in the
visual system through supervised learning of neuronal connectivity aimed at
optimized compressive encoding of sparse visual stimuli; and (4) characterize
the functional role of receptive field structure in the encoding of natural
scenes through compressive network dynamics and the manifestation of related
deficiencies in processing non-natural scenes, such as illusory images. This
work will underline how the network dynamical regime impacts the inference of
structural connectivity and network inputs from neuronal dynamics, improving the
scale over which neuronal connectivity can be determined and providing novel
insights into abnormal information processing in the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.