* 1812318
* Hot Quarks 2018: A Workshop on The Physics of Ultrarelativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions for Young Scientists Texel Island, Netherlands Sept. 9-15, 2018.
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Sevil Salur, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2019
* USD 5,000.00

This award supports early career scientists to attend and participate in the
"Hot Quarks 2018: A Workshop on the Physics of Ultrarelativistic Nucleus-Nucleus
Collisions for Young Scientists." The quark gluon plasma, predicted by Quantum
Chromo-Dynamics, has been observed through measurements at Brookhaven National
Laboratory and the CERN Super Proton Synchrotron, but fully understanding the
nature of this collective state of matter remains elusive. The scientific scope
of this field has broadened significantly with new measurements and theoretical
developments. The discussions in this workshop will include an interdisciplinary
combination of concepts from elementary-particle physics, nuclear physics, QCD
thermodynamics, hydrodynamics, non-equilibrium transport theory and the
application of AdS/CFT techniques to the phenomenology of heavy-ions
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this workshop is to enhance the
scientific communication among the younger members, particularly graduate
students, postdocs and junior faculty, both from experiment and theory. For
early career scientists, this represents an opportunity for exchange and
exposure to science that that they might not have in one of the major big
conferences. The organizers have a history of recruiting widely to broaden the
participation of under-represented groups in nuclear
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.