* 1812103
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Allie Graham, Graham                  Allie          M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The broad
objective of this research project is to understand how coastal marine organisms
cope with stressful environmental conditions, specifically situations of
extremely low oxygen (hypoxia). The Fellow will perform this project with a
common tidepool crustacean, the copepod Tigriopus californicus, which live in
tidepools all along the Pacific Coast of the U.S., from Southern California to
Alaska, and are subject to potential variation in oxygen content availability.
One of the objectives of the project is to compare the different populations
with regards to how tolerant they are to hypoxia and then to perform genetic and
biochemical analyses to understand which genes are responsible for their
physiological differences. Determining the diverse mechanisms that an organism
uses to cope with hypoxia will aid in better understanding this fundamental
biological constraint. In addition, these experiments will help elucidate the
role of interactions between the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes in the
process of population divergence, potentially providing insights on conservation
biology, medicine, and understanding the sources of new species and
biodiversity. The Fellow will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups by coordinating various research and training activities between the
Department of Integrative Biology at Oregon State University (OSU), the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program at OSU, Oregon
Alliance for Minority Participation (OR-AMP), and OSU's Center for Genome
Research and Biocomputing (CGRB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will use
functional genomic, transcriptomic, and biochemical tools to characterize the
pathways and genes underlying mechanisms of adaptation to low-oxygen
environments in the intertidal copepod Tigriopus californicus. This research
tackles several questions: (1) Is there variation in hypoxia tolerance among
geographically isolated populations? (2) Which cellular pathways are involved in
hypoxia response and do they overlap with pathways associated with temperature
stress? and, (3) To what extent are adaptations to hypoxia connected to rapid
nuclear-mitochondrial coevolution in Tigriopus? To promote participation of
groups underrepresented in biology, the Fellow will fully integrate
underrepresented minority students into all stages of research endeavors. In
addition, the Fellow will coordinate with well-established programs, such as
LSAMP and OR-AMP, to develop and run short-workshop activities aimed at training
OSU students from minority backgrounds on multiple aspects of scientific
research, including the importance of basic research, how to apply to graduate
school, as well as basic techniques in bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.