* 1812654
* Collaborative Research: The DAMIC-M Detector to Search for Light Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Paolo Privitera, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,484,325.00

There is strong cosmological and astrophysical evidence for cold dark matter as
a major constituent of the universe. A compelling explanation is the existence
of hitherto unknown Weakly-Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs), and a world-
wide experimental effort is on-going to test this hypothesis. The nature of Dark
Matter (DM), so far elusive, constitutes one of the most fundamental questions
in science. Its discovery as a yet unknown particle would have profound
implications in our understanding of the universe, and open new directions in
particle physics and cosmology. This project focuses on the DAMIC-M (Dark Matter
In CCDs) experiment, which will search beyond the heavy WIMP paradigm by
detecting nuclear recoils and electrons induced by light DM in charge-coupled
devices (CCDs). The one-kg detector will be installed at the Laboratoire
Souterrain de Modane, France by an international collaboration. This award
provides US support for the construction of the DAMIC-M
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immersive research experiences, engagement of the
local community and innovative partnerships will bring DM science to formal and
informal audiences. Research experiences developed in collaboration with
programs focused on underrepresented groups - e.g., U. Chicago and Fisk-
Vanderbilt Bridge, the Community College Transfer Program at U. Washington -
will enhance diversity at the graduate and undergraduate levels. The local
community will be broadly engaged in Chicago by integrating high school URM
students of the Space Explorers Program and of the STEM Science Inquiry and
Research program in a stimulating research environment, by enhancing the RISE
program for URM middle-school students and by communicating science to older
adults via the Life-long Learning program; in the Pacific Northwest by engaging
science school teachers in research at U. Washington through the Partners in
Science program. DM science will reach broad and diverse audiences through
partnerships with the Adler Planetarium, in particular with the high-impact
(50,000 visitors/yr) Adler Astronomy Conversations program, where scientists
interact directly with museum visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this novel and
unconventional use of CCDs, which are commonly employed for digital imaging in
astronomical telescopes, the ionization charge will be detected in the most
massive CCDs ever built with exquisite spatial resolution. The crucial
innovation in these devices is the non-destructive, repetitive measurement of
the pixel charge, which results in the high-resolution detection of a single
electron and unprecedented sensitivity to light DM (~ eV energies are enough to
free an electron in silicon). By counting individual charges in a detector with
extremely low leakage current - a combination unmatched by any other DM
experiment - DAMIC-M will take a leap forward of several orders of magnitude in
the exploration of the hidden sector, a jump that may be rewarded by
serendipitous discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.