* 1812948
* CAREER: Understanding the Printability of Liquid Metal Dispersions for Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Rebecca Kramer-Bottiglio, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2021
* USD 404,894.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will investigate an
additive manufacturing process using liquid metal. This work has the potential
to enable a new class of stretchable electronic devices to serve as platforms
for soft robotics, safe human-machine interaction, active orthotics, wearable
interfaces, or assistive medical devices for motion aid, prolonged endurance,
and health-monitoring. In this research program, stretchable composite materials
with electronic functionality will be created by printing liquid-metal traces in
elastic polymers. The composite materials are expected to retain the function of
rigid metal conductors while leveraging the highly deformable properties of the
plastic matrix. The work will focus on the fundamental problems surrounding the
processing of liquid metal in order to develop a scalable manufacturing process.
The educational and outreach activities include the development of a low-cost,
accessible, and scalable soft robot designed for middle- and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing with liquid-metal
dispersions will bridge the gap between well-established scalable liquid
processing, such as printing, and the processing of emerging soft functional
materials that exhibit high surface tension, viscosity, and density properties
that typically preclude printability. The research objective of this project is
to derive and validate the fundamental electromechanical behavior of liquid-
metal dispersions during synthesis, deposition, and coalescence. The mechanical
response of liquid-metal through these three processing phases will be coupled
to its bulk electrical response using experiments, theories, and numerical
models across different length scales. This grant will enable a fundamental
understanding of the basic principles underlying scalable materials processing
for soft electromechanical systems and will significantly improve our ability to
design soft machines that deform, react to their environment, and adapt.