* 1812421
* Precision Experiments at Jefferson Lab to Study Specific Electromagnetic Properties of Hadrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ashot Gasparian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 553,035.00

This award supports two high-profile projects: the high precision determination
of the proton charge radius and the measurement of the probability for an eta-
meson (one of the light elementary particles that interact through the strong
force) to decay into two photons. The visible Universe consists mostly of
protons; therefore understanding the proton's properties is one of the important
tasks of contemporary nuclear physics. Fundamental symmetries and, most
importantly, the ways in which these symmetries are broken, define the physical
properties of the eta-meson. These properties, although very critical for the
formation of the visible matter, are rather small and require high precision
state-of-the-art experiments to be able to "look back" at the early stages of
the development of our Universe. Under this award one undergraduate, one
graduate student and one postdoctoral fellow will be trained in highly
multidisciplinary experimental nuclear physics. This award will broaden the
participation of under-represented groups in STEM, in that the majority of
students at the PI's institution are African American. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
the past many decades consistent results on the proton charge radius have been
obtained between electron-proton scattering and traditional hydrogen
spectroscopic measurements. However, recent ultra-high precision measurements of
this quantity performed with a novel muonic-hydrogen spectroscopic method gave
results up to eight-standard deviations smaller than the average value from all
previous experiments. This clear discrepancy triggered what is now known as the
"proton radius puzzle". The goal of the PRad experiment is to determine the
proton charge radius to 0.5% precision. The projected accuracy of the eta --&gt;
2 gamma decay width will significantly impact the eta-meson sector of the
Particle Physics Group (PDG) by significantly improving the rest of eta-partial
decay widths. As a result, it will critically improve the light quark mass ratio
in a direct and mostly model independent way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.