* 1812449
* Workshop: Towards Rigorous Verification &amp; Validation of Predictive Computational Models in Mechanics of Materials; New York, New York; July 27, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 95,830.00

This grant provides financial support for the workshop entitled: Towards
Rigorous Verification &amp; Validation of Predictive Computational Models in
Mechanics of Materials to be held on July 27, 2018 in New York, New York. As the
role of predictive computational modeling for reducing time and cost of new
mechanical structures, materials systems, and manufacturing technologies
continues to grow, the concomitant use of verification and validation (V&amp;V)
as part of the modeling process has not kept pace. Verification ensures that the
computational model accurately represents the underlying mathematical model and
its solution, whereas validation determines the degree to which the
computational model represents physical reality within the intended scope of the
model. Therefore, V&amp;V is a crucial cog in maintaining the viability and
advantages of predictive modeling, which in turn advances U.S. national security
and economic competitiveness, and potentially improves the quality of life,
health, and well-being of the society. In this workshop, pathways that
facilitate more accurate and advanced predictive modeling and simulation through
V&amp;V will be discussed. It is also expected that it will serve as the avenue
to foster improved, meaningful collaborations among modelers and
experimentalists from the stakeholder communities. Funding from this grant will
support planning activities, production of a report, and travel of invited
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this one-day workshop, leading experts in
the mechanics of materials, materials science and engineering, manufacturing,
mathematics, and related disciplines will convene in an interactive setting to
discuss ways to stimulate strong progress towards widespread experimental
validation (and mathematical verification) of predictive models and to provide
recommendations for specific actionable next steps. The intent is for these
tactical recommendations to start galvanizing the community, and provide staging
points for future efforts. Outcomes of the project will also include
recommendations for knowledge and tool development that are expected to provide
opportunities not only for practitioners, but also for students, postdoctoral
researchers, and educators. All findings will be captured in a final report that
will be disseminated across academia, government, and industry.