* 1812648
* LOUIS STOKES B2B ALLIANCE: Metro Denver STEM Alliance - Strengthening URM Student Pathways to College &amp; Careers
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Nicole Lacroix, Community College of Aurora
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,499,951.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Metro Denver STEM
Alliance (MDSA), a LSAMP Bridge to the Baccalaureate Alliance project led by the
Community College of Aurora and in partnership with four community colleges -
Arapahoe Community College, Community College of Denver, Front Range Community
College, and Red Rocks Community College - was formed in response to the need
for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and
is particularly acute in the State of Colorado. MDSA will build on research-
based models which have proven successful in improving degree completion
outcomes for underrepresented minority (URM) STEM students through a focus on
engagement, capacity building and continuity. This focus supports the National
Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly
inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy
of all citizens." In support of the focus, the Alliance will engage targeted
students in STEM exposure, career and degree planning activities; enhance
students' capacity to apply STEM knowledge and skills through project-based
learning, hands-on workshops, and undergraduate research experiences; and
promote students' continuity through accelerated math remediation, STEM degree
progress tracking and coaching, and four-year STEM baccalaureate transfer
support. The Alliance will result in systemic support to URM students from their
entrance into community college, throughout their foundational STEM coursework,
and to four-year institution transfer, with ultimate engagement in a successful
STEM career. Each strategy adopted by the Alliance is based on best practices
for cultivating students' knowledge, skills, and transfer readiness, and
informed by an equity approach in which the partner institutions recognize the
need to create the conditions in which URM students can
succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.