* 1812796
* CHS: Small: Higher-Order Monte Carlo Samples for Computer Graphics Rendering
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Wojciech Jarosz, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 494,628.00

As computer graphics rendering becomes more realistic, it is increasingly
critical to our economy, safety, and daily lives: from diagnosing illnesses, to
self-driving cars, and to designing, visualizing and manufacturing products.
These application domains are fueled by rendering algorithms which simulate how
light sources emit photons that then scatter around in a scene before making
their way into a camera (or our eyes) to form a virtual image. Unfortunately,
the number of such photons that even the fastest computers are able to simulate
is so tiny in comparison to nature that rendering high-quality images remains an
incredibly time-consuming enterprise. This project will develop new ways of
expressing numerical light transport simulations which are not restricted to
operate in direct analogy to nature, thereby generalizing a broad range of
rendering algorithms used in computer graphics so they can operate more
efficiently. Project outcomes will transform the field by fundamentally changing
the definition of Monte Carlo integration, and by providing a suite of new tools
to design, implement, and analyze such algorithms, with far-reaching and broad
impact on applications such as those mentioned above and many others. An
integrated educational and outreach program will leverage ubiquitous familiarity
with light to teach otherwise abstract mathematical and physical concepts to
students from diverse educational and socio-economic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and efficient light transport
simulation has always been a central problem of computer graphics, and it
continues to be challenging because the currently prevailing Monte Carlo (MC)
algorithms operate in direct analogy to nature by randomly point-sampling paths
from the light to the sensor. While intuitive, these algorithms are too slow
because each sample contributes little to the answer so that many samples are
required, but even the fastest computers cannot hope to compete with the
computational speed of nature in the foreseeable future. This project will
address that challenge by: establishing a generalized theory of MC integration
enabling new rendering algorithms that simulate light more efficiently than
nature by leveraging higher-order samples such as lines (1D), planes (2D), and
beyond (nD); by developing the necessary tools to analyze and optimally leverage
such samples in general MC integration; and by applying these benefits to
inverse light transport problems. Project outcomes will have far-reaching impact
in all application domains relying on computer graphics rendering, as well as in
other fields that rely on MC integration and physically based light transport in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.