* 1812789
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Intersectional Relationship between Mathematics and Computing Identities for Black Girls and Women
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Nicole Joseph, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 10/31/2019
* USD 10,937.00

This project will conduct a two-day workshop examining black girls' and women's
mathematics and computing identities. The goals of the workshop are to 1)
explore the intersectional experiences of black girls and women in math and
computer science (CS), 2) begin to understand how math and CS identities relate
and inform each other, 3) start understanding factors that lead black women to
study math and CS in college, and 4) establish a more extensive research agenda
around these issues. The workshop will bring together thought leaders to examine
the trajectories of success for black girls and women in mathematics and CS. The
results of this workshop will inform the national dialogue in support of
broadening participation in both computing and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions of the workshop address the
need to increase the diversity of ideas and perspectives in computer science and
mathematics, particularly for black women. This workshop will go beyond simply
adding to the discourse for the need to increase diversity in these disciplines
by 1) actively investigating research to differentiate the experiences of black
women from other groups in computing and mathematics, 2) providing a critical
analysis of the conditions under which black girls and women thrive, 3) actively
investigating the relationship between computer science and mathematics through
both curricular and experiential lenses, and 4) engaging black girls and women
to articulate the experiences that differentiate them from other groups in
computing and mathematics. The organizers will create and distribute an article
describing the workshop, its enactment and the findings that emerge from the
discussion and interaction. They will also develop a videography of black girls
and women sharing how their personal experiences affect their math and CS
identities as well as their interest and persistence in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.