* 1812314
* Precision Measurements and Fundamental Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 931,259.00

The research supported by this award will test precise Standard Model
predictions and can provide solid signals of new physics by 1) measuring the
magnetic signature of the muon, an exotic elementary particle that is produced
in abundance at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory and 2) studying the
detailed behavior of neutrons as they decay. This work addresses the deepest
questions that we can ask: what is matter made of, how did it come to be, and
how does it interact. At the same time this work addresses the technical demands
of the two experiments by pushing the limits of magnetic field measurements.
Many potential additional applications of these techniques may be extended into
biology, neuroscience and medicine. This research provides challenging research
projects for graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Michigan.
A diverse cohort of graduate students are working on aspects of this research
and will join former students in contributing to the National interest as
teachers, researchers in physics and biomedical fields and leaders in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of advancing two precision
measurements: the muon magnetic moment anomaly g - 2 and the beta-neutrino
asymmetry parameter in neutron decay. These address the deepest question in
elementary particle and nuclear physics, namely what lies beyond the Standard
Model, by putting precise predictions to the test in systems most sensitive to
new physics. This University of Michigan group is contributing to the Fermilab
Muon g-2 experiment, which is completing the first production data run with the
goal of equaling the experimental precision of the previous measurement with
much better control and understanding of the systematic errors, and preparing
for the upcoming data runs with the goal of improving the experimental precision
by a factor of four. More specifically, the group has developed critical
innovations for precision measurement of the magnetic field and its absolute
calibration, and innovations in the most challenging aspect of the analysis of
the field-measurement data, namely interpolating between calibration runs to
track changes in the magnetic field and its spatial variations. The group will
also complete commissioning and begin Nab, a new precision measurement of the
beta-neutrino asymmetry parameter a in neutron decay that also probes physics
Beyond the Standard Model by way of redundantly measuring the parameter lambda,
the ratio of axial vector to vector coupling constants, which is also determined
by the beta asymmetry (A). The neutron spin flipper designed and built at
Michigan has been moved to the Fundamental Neutron Physics Beam (FNPB) at the
SNS at ORNL. This will be used in determining the residual neutron beam
polarization that would present a major systematic correction to the
measurements. The He-3 magnetometer for absolute calibration developed and built
by this group is fully operational, has sensitivity of sub ppb (part-per-
billion) and will potentially impact precision magnetic field measurements from
geology to medicine to physics. This research will continue to seed a number of
outreach opportunities including public lectures on physics and its
applications, undergraduate course development, lectures for specialist students
such as the National Nuclear Physics Summer schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.