* 1812968
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Automatically Enhancing Quality of Social Communication Channels to Support Software Developers and Improve Tool Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kostadin Damevski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Social communication channels (e.g., Stack Overflow, Slack, and GitHub) play an
increasingly important role in software developer productivity, as developers
use these channels to collaborate and coordinate activities. Researchers have
shown additional value in mining information from these sources to develop and
improve recommendation systems, software integrated development environments,
and other tools. Users of these systems complain about the varying and often
poor quality of the information shared on these channels despite the intrinsic
mechanisms for maintaining quality (e.g., voting, accepted answers). This
project aims to address the need for automation in curating for increased
quality of the information shared in developer communication channels. The
envisioned system uses multiple software developers' social communication
channels as parallel sources of evidence to establish quality of information in
each channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the state of
the art by tackling three major challenges to bring automated curation of
developer communication into practical use. The first aim is to develop analyses
for automatically determining and improving the quality of developers'
interactive communications on social media sites with regard to quality concerns
including poor software properties, obsolescence, contradictions, unreliable
sources, and duplication. The second aim is to explore different feedback
mechanisms to indicate quality findings back to the communities. Third, the
project will develop techniques to customize quality measurement and feedback to
a particular developer's context. The resulting tools, data sets, and
experimental infrastructure developed as part of the project will be released,
enabling other researchers and practitioners to build on the project's results
and ultimately advance the quality of the modern software development
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.