* 1812747
* Harnessing Machine Learning to Study the Life Cycle of Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stella Offner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2022
* USD 370,333.00

Stars like our Sun are born in large clouds of gas that usually produce
thousands of stars at once. As the stars form, they add energy back into their
environment ('feedback') and influence the birth gas cloud. This feedback
appears as fast-moving gas, which sometimes looks like large bubbles. The data
are complex, so identifying feedback is difficult. Typically, astronomers have
found the feedback "by eye", which is subjective and time-consuming. A new field
of computer science, machine learning, provides an alternative approach to find
feedback. In machine learning, computer algorithms are trained to identify
features in the same way the human brain recognizes objects - like cats, dogs
and cars. The investigator's group will use state-of-the-art models of forming
stars to train machine learning algorithms to find feedback. They will apply the
algorithms to telescope observations and compare with the feedback sources
previously found by humans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will share
the models with the public through the Milky Way project, which is an online
astronomy program that trains people to identify feedback in telescope images of
gas clouds. The program will also train students in research techniques,
including undergraduates from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal addresses a fundamental star formation question: How much mass and
energy is associated with stellar feedback in the interstellar medium? To answer
this question, the PI and collaborators will use magnetohydrodynamic simulations
of forming stars, for which full feedback information is known, to train machine
learning algorithms to identify and quantify feedback. Dust and molecular line
'synthetic observations' will be produced and used together with observational
data as a training set. The investigators will compare the machine learning
identifications to prior visually identified feedback catalogs, including those
from the citizen-science Milky Way Project, create an updated census, and
publicly release the algorithm and data to the community. The broader impact
objectives are to increase public participation in the Milky Way Project,
develop a WorldWide Telescope tour on feedback, and train students, including
undergraduates in the Texas Astronomy Undergraduate Research experience for
Under-Represented Students (TAURUS) summer program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.