* 1812008
* Quantum Invariants and Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tian Yang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,268.00

Quantum physics has profoundly changed the world in the last 120 years. Its
impact on mathematics is also deep. This National Science Foundation funded
project aims to relate the geometry of the three-dimensional space to quantum
physics. The affirmative resolution of the problems in the project will benefit
our understanding of our three-dimensional universe. This project is at the
nexus of two areas of mathematics, known as quantum topology and geometric
topology. Being one of the few experts in both these areas, the investigator
plans to use techniques from one to shed new light on the other.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Kashaev's Volume Conjecture, Witten's Asymptotic Expansion Conjecture
and their generalizations assert that the asymptotic behavior of certain quantum
invariants of a 3-manifold provides topological and geometric information of the
manifold. Among various generalizations of Kashaev's and Witten's conjectures,
the recent one by Qingtao Chen and the PI on the Turaev-Viro invariants and
their relationship with the hyperbolic volume of the 3- manifold attracts
massive attention from the experts. In this project, the PI plans to study the
asymptotic behavior of the Turaev-Viro invariants by studying the asymptotic
behavior of their building blocks, the quantum 6j-symbols, and the geometry that
guides the assembling of the building blocks. A key ingredient is the rigidity
of hyperbolic cone metrics developed by the PI and a collaborator. In a related
project the PI will attempt to solve a conjecture of Andersen, Masbaum and Ueno
(AMU) which asserts that the quantum representations detect the Nielson-Thurston
classifications of the mapping classes of a surface. Recently, the PI and a
collaborator realized that the AMU conjecture is an immediate consequence of a
weaker version of the conjecture by Chen and the PI. Their approach could settle
the weaker version of the conjecture, and thereby solve the AMU
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.