* 1812151
* RUI: Study of the Nucleon Structure Using Deeply Virtual Compton Scattering at Jefferson Lab.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Angela Biselli, Fairfield University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 148,413.00

Understanding the structure of the nucleon has been the focus of many scientists
for decades. Over the past 40 years there has been a tremendous theoretical and
experimental advancement that brought us to the discovery of quarks as
fundamental bricks of matter and the laws that govern their interactions. The
generalized parton distributions (GPDs) are theoretical tools used to describe
hadrons (particles that are made from quarks and gluons) in terms of their
constituents. These distributions give fully correlated quark information in
both coordinate and momentum space, allowing access to crucial properties such
as the angular momentum distribution of quarks in the nucleon and explaining how
quarks contribute to the overall properties of nucleons such as their electric
and axial charge. This project will focus on experiments at Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) in Newport News, VA using the
recently upgraded Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) large
acceptance spectrometer (CLAS12). Jefferson lab with its "intermediate" energies
is a unique facility to explore the region sensitive to the valence quarks, and
the large acceptance CLAS12 detector will allow the extraction of GPDs over
large kinematic ranges. The PI of this proposal is a co-spokesperson of three
experiments aimed to extraction of GPDs. The PI will take an active role in the
data taking at Jefferson Lab and will contribute to the data reduction and
analysis. Undergraduate students will be involved in this project and in
addition to gaining experience in data analysis in particle physics, they will
develop broader skills, such as coding and
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cleanest way to access GPDs is
via deeply virtual Compton scattering (DVCS), where the virtual photon interacts
with a single quark of the nucleon radiating a real photon. At leading twist,
the soft process is described by four chiral-even GPDs: the quark-helicity
independent, H, E and the quark helicity dependent H-tilde and E-tilde. The
focus of this project is to measure target and beam asymmetries and cross
sections for the DVCS with proton and neutron targets. These observables on
different nucleons have unique sensitivity to a subset of the four GPDs, and
their simultaneous determination allows for a comprehensive extraction of GPDs
for the proton and neutron and flavor decomposition. In September 2018, the
unpolarized proton target run will start, providing a significant amount of
additional production data. Experiments on the neutron target and the polarized
proton target are expected to run in the next three years. Fairfield University
will contribute to the physics analysis and other aspects of the data reduction
such as quality tests, calibration and software development. In addition to the
work on the new data, as it becomes available, Fairfield University will
continue to complete simulation work in preparation to the upcoming experiments
to study the optimal configuration of the detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.