* 1812377
* A Program of Medium Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Douglas Beck, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 7,843,321.00

It is now a well-established fact that nucleons, protons and neutrons, particles
that make up the vast majority of the visible matter in the Universe, are made
up of more elementary particles called quarks. The main physics program
supported by this grant is to measure how quarks are distributed in nucleons. In
this quark form of matter, energy and mass are traded back and forth on short
timescales according to the famous E = mc2. Particular questions that will help
us to understand this essential feature of quark matter include: How is the
magnetism of the nucleon constructed? What is the role of anti-matter in the
nucleon? What happens when the temperature inside a nucleon is increased to a
high value? Does the motion of the quarks inside the nucleon look the same as
one moves forward or backward in time? The goal of these experiments is to
compare with theoretical predictions from the so-called Standard Model of
Particle Physics, both to better understand it, as well as to look for signs of
new phenomena that are not described by it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing
theory of the strong force, quantum chromodynamics or QCD, is a generalization
of the highly successful quantum electrodynamics QED, yet we are hard-pressed to
provide truly QCD-based quantitative or intuitive descriptions of nucleon
structure. This project will focus on investigating key properties of the
proton, targeting the poorly measured sea quarks and the unknown orbital motion
of the quarks. The strong force also played a role at the beginning of time. In
the early stages of the big bang, the quark-gluon plasma (QGP) existed for an
instant, before the strong force confined the quarks into bound states. This
fleeting state of matter has been recreated in the laboratory and found to
possess extraordinary properties, such as a viscosity so low that it may be at
its theoretical minimum. This grant enables continued study of the QGP's
properties using fully reconstructed jets at ATLAS and correlations in small
collision systems at sPHENIX. This QCD research will comprise four experiments:
SeaQuest at Fermilab, COMPASS-II and ATLAS at the European Cernter for Nuclear
Research (CERN) as well as, in the future, sPHENIX at Brookhaven. This award
also supports a search for a permanent electric dipole moment (EDM) of the
neutron, a CP-violating quantity. The nEDM experiment aims at a 100-fold
improvement over the present upper limit of the EDM set by previous
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research efforts will contribute to the
education of postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates in a broad array of
skills needed in the advanced high tech workforce. The research program also
includes a number of outreach activities: summer programs for undergraduates
from smaller institutions, and for local high school students from
underrepresented groups, along with leadership of a program of weekly public
presentations, a public course in energy and sustainability and a popular
website exploring the physics of baseball.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.