* 1812794
* Collaborative Research: Design and Development of a K-12 STEM Observation Protocol
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Ring-Whalen, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 139,049.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will design and develop a new K-12 classroom observation
protocol for integrated STEM instruction (STEM-OP). The STEM-OP will be
developed for use in K-12 STEM settings. While the importance of integrated STEM
education is established, there remains disagreement on models and effective
approaches for integrated STEM instruction. This issue is confounded by the lack
of observation protocols sensitive to integrated STEM teaching and learning to
inform research to the effectiveness of new models and strategies. Existing
instruments were not developed for use in integrated STEM learning environments.
The STEM-OP will be designed to be used effectively by multiple stakeholders in
a variety of contexts. Researchers will benefit from having the STEM-OP
available for them to carry out research and continue to improve STEM education
in a variety of ways. Existing instruments were not developed for use in
integrated STEM learning environments. The STEM-OP and associated training
materials will be available for use by other education stakeholders, such as
K-12 teachers and district administrators, through a publicly available online
platform. In brief, the STEM-OP will inform the instruction of integrated STEM
in many contexts with the goal of improving integrated STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary product of this project is the new
observation protocol called STEM-OP for K-12 classrooms implementing integrated
STEM lessons. The project will use over 500 integrated STEM classroom videos to
design the STEM-OP. Using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis, the
STEM-OP will be a valid and reliable instrument for use in a variety of
educational contexts. The research will explore the different ways that
elementary, middle, and high school science teachers enact integrated STEM
instruction. This study will shed light on the nature of STEM instruction in
each of these grade bands and provide information building towards an
understanding of learning progressions for engineering practices across grade
bands. Research exploring how the nature of STEM integration changes from day to
day over the course of a unit will provide critical information about the
different sequencing and trajectories of STEM units. Examining how integrated
STEM instruction unfolds over a full unit of instruction will inform the
understanding of integrated STEM practices at both micro- and macro- levels of
analysis. The STEM-OP and associated training materials will be available for
use by other education stakeholders, such as K-12 teachers and district
administrators, through a publicly available, which will be distributed via a
publicly available, online platform that includes a training manual and
classroom video for practice scoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.