* 1812431
* New Directions in High Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Rainer Fries, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,945.00

Among the four fundamental forces in nature the strong nuclear force stands out
for being the least understood one. It drives many processes in the universe
that are crucial for our existence. One particularly important aspect of the
strong nuclear force is the existence of quark gluon plasma. If ordinary matter
is heated up to temperatures of about 1,000,000,000,000 degrees, hotter than the
core of the sun, atoms and molecules cease to exist and even protons and
neutrons inside atomic nuclei melt. The remaining primordial soup of quarks and
gluons filled the very early universe. We can recreate quark gluon plasma in our
largest particle colliders by smashing heavy nuclei into each other.
Experimental programs at the Large Hadron Collider in Europe and the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider in the USA study the properties of quark gluon
plasma. This project will support research that will improve our understanding
of the formation and properties of quark gluon plasma in nuclear collisions. The
PI and his collaborators will use computer simulations and advanced statistical
methods to reach this goal. Funding is provided to support training for a
graduate students and junior scientists in nuclear
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quark gluon plasma in nuclear collisions emerges
from the highly complex gluon fields that are initially created in nuclear
collisions. The PI and his group will investigate these fields and their
properties by studying how angular momentum of the droplets of quark gluon
plasma is related to the initial angular momentum of the colliding nuclei. The
same gluon fields will also be studied through their interaction with fast
quarks. The PI and his group will be able to use the JETSCAPE framework for
large scale computational simulations of nuclear collisions. They will study
various aspects of jets and heavy quarks being quenched in quark gluon plasma.
They will then extract properties of quark gluon plasma using multiple
constraints. For example, the strength of quenching of quarks and heavy quarks,
and the viscosity of quark gluon plasma can be independently measured and are
mutually related. Testing these relations will be an important step towards a
deeper understanding of the dynamics of quark gluon plasma. The PI and his group
will also use advanced statistical methods and machine learning applied to data
to understand the mechanisms of hadron formation from quarks and gluons. These
results will be used to improve the state-of-the-art modeling of the
hadronization process that is a crucial input to many
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.