* 1812702
* A COHERENT Next Step: Precision Measurement of CENNS Using PPC Germanium Detectors at the SNS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 364,540.00

Of all known elementary particles, neutrinos stand out for the difficulty
involved in their detection, a result of their tiny probability of interaction
with other forms of matter. Large (ton or multi-ton) detectors are typically
involved. Coherent Neutrino-Nucleus Elastic Scattering (CEnNS) is a mechanism of
neutrino interaction predicted more than four decades ago, and only recently
measured by the COHERENT collaboration. The probability of neutrino detection
via CEnNS is much larger than for any other known mode of neutrino interaction
with matter, but the signals generated are subtle and hard to isolate. It is
only through recent advances in radiation detection that it has become possible
to access these signals. CEnNS opens up the possibility of employing small,
handheld devices for neutrino detection, generating some interesting
technological applications. This award will facilitate a next step in the
investigation of this promising new type of neutrino interaction within
COHERENT, funding the construction of state-of-the-art germanium detectors to be
used at the Spallation Neutron Source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The
devices will measure CEnNS with an unprecedented precision, constraining the
many still unknown properties of the evasive neutrino, and contributing to a
refinement of the underlaying theories of particle interactions. Several aspects
of the development of these devices will apply to their planned use in nuclear
non-proliferation applications, where CEnNS can be exploited to monitor nuclear
reactors against diversion of weapons-grade material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planned measurement of the CEnNS energy spectrum will be performed in optimal
conditions of signal-to-background ratio, large statistics, sensitivity to the
full range of recoil energies, and detailed knowledge of detector response to
nuclear recoils. The latter will be achieved through past, ongoing, and planned
measurements of the germanium quenching factor for CEnNS-induced nuclear
recoils, down to sub-keV energies. The modest uncertainties expected from this
new CEnNS measurement will allow a very precise comparison to Standard Model
(SM) predictions. A significant improvement of the present experimental
sensitivity in a number of active areas of research in particle physics will
result from this comparison: for instance, the study of electromagnetic
properties of neutrinos, their non-standard couplings predicted by extensions of
the Standard Model of particle physics, tests of dark matter models, and an
improved sensitivity to a fourth sterile neutrino, to name a
few.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.