* 1812697
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Assessment of Water Quality in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Mark Hernandez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2020
* USD 88,619.00

Hurricane Maria made landfall in Puerto Rico on September 20th, 2017. This
hurricane has devastated much of the Puerto Rico's water collection, treatment,
and supply system. Given this impact, a unique and important opportunity exists
to conduct a detailed evaluation of water quality during the restoration of
potable water service. There are two main concerns regarding this restoration
effort. The first concern is regarding the water quality of the centralized
water treatment and distribution system governed by the Puerto Rico Aqueduct and
Sewer Authority (PRASA). As the system returns to full operation, there is the
potential for human pathogens, disinfection byproducts, and other organic and
heavy metal contaminants to be released into the water. Such releases have the
potential for wide-spread public health impacts. The second concern is in the
restoration of smaller scale community water supply systems that are not
associated with PRASA. Here, contamination of the source water to these small-
scale distribution systems, could also result public health impacts. The results
of this research will help to evaluate potential health impacts, potentially
identify sources of contamination, and help communities understand how to better
protect the water supply.

The main objective of this RAPID proposal is to conduct a systematic survey and
evaluation of water quality in several Puerto Rican potable water systems,
focusing on both chemical and microbiological components. The main outcome from
this project will be a point-of-use water quality retrospective of the near-term
aftermath of Hurricane Maria, including an analysis of potential relationships
between the chemistry and microbiology compromised water treatment and
distribution systems. The proposed research will provide information on
potential relationships chemical and microbiological agents in a seriously
compromised tropical setting. Given the scope of water samples collected, this
project will the engineering community to better understand water related
exposures relevant to public health.