* 1812739
* Constraining Cosmological Parameters with Galaxy Cluster Phase Spaces
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Christopher Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2023
* USD 382,882.00

In 1914, Einstein brought forth his foundations for General&lt;br/&gt;Relativity
(GR) to explain gravity using the geometry of space and&lt;br/&gt;time.
Einstein's GR ushered in the beginning of a new scientific&lt;br/&gt;paradigm
shift for the science of the origin and evolution of the&lt;br/&gt;universe
("Cosmology"). This is now a golden age, similar to the&lt;br/&gt;centuries
around Plato, Copernicus and Newton, and we are privileged&lt;br/&gt;to be
witnesses to this paradigm shift in real-time. All
scientific&lt;br/&gt;paradigms go through a long period of intense testing, as
the data and&lt;br/&gt;the scientific methods push the theory to its limits. The
Universe is&lt;br/&gt;so vast that there are physical scales on which GR should
apply, but&lt;br/&gt;which have been difficult to test. Consider clusters of
galaxies,&lt;br/&gt;which are the largest gravitationally bound objects in the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;Clusters entrap galaxies on scales of tens of millions of
light years&lt;br/&gt;(i.e, 100 times larger than our own Milky Way). Does
Einstein's GR&lt;br/&gt;still apply over such large distances in space-
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The escape velocity from a galaxy cluster is a
combination of the&lt;br/&gt;local Newtonian gravitational potential and the
acceleration of the&lt;br/&gt;expansion of the Universe. Weak lensing mass
profiles of clusters can&lt;br/&gt;be used to predict the escape velocity
profile from the gravitational&lt;br/&gt;Newtonian component and cosmology. This
joint analysis provides a new&lt;br/&gt;direct avenue to constrain the dynamics
of the expanding Universe and&lt;br/&gt;can simultaneously test GR and our
standard Lambda CDM cosmological&lt;br/&gt;paradigm, time evolving dark energy,
Chameleon gravity, and more. We&lt;br/&gt;will use the Michigan Magellan Fiber
System (M2FS) to collect 100-200&lt;br/&gt;galaxy cluster member spectra for
escape velocities of clusters within&lt;br/&gt;the Dark Energy Survey (DES)
footprint. We will directly compare the&lt;br/&gt;weak-lensing predicted escape
velocity profiles to the observed&lt;br/&gt;profiles from the M2FS data in a
likelihood analysis. Given a Hubble&lt;br/&gt;constant prior, this probe can
achieve similar or better precision on&lt;br/&gt;the dark energy equation of
state parameters compared to supernovae or&lt;br/&gt;the
CMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.