* 1812461
* Collaborative Research: Dark Matter and Substructure in the Galactic Halo with Gaia and Multi-Object Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nelson Caldwell, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 14,449.00

The Galactic Halo encompasses the vast, seemingly empty volume surrounding our
home galaxy, the Milky Way. But the Halo is not so empty as it appears. A rich
variety of dwarf galaxies, stellar streams and star clusters pervade the Halo.
These structures can reveal the nature of dark matter, how heavy elements are
made, and how our Galaxy formed. This project advances the field by combining
data from large public sky surveys with new data to be obtained with state-of-
the art ground-based facilities. This project aims to identify new stellar
structures, then probe their chemistry and dynamics. The results will test
competing models of dark matter and galaxy formation. This project builds on
previous NSF investments in instrumentation and the scientific workforce. The
team will continue to operate the NSF-funded Michigan/Magellan Fiber System
(M2FS) spectrograph, enabling innovative science by other astronomers. These
activities promote science by continuing successful public outreach programs and
training the next generation of astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
scientific objectives include 1) the detection of faint and previously unknown
star clusters, dwarf galaxies, and stellar streams within the Milky Way halo; 2)
measurement of the velocities and chemical compositions of the stars within
these structures; and 3) mapping the dark matter content of these structures. To
discover new objects, the team will mine data from the Gaia space mission,
exploiting its unprecedented combination of sky coverage, precision of stellar
positions, and measurement of stellar motions. The team will use Gaia data to
identify not only new stellar structures, but also rare stars within known
structures. For all such targets, the team will use the M2FS spectrograph to
measure stellar velocities and chemical composition. Finally, the team will
combine the Gaia and M2FS data sets, exploiting the multi-dimensional
information to infer the dark matter content and chemical evolution of these
structures. These results will advance the frontiers of knowledge regarding the
nature of dark matter, the origin of heavy elements, the formation and evolution
of the smallest galaxies, and the processes that built up the stellar halo of
our own Milky Way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.