* 1812017
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Merce Ramirez, Ramirez                 Merce          D
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. A fundamental
goal in evolutionary biology is understanding how diversity in the form and
function of organisms arises. Species differences in neural circuitry, i.e.
wiring between neurons, are thought to be important for diversity in animal
behavior. But the specific molecular changes that underlie divergence of neural
circuits in different species is not known. This research aims to identify
changes in gene expression within single neurons that cause divergent
connectivity in the neural circuits underlying the swimming behaviors of two sea
slug species. The neurons, neural circuits, and behaviors of these relatively
simple animals are easily and directly comparable, making them uniquely suited
to address this question. One way that neurons are connected is through direct
electrical transmission mediated by structures called gap junctions, which are
common to all nervous systems. This project investigates how species-specific
patterns of connectivity arise, providing insight into the evolution of neural
circuits underlying behavior. During this project, the Fellow will participate
in multiple activities for broadening representation in biology, including
mentoring students from underrepresented backgrounds, and creating an
interactive, field observation based outreach module aimed at K-8 students from
surrounding communities.

The sea slugs Dendronotus iris and Melibe leonina are nudibranch molluscs that
swim using an alternating homologous left-right motion. Furthermore, the neural
circuits underlying this simple behavior are composed of homologous neurons,
which are electrically coupled in species-specific patterns. The hypothesis
being tested is that differences in expression of innexins in homologous neurons
are responsible for the species differences in neural connectivity. The Fellow
will learn a number of techniques to determine the role of innexins in species-
specific patterning of electrical synapses, including single neuron RNA
sequencing, single neuron quantitative real-time PCR, in situ hybridization and
electrophysiology combined with RNAi and injection of synthetic mRNA. The
outcomes of this project include more than 70 complete, single neuron
transcriptomes with corresponding electrophysiological recordings, an innexin
phylogeny, and in-situ hybridization to localize and compare innexin expression
between neurons within the neural circuit for each species and between
homologous neurons. The Fellow will also receive training in mentoring diverse
students and directly mentor undergraduates in the lab as part of the STEM
Ambassadors program at UMass. Finally, the Fellow will create a K-12 outreach
module called "Wonder in a drop of water", where students from local schools
will visit the UMass pond, explore invertebrate diversity using small portable
microscopes to make field observations. This outreach module will be taught by
3rd year undergraduates from STEM Ambassadors, developing their own mentorship
and leadership skills through outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.