* 1812383
* RUI: Quantum Kinetics of Neutrinos: a window on nuclear and particle astrophysics in the Early Universe and Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Chad Kishimoto, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

Neutrinos are particles that travel through the universe at the speed of light,
but very rarely interact with matter. Trillions of neutrinos pass through our
bodies every second without leaving a trace. In hot and dense astrophysical
environments, prodigious numbers of neutrinos significantly impact each other
and their environment. Here, neutrinos play an important role in energy
transport, affecting the dynamics of these environments, and in converting
protons to neutrons and vice-versa, affecting the synthesis of elements.
Therefore, understanding how neutrinos evolve is essential to addressing
intriguing topics in astrophysics, including understanding the origins of the
elements and using precise observations to elucidate fundamental physics. The PI
will train undergraduate researchers, engaging them in various skills that are
valuable across a range of 21st century careers. They will simulate numerically
the evolution of neutrinos in astrophysical environments and their concomitant
effect on their environment. This evolution is complicated by the quantum
mechanical nature of particles, interactions of neutrinos with other neutrinos,
and the high rate at which they collide. In addition to mentoring undergraduate
researchers, the PI will broaden the impact of this project by enhancing
outreach projects run by the Society of Physics Students chapter at the
University of San Diego. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
evolution of neutrinos in hot and dense astrophysical environments where
prodigious fluxes of neutrinos affect the dynamics of their environment. Here,
neutrino evolution is complicated by their nonlinear evolution due to neutrino-
neutrino interactions, their coherent, quantum mechanical behavior, and their
high scattering rates (kinetics) that influence the aforementioned effects. In
environments such as the early universe, within the first second after the Big
Bang, and the explosive end of stars' lives, this nonlinear quantum kinetic
behavior plays an important role because neutrinos transport energy over large
length scales and govern the interconversion between protons and neutrons. These
effects need to be self-consistently understood in order to better understand
the synthesis of the elements and to perform the high-precision calculations
needed to complement high-precision cosmological observations that look to use
the universe as a laboratory to study fundamental physics. The quantum kinetic
equations for neutrino evolution in astrophysical environments are known. The
goal of this project is to solve these equations in astrophysical environments
toward toward gaining a broader understanding of the nonlinear quantum kinetic
evolution of neutrino states and to elucidate the feedback of this evolution on
the astrophysical environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.