* 1812643
* I-Corps: Beacon-Enabled Smart Location-Based Service
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Yun Huang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in enabling
new location-based services by using Bluetooth low energy (BLE) beacons in
several important market verticals such as public transportation, retail, and
events management, to name just a few. BLE beacon-based software solutions can
provide low-cost location-based services in both indoor and outdoor locations,
supporting, for example, automatic foot traffic counts and location-based
product promotions. As an emerging Internet of Things (IoT) technology, BLE
beacons have the potential to become the leading proximity technology. However,
the pros and cons of using these technologies in different settings are still
not fully understood. For instance, privacy issues regarding location sharing in
public spaces can impede the adoption of these technologies. This I-Corps
project will explore implementation and commercialization opportunities of
beacon-based technologies in airports, business conferences, and retail stores.
The success of this project can help promote the adoption of this IoT technology
and result in improved efficiency in public services and enhanced quality of
people's daily lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will identify
the commercial potential for using Bluetooth low energy (BLE) beacon technology
to provide new and low-cost location-based services. A BLE beacon actively
broadcasts Bluetooth signals, which can be received by nearby Bluetooth-enabled
smartphones. Thus, mobile applications can leverage the beacons that are
installed at different locations to detect people's movements, for instance,
sensing when people enter or exit certain locations, and estimating the number
of people co-located at certain locations. Effective beacon-based solutions need
to address the following: ensure accurate movement detection when different
beacons' Bluetooth signals interfere with each other; provide a scalable service
where a large number of beacons can be supported by different mobile platforms;
and include privacy-preserving features to address people's privacy concerns.
This project will lead to a better understanding of varying requirements for
beacon-based location services and how they might be customized to potentially
service a variety of market verticals.