* 1812924
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Intersectional Relationship Between Mathematics and Computing Identities for Black Girls and Women
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Jakita Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 10/31/2020
* USD 89,063.00

This project will conduct a two-day workshop examining black girls' and women's
mathematics and computing identities. The goals of the workshop are to 1)
explore the intersectional experiences of black girls and women in math and
computer science (CS), 2) begin to understand how math and CS identities relate
and inform each other, 3) start understanding factors that lead black women to
study math and CS in college, and 4) establish a more extensive research agenda
around these issues. The workshop will bring together thought leaders to examine
the trajectories of success for black girls and women in mathematics and CS. The
results of this workshop will inform the national dialogue in support of
broadening participation in both computing and mathematics. The project was
funded by the STEM+C program, which focuses on research and development of
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching and
learning and supports research on how students learn to think computationally to
solve interdisciplinary problems in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
contributions of the workshop address the need to increase the diversity of
ideas and perspectives in computer science and mathematics, particularly for
black women. This workshop will go beyond simply adding to the discourse for the
need to increase diversity in these disciplines by 1) actively investigating
research to differentiate the experiences of black women from other groups in
computing and mathematics, 2) providing a critical analysis of the conditions
under which black girls and women thrive, 3) actively investigating the
relationship between computer science and mathematics through both curricular
and experiential lenses, and 4) engaging black girls and women to articulate the
experiences that differentiate them from other groups in computing and
mathematics. The organizers will create and distribute an article describing the
workshop, its enactment and the findings that emerge from the discussion and
interaction. They will also develop a videography of black girls and women
sharing how their personal experiences affect their math and CS identities as
well as their interest and persistence in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.