* 1812727
* CSR: Small: Middleware Technologies for Multi-Accelerator Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Michela Becchi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2023
* USD 507,896.00

Today many computing systems include, besides traditional processors, a variety
of hardware accelerators. Hardware accelerators are devices that are not suited
to run generic applications but can execute specific applications or portions of
applications significantly faster than traditional processors. Two popular
hardware accelerators are Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), which are architecturally very diverse and
provide various degrees of performance and power efficiency depending on the
application they run. The combined use of these accelerators in a computing
system, whether a single machine or a set of interconnected machines, involves
significant challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design a software layer allowing the effective use of diverse hardware
accelerators on computing systems. Specifically, this work has the following
objectives. First, the design of mapping techniques to execute applications on
the available devices transparently from the end user's perspective while
optimizing system utilization and maximizing performance (possibly under power
consumption constraints). Second, the project will design a memory unification
layer to abstract the underlying distributed memory system, while providing
programmability, performance, memory protection and applications isolation.
Third, the project will design various techniques to share FPGAs across
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a broader impact, this project aims to
facilitate the adoption of diverse accelerators on servers and compute clusters,
allowing better performance and power efficiency without increasing the
programming effort. Specifically, the combined use of GPUs and FPGAs can allow
leveraging the various strengths of these devices on a broad range of
applications with different computational patterns and resource requirements.
Further, this project aims to improve software stacks to support the Open
Computing Language framework on FPGAs. Finally, the impact will be extended by
incorporating related topics in existing courses and involving undergraduate
students in high-performance computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software
artifacts originated from this project will be stored on machines administered
by North Carolina State Electrical and Computer Engineering's Information
Technology team for a minimum of ten years. Some software artifacts will be
released in open-source and made available through North Carolina State Github
(https://github.ncsu.edu) or the investigators website. Instructional materials
will be made available through North Carolina State's WolfWare system.
Publications will be maintained and distributed by the appropriate journals and
conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.