* 1812191
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kelsey Speer, Speer                   Kelsey         F
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
studies marine invertebrates of the class Anthozoa, including reef-building
corals and sea anemones, which are in imminent danger of extinction due to
climate change. Anthozoans harbor photosynthetic algae within their body tissues
and rely on the exchange of nutrients with these 'symbionts' for survival. As
the acidity of seawater continues to increase (a phenomenon called ocean
acidification) the fate of this essential relationship becomes increasingly
uncertain. A better understanding of this biological association (or symbiosis)
at the cellular level will help scientists create more sophisticated, and
species-specific, conservation strategies. This proposal will develop cutting-
edge cell biology techniques to study Anthozoan symbiosis and understand its
susceptibility to ocean acidification. The research will use the sea anemone
Aiptasia pallida; an organism that has demonstrated excellent potential for both
cell biology research as well as science education. The Fellow will use Aiptasia
to directly engage high school and undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in climate change research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthozoans communicate
with their symbiotic algae through pH-dependent mechanisms. The master regulator
of pH homeostasis in corals is the enzyme soluble Adenylyl Cyclase (sAC).
However, the role of sAC-dependent signaling in symbiosis remains poorly
defined. A recent technical breakthrough demonstrates that DNA and protein
expression can be manipulated in Aiptasia pallida embryos. The Fellow will
exploit this technical advance to investigate how sAC dynamically regulates pH
homeostasis and symbiosis in Aiptasia. Specifically, this research will: 1.
Perform the first in vitro characterization of Anthozoan sAC. 2. Use CRISPR-Cas9
genome editing technology to silence sAC gene expression and measure whether it
is both necessary and sufficient for pH homeostasis and symbiosis. 3. Use FRET
biosensor technology to measure the temporal and spatial dynamics of sAC
signaling in live Aiptasia cells. This fellowship will provide new training for
the Fellow in the fields of marine biology, symbiosis and microscopy. Data will
be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific conferences.
Broadening participation activities will include: research activities with
freshman from a minority-serving public high school, summer research internships
for high school minority women, and active recruitment of minority
undergraduates to laboratory research positions. Educational materials will be
shared through an open-access website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.