* 1812689
* Unraveling the observational mysteries of the CGM and IGM  with non-equilibrium gas kinetics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Neal Katz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 544,492.00

We are all familiar with gas temperature: a higher temperature
implies&lt;br/&gt;more energetic atoms which we feel as heat. Gasses at the
same&lt;br/&gt;temperature have the same distribution of energies:
a&lt;br/&gt;Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. If we heat some of the
gas,&lt;br/&gt;collisions quickly re-establish the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, collisions between electrons and ions can
excite&lt;br/&gt;electronic states (in a neon sign, for example). The excitation
rates&lt;br/&gt;depend sensitively on the tails of the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;Astrophysicists use these ideas to infer the
temperatures, densities,&lt;br/&gt;and compositions of gases in the cosmos.
Observations of the&lt;br/&gt;intensity and wavelengths of the emitted photons
provide information&lt;br/&gt;about the composition and energies of the gas.
However, the gas&lt;br/&gt;density in much of the Universe is extraordinarily
low. It is so low&lt;br/&gt;that the heating and cooling times are longer than
the equilibration&lt;br/&gt;time for the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The
discrepancy from the&lt;br/&gt;thermal distribution affects radiative cooling
rates and the balance&lt;br/&gt;between ionization and recombination. This
changes our interpretation&lt;br/&gt;of observed spectra. Spectra are important
diagnostic of gas&lt;br/&gt;properties throughout the Universe. The results of
this research will&lt;br/&gt;be an improved understanding of cosmic gas for use
by all astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research projects will provide
training for graduate&lt;br/&gt;students in high-performance computing and
dynamical systems. These&lt;br/&gt;skills will translate to wide variety of STEM
careers. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;simulations will generate a number of small-
scale analyses suitable&lt;br/&gt;for undergraduate projects. We will provide
both term-time and summer&lt;br/&gt;internships for all institutions in the
5-College Consortium. This&lt;br/&gt;will help recruit and retain future STEM
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These fundamental physical issues motivated a new
collisional&lt;br/&gt;Boltzmann equation solver based on Direct Simulation Monte
Carlo&lt;br/&gt;(DSMC). Development of this code motivated new algorithms
for&lt;br/&gt;computing the multiple ionization states found in tenuous
cosmic&lt;br/&gt;plasma. The new computational method reproduces the standard
LTE&lt;br/&gt;cooling curve. But, it also tracks the non-thermal time-
dependent&lt;br/&gt;evolution of gas affected by multiple heating, cooling, and
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;processes. This novel approach promises new insight into the
exotic&lt;br/&gt;states of gas in galaxies. For example, consider the
circumgalactic&lt;br/&gt;medium (CGM). Interpreting non-thermal ionization
fractions in the&lt;br/&gt;thermal limit may yield the wrong elemental
abundances and&lt;br/&gt;unexpectedly large volumes of thermally unstable gas.
Even in the&lt;br/&gt;simple case of a hydrostatic halo, this non-thermal
distribution may&lt;br/&gt;pass through multiple CGM gas phases. This results in
an overall&lt;br/&gt;non-thermal mixture of energies and ionization fractions,
which&lt;br/&gt;impacts our understanding of gas accretion and wind processes
that&lt;br/&gt;govern star formation in galaxies. The implications are even
more&lt;br/&gt;drastic for smaller scale structures like gas clouds embedded in
a hot&lt;br/&gt;halo or for shocks. Overall, these non-thermal distributions
affect&lt;br/&gt;absorption and emission features in the optical, UV, and x-ray.
They&lt;br/&gt;alter our interpretation of quasar absorption-line and x-ray
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;In short, the proposed work will improve our core
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;non-fluid gas dynamics. This may lead to ground-
breaking solutions of&lt;br/&gt;outstanding observational
dilemmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.