* 1812201
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Robert Literman, Literman                Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Specifically,
the Fellow will develop new methods to understand how species are related. This
understanding is critical to many research areas. For example, to understand how
disease-causing bacteria and viruses are spread, we need to know which outbreaks
are similar. Biologists determine species' relationships by looking for
similarities in DNA sequences. Recent advances in DNA sequencing technology have
created lots of data to compare species; however, the relationships within
certain groups of species are still debated. The Fellow will develop methods to
filter large DNA datasets to include only subsets useful for understanding
species' relationships. This process will remove data that may be misleading.
This research will help scientists across the globe to piece together the Tree
of Life. Because "Big Data" work requires that researchers have strong
quantitative and computer skills, the Fellow will work with URI students and
faculty to develop training strategies for underrepresented biology majors to
work with biological "Big Data". Embracing inclusion and diversity at the
undergraduate level is important to combat the lack of diversity at higher
levels of research, which is critical to fostering diverse perspectives and
opportunities for all.

The Fellow will address the problem of conflicting results in estimating
species' relationships in three ways. (1) Starting with whole-genome datasets,
the Fellow will apply novel filtering methods to remove loci that fail to
resolve well-supported clades, as these loci likely carry non-historical signal.
Specifically, the Fellow will analyze data simulated under biologically-relevant
conditions, and sequence data from two clades that have been a focus of numerous
incongruous phylogenomic studies: mammals and birds. (2) The Fellow will test
historically accepted notions regarding the informativeness of different genomic
subsets (e.g. coding, non-coding, intergenic regions). (3) The Fellow will
investigate how functional annotations of loci correlate with age-specific node
resolution. To develop students' computational skills, the Fellow will lead
workshops for existing groups of underrepresented biology students at URI. These
workshops will include coding lessons that are accessible to novice students,
and highlight career / internship opportunities in "Big Data" and biological
data science. Students will engage with real biological data and problems, and
participate in team-based exercises.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.