* 1812070
* CIF: Small: Secure Quantum Communication with Limited Resources
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Walter Krawec, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 309,582.00

Developing a communication infrastructure, secure against powerful adversaries
(with potential access to advanced quantum computers and capabilities), is of
vital importance to our society. Using only classical communication, two parties
cannot establish a shared secret key (needed to securely communicate with one
another) unless some computational assumption is made on the power of the
adversary. However, by carefully using the power of quantum communication, one
can achieve unconditional security for this task. This project seeks to
understand the capabilities of quantum communication protocols where users have
only limited access to quantum functionality while an adversary has unlimited
access to such resources. These limitations on the users may be intentional (for
instance, to reduce the cost of a quantum communication device), or
unintentional (for instance, if a device malfunctions or breaks down during
operation). The work in this project will provide new theoretical results of
broad application to quantum information science and also pave the way for a
future communication infrastructure that is highly secure, practical, and robust
to device failure and cost limitations. Besides the theoretical and practical
benefits of this work, there are also impacts in this project in educational
activities and outreach efforts. The work on this project will enable
undergraduate researchers an opportunity to not only contribute to quantum
cryptographic research, but to also learn and gain insight into this important
field. The future will see a vast increase in the use of quantum technologies,
making the education of students in this field all the more
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a deeper understanding
of the theoretical foundations of secure quantum communication by discovering
and analyzing novel quantum cryptographic protocols that utilize participants
with limited quantum functionality. The research efforts involve analyzing these
limited-resource protocols in a variety of security models (including various
forms of device independence) and devise innovative methods for users, despite
having limited quantum capabilities, to counter an adversarial agent allowing
for highly secure, and efficient, communication systems, even over high-noise
channels. To achieve this, the PI will also be developing new quantum
information theoretic techniques needed to analyze these protocols in such
highly restricted setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.