* 1812675
* Collaborative Research: CESER: EAGER: "FabWave" - A Pilot Manufacturing Cyberinfrastructure for Shareable Access to Information Rich Product Manufacturing Data
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Yong Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 03/31/2020
* USD 108,625.00

Advanced manufacturing research is dependent on access to large datasets of
product models to enable product designers to learn from past errors, and to
discover and develop new solutions. However, such datasets are typically
archived in inaccessible repositories and may be poorly described and difficult
to use by others. Current manufacturing research must shift from siloed
repositories of product manufacturing data to a federated, decentralized, open
and inter-operable approach. This transformation can be achieved by embedding
cyber-capability in every physical end-point, be it on a desktop used by a
product designer or within the control systems of a manufacturing machine. The
goal of this project is to develop a pilot manufacturing-focused
cyberinfrastructure called FabWave. FabWave will gather together digital data on
product and manufacturing processes from diverse sources, in particular, three-
dimensional (3D) computer aided design (CAD) models generated by academia and
public community users, into a new rich dataset that, in turn, will be fully
accessible to manufacturing researchers and others. FabWave's system design will
be driven by the needs of the manufacturing research community, and the project
will encourage its adoption by academic users, government labs and the public.
FabWave will aim to lower the barriers for users to upload, share and download
3D product model data; it will also enable manufacturing science researchers to
gain access to an information rich dataset for testing and evaluation of
algorithms to advance manufacturing research and offer the capability for the
community to build custom apps that provide services to the community. This
infrastructure development project aligns with the NSF Harnessing Data for 21st
Century Science and Engineering Big Ideas vision and can serve to improve US
competitiveness in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The de novo
cyberinfrastructure tools to be built in the FabWave project include: 1) Direct
plugins within design software to allow easier capture of metadata and upload of
3D product models to the FabWave repository with limited human interaction; 2) a
data-store with application programming interface (API) tools to allow users to
write scripts to search through the repository for content specific to their
research questions. Innovative use of the Inter-Planetary File System (IPFS)
protocols along with next generation unstructured databases will serve to index
and enable search services for Fabwave's users. the project will demonstrate use
of FabWave for development of community facing third-party apps and libraries.
Ultimately, the research community will have access to a rich source of product
datasets created within research laboratories, within classes and through other
open sourced projects. This data network, if expanded across universities, would
accelerate advancements in cybermanufacturing, engineering systems design, and
cyber-physical systems in manufacturing. In addition, FabWave will enable new
areas of research in manufacturing information integration and informatics
combined with reducing the barriers to exploring the science of manufacturing
machine intelligence. This award is supported by the Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.