* 1812699
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Combinatorial Collaborative Clustering for Simultaneous Patient Stratification and Biomarker Identification
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Mingyuan Zhou, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,999.00

Modern high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies produce rich high-
dimensional biomedical data. When studying complex, dynamic, stochastic, and
heterogeneous life and disease systems, the dimensionality (number of features)
of samples is typically much higher than the number of samples in HTS data. Such
HTS data, while imposing significant statistical and computational challenges,
bring unique opportunities for collaborative research to translate them to
clinical precision medicine. This project will develop novel Bayesian methods
and computational tools for combinatorial collaborative clustering targeting at
two fundamental biomedical applications: tumor stratification and predictive
biomarker identification. Compared to existing black-box algorithms for tumor
stratification and biomarker identification, the proposed Bayesian combinatorial
collaborative clustering framework enables simultaneous tumor stratification and
biomarker identification for specific tumor subtypes, so that mechanistic
understanding of heterogeneity of complex diseases can be obtained. The captured
interrelationships between molecular profile patterns and disease subtypes may
provide deep insights into disease cellular mechanisms and have the potential of
developing personalized disease prognosis and therapeutic strategies. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project, together with the planned curriculum
development and outreach activities, will provide excellent training
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students, preparing them with
the quantitative skills in biomedical research with unprecedented big biomedical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of this project is the theoretic and
computational foundation of a novel Bayesian statistical framework to translate
existing large-scale publicly available biomedical datasets, such as TCGA (The
Cancer Genome Atlas) and ICGC (International Cancer Genome Consortium), to
precision (personalized) disease diagnosis and prognosis. A new class of binary
and count data analysis models will be developed for Combinatorial Collaborative
Clustering (CCC) based on modern HTS data to achieve reproducible and accurate
tumor stratification and biomarker identification. Here "combinatorial' means
that each cluster will be defined over a subset of features, which will be
selected from all possible feature combinations, via novel combinatorial
analysis; and "collaborative" means that each cluster is collaboratively defined
by how its cluster members express their selected subset of features. First,
rather than defining cluster centers and a distance metric to stratify patients
based on all features, CCC simultaneously identifies cluster-specific features
as biomarkers that show similar profile patterns when performing patient
stratification. Hence, with the predictive likelihood of a sample under a
patient cluster calculated over a small subset of features selected from tens of
thousands of them, it alleviates "the curse of dimensionality" and substantially
improves reproducibility. Second, it also enables natural integration of mixed-
type HTS data by linking various types of data to latent counts. Finally, the
proposed count modeling based inference algorithms only compute for non-zero
elements and therefore lead to extremely efficient analytic methods for sparse
matrices, often the case in HTS data. In addition to the theoretic and
computational merit, CCC provides a flexible probabilistic computational
framework to identify and characterize tumor subtypes or subclones, which leads
to more effective personalized prognosis and therapeutic design. The proposed
CCC methods will be first evaluated on the TCGA and ICGC data, and then be
applied to the collaborative research with the principal investigator's ongoing
biomedical collaborators on cancer and immunological disease
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.