* 1812325
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: Development of Very Radiation Hard Zero Degree Calorimeters for the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Anne Sickles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 35,574.00

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory in Switzerland is being
upgraded to increase the number of beam collisions by a factor of ten beyond the
LHC's design value. The increased radiation will damage many of the existing
detectors, so new detectors have to be designed and built. This award supports
the development of different prototype designs and, after extensive testing, the
best design will become the common design for both the ATLAS and CMS
experiments. The ATLAS and CMS experiments are the two largest experiments
currently mounted at the LHC. The prototypes will be tested at the Soreq Nuclear
Research Center in Israel and Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois.
The project has a robust plan in place to engage undergraduate students from a
diverse community to participate in the development of these new detectors. The
technology developed in the proposed activities may have applications in other
areas of science such as radiation oncology and space
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To take full advantage of the LHC, with its unique
access to high energy photons caused by the electromagnetic fields of the
passing hadrons, and unprecedented access to low-x partons probed by these
photons, the experiments need Zero Degree Calorimeters (ZDCs). The ZDCs are
destined to be used at the LHC during the high luminosity era which starts after
the next Long Shutdown. Luminosities will exceed 7x10^34 /cm^2/sec in the high
luminosity era and so the ZDCs must be extraordinarily radiation hard. ZDCs are
needed to identify the reaction plane orientation in a heavy ion collision and
are an essential detector for measuring ultra-peripheral collisions in heavy ion
and p-p collisions. The photon-photon and photon-nucleus interactions allow
observations of extremely rare processes, such as light-by-light scattering,
which are potentially sensitive to new unobserved physics processes and provide
a clean penetrating probe of the nucleus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.