* 1812250
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Keir Wefferling, Wefferling              Keir           M
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. This study of goldback ferns (Pentagramma; Pteridaceae)
investigates the evolutionary and ecological implications of polyploidy (whole
genome duplication) and hybridization (genome merging) in nature. Hybridization
and polyploidy exert long-term effects on the evolution of lineages across the
tree of life. However, only recently have we had the tools to address the
impacts of these processes on evolution. This research addresses long-standing
questions about evolution, such as the relative contribution of genome
duplication versus genome merging in the ecological and evolutionary success of
polyploids, and how genome and cell size vary across the landscape. This work
will enhance the usefulness of museum specimens through novel, cost-effective,
and high-throughput approaches that can be applied to other systems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Conceptualizing polyploid formation as taking place at various
positions along a polyploid spectrum?measured by polyploid subgenome
divergence?provides a framework in which to test the ecological and genetic
determinants of polyploid success. In order to delineate diploid and polyploid
species and address geographic, ecological, and phenotypic effects of subgenome
divergence in Pentagramma, the fellow will: 1) assess ploidy levels and genome
size specimens using a combination of chromosome counts and flow cytometry; 2)
infer phylogenetic relationships among diploids and polyploids using chloroplast
and nuclear markers; 3) measure genetic distance between polyploid subgenomes;
4) compare geographic range and niche breadth between and among diploids and
polyploids; 5) measure spore size, exudate quantity, and chemotype; and 6)
assess correlations between subgenome divergence and spatial variables, and
among phenotypic traits and spatial variables. These data will allow for a test
of the hypothesis that polyploids are most successful when formed between
progenitors with intermediate levels of divergence. The use of museum specimens
as a source of material for ecologically relevant data is highly important for
studies of fern evolution and ecology. This approach will retrieve genomic data
from old and degraded samples and can serve as a proof of concept for other
studies relying on biological collections of similar samples. In order to
promote the sharing of tools and research results, the fellow will lead
workshops and seminars at the University of California, Berkeley Botanical
Garden, California Academy of Sciences, and regional universities. Public
outreach will target local elementary, middle, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.