* 1812082
* Optimal and Adaptive p-Value Combination Methods with Application to ALS Exome Sequencing Study
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Zheyang Wu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Statistical theory and methodology play a key role in advancing scientific
research. The p-value combination approach is a foundational statistical method
for important data-driven research in meta-analysis, data integration, and
signal detection. Despite recent theoretical and methodological advances,
significant gaps still exist in the literature. Many of the assumptions
including independence, Gaussianity, and large group size, are not realistic for
real data applications. Further, some methods developed based on ad hoc
arguments lack a rigorous study of optimality. This project seeks to develop new
methods that exhibit more powerful and robust performance. The methods will be
applied to the analysis of large exome sequencing data from a study of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Students from underrepresented groups will
be strongly encouraged to participate in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop powerful and robust p-value combination
tests that are optimal and data-adaptive under a wide spectrum of signal
patterns and readily applicable to real data analysis. Analytical calculations
for p-value and statistical power, and asymptotic techniques, under realistic
assumptions of small or moderate group size, non-Gaussian distribution,
dependence, and linear-model-based alternative hypotheses, will be developed.
Two statistics families, gGOF for goodness-of-fit type tests, and tFisher for
Fisher type p-value combination, will be investigated. In addition to a study of
power and optimality, the project will also develop omnibus tests for adapting
to unknown signal patterns. The project will lead to (1) a new statistical
framework for calculating the distributions of generic families of goodness-of-
fit type and Fisher type statistics, (2) optimal statistics for given signal
patterns as well as data-adaptive methods when patterns are unknown, and (3)
genetic association test strategies for detecting genetic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.