* 1812428
* DCL: INCLUDES: Early Stage Empirical Research (EAGER): Data and the Future of an Empirically Grounded Research Community for Broadening Participation in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Kimberly Scott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,707.00

Science and engineering in the United States have yet to achieve full
participation across race, gender, ethnicity, geography, and/or social class.
Many research projects aim to investigate barriers to participation and
solutions to overcome those barriers. These research projects, however, can take
place in isolation, without useful discussion or collaboration across projects.
This project aims to identify connections across researchers in broadening
participation. Computational analysis of research papers, and their citations,
will map and illuminate the structure of this network. Guided by this map, the
project team will interview and study a range of researchers, with focus on how
these researchers generate and store data. Through this project, the researchers
will learn how to better share data; compare and strengthen research findings;
and build community toward more effective national-scale research on broadening
participation. This in turn will aid larger scale interventions, making more
meaningful strides toward diversity and inclusion across science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will begin with computerized
analysis of federal grant awards and publications arising from those awards. The
project team has expertise managing and analyzing large complex data sets,
synthesizing patterns, identifying gaps in knowledge, quantifying trends, and
creating visualization tools. This analysis will reveal the structure of
diversity and inclusion research communities. From these communities, key
scientists will be recruited for further study. This will include in-depth
interviews and a focus group gathering. This study will reveal problems and
solutions to build data collaborations; ways researchers execute their data
management plans; how they utilize datasets as scarce resources, beyond the
contexts of hypothesis generating and testing; and how shared data and data-
management practices can foster a stronger, empirically grounded research
community in broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.