* 1812043
* Characterization of Genetic Regulatory Networks Controlling Bifacial and Unifacial Leaf Morphology in Legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Aaron Leichty, Leichty                 Aaron          R
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Aaron R. Leichty is "Characterization of Genetic
Regulatory Networks Controlling Bifacial and Unifacial Leaf Morphology in
Legumes". The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California-Davis and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Neelima
Sinha.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The morphology of a leaf impacts plant physiology,
which in turn determines where a plant can grow and reproduce. Plants adapted to
arid environments often have leaves with morphological traits that are not found
in plants that grow in wetter environments. This project examines the
development of a striking adaptation to arid environments: the leaves of many
woody legumes are vertically oriented and radially or vertically symmetric.
Examining the similarities and differences in genetic regulatory networks
underlying the leaves of major legume crops and the leaves of woody legumes may
allow for the engineering of crops better adapted to a warmer, dryer, more
variable climate. Training objectives include comparative developmental
genomics, systems biology, bioinformatics, and gene expression and regulation in
legumes. Broader impacts will include training opportunities for undergraduates
and high school students and development of high school curriculum related to
plant molecular biology, husbandry, and tissue culture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to determine how bifacial
and unifacial leaves develop in legumes. To determine how each leaf type is
constructed, laser capture microdissection will be used to sample a series of
developmental stages very early in leaf morphogenesis, when leaf identity and
polarity are specified. These samples will be used for RNA-seq and the resulting
data will be used to construct gene co-expression networks. Bioinformatic
analyses will be used to identify important communities in the resulting
networks. Communities from bifacial and unifacial networks will be compared to
identify conserved components of each leaf type across species. Molecular and
reverse genetic techniques will be used to validate the resulting networks.
Specifically, transient and stable transformation will be used to perturb key
genes in the identified genetic regulatory networks to confirm differences in
regulatory connections within Acacia and Medicago. For the most promising genes,
their unifacial expression pattern will be emulated in Medicago to see how
easily bifacial development can be transformed into a unifacial-like morphology.
The findings of this research will be shared publicly through presentation and
publication. Sequence data and assemblies will be deposited to the NCBI Sequence
Read Archive (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra), the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/), the NCBI Genome resource
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome) and linked through an applicable NCBI
BioProject
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords:
comparative genomics, plant development, systems biology, gene networks,
legumes, Medicago truncatula, Acacia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.