* 1812258
* Dynamic Signal Detection in Non- and Semi-Parametric Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Lan Xue, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,971.00

In the big data era, massive data with complex structures are generated in an
explosive fashion. Non- and semi-parametric models are powerful statistical
tools for exploring nonlinear patterns hidden in complex data, and have been
used in a wide range of fields, such as, biomedical science, geology,
engineering and social sciences. However, traditional non- and semi-parametric
methods are limited in their ability to deal with massive data of high
dimensions. The goal of the proposed research is to develop effective tools for
dynamic estimation and variable selection for non- and semi-parametric models in
the massive complex data setting. The proposed research generates new methods
and theory, and will provide practitioners in different fields with tools to
better understand complex and dynamic structures in massive data.

As an effective dimension reduction tool, variable selection is very useful for
modeling high-dimensional data. In recent years, the properties of the penalized
methods have been well investigated for both linear models and semiparametric
models. However, those methods generally do not allow the variable selection to
dynamically change with other variables. For many longitudinal or spatial data
in practice, there is a need to develop a general framework for dynamic variable
selection that allows possibly different sets of relevant variables to be
selected in different time periods or at different spatial locations. The
objectives of the proposed research include: (1) to develop a novel procedure
for dynamic variable selection in the varying coefficient model; (2) to provide
large sample properties to ensure that the proposed method provides an optimal
solution when the sample size is sufficiently large; (3) to develop an efficient
algorithm which allows one to obtain a higher percentage of correct-fitting even
when the dimension of covariates is large; (4) to apply the dynamic variable
selection to study time-varying network data ; (5) to develop an innovative
penalized spline procedure with triangulations which plays the roles of dynamic
local signal detection, as well as efficient estimation of sparse non-parametric
functions on irregular domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.