* 1812503
* Mining Multi-Layer Protein-Protein Association Networks: An Integrated Spectral Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xiaozhe Hu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

This project is focused on strategies which help us to obtain information for
associated pairs of proteins or genes in biological systems. In addition to the
collection of lots of information about the role of different genes or proteins
in the cell, there is also increasing information about pairs of proteins or
genes that are related, either because there is evidence that they cooperate in
the cell, or evidence that they otherwise have common attributes. The
information about associated pairs can be mathematically described as a
heterogeneous collection of networks, but designing efficient and effective
machine learning and computational mathematics algorithms to integrate the
diverse information sources to explore and make sense of these networks is a
difficult unsolved problem. The new mathematical methods that will be developed
in this project will be customized for the computational biologists and systems
biologists who would like to use network analysis to boost the statistical
significance of the signal of important genes and pathways in their data, with
applications to gene function prediction, and the identification of sets of
genes that are important in complex diseases such as type II diabetes and
Crohn's disease. The project supports one graduate student and two undergraduate
students. Through training and collaborating with investigators and other
experts in the field, they will become involved in the broader research
communities of scientific computing and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective
and efficient inference and computational methods will be developed, analyzed,
and implemented for mining multi-layer PPI networks via an integrated spectral
approach and the generalizations of diffusion-based distance metrics. More
precisely, spectral multilayer analysis methods based on dimension reduction and
multilevel optimization methods will be designed in order to provide high-
quality integration tools of multiple networks that can be used to mine this
massive graph collection. The methods will be benchmarked and tested on a
substantial new biological network testbed, connected with the recent DREAM
disease module identification challenge. Furthermore, implementations of the
tools will be made generally available to the community, for mining
heterogeneous network collections in general, which will lead to new insights
related to core problems in computational biology, including the identification
of disease modules within the datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.