* 1812913
* STEM Sea, Air, and Land Remotely Operated Vehicle Design Challenges for Rural, Middle School Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Guenter Maresch, North Florida Community College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,093,675.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Florida Community College project
provides middle school students in a high poverty rural area in Northern Florida
an opportunity to pursue post-secondary study in STEM by providing quality and
relevant STEM design. The design challenges will be contextualized within a
rural region (i.e., GIS mapping and drones used for surveying large ranches,
farms, and forests), producing a series of six design challenge modules and two
competition design challenges with accompanying teacher guides for preparing
relevant STEM modules for 90 middle school aged students. The project will
integrate 4 components: (a) engineering design, (b) technology and society, (c)
electrical knowledge, and (d) computer science. The project aims to improve
middle school students' spatial reasoning through experiences embedded within
engineering design challenges. competition design challenges with accompanying
teacher guides for preparing relevant STEM modules for aged
students&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative partners consisting of school level, college
level, and STEM professionals will develop the design challenges, using best
practices from STEM learning research, with the intent of advancing STEM pathway
awareness and participation among historically underserved students in the
rural, high-poverty region served by North Florida Community College. Data
regarding student outcomes will be collected before and after implementation,
including measures of content mastery, spatial reasoning skills, self-efficacy,
attitudes and interests in STEM, and academic achievement in science courses
Assessment of the data will involve the research and development phases of six
curriculum modules and (2) an intervention study following a delayed-treatment
design model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing need for the increased
broadening of STEM by underserved groups. By increasing the number of rural
students who participate in STEM hands on, interdisciplinary experiences, the
project has the potential to expand interest and competency in mathematics and
science and expand the number of students who are aware of STEM career
pathways&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.