* 1812822
* III: Small: Models and Methods for Simultaneous Genotyping and Phylogeny Inference from Single-Cell DNA Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 519,234.00

Cancer is a disease that emerges from a single cell in the somatic tissue and is
driven by a complex interplay of somatic mutations, copy number aberrations and
chromosomal rearrangements. As a tumor progresses, diverse genomic aberrations
give rise to genetically heterogeneous subpopulations (clones) of cells that
interact with each other in a Darwinian framework of mutations, fitness and
selection. Intra-tumor heterogeneity (ITH) complicates the diagnosis and
treatment of cancer patients and causes relapse and drug resistance. The
emergence of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies has enabled a
thorough analysis of tumor heterogeneity through the generation of large-scale
quantitative genomic datasets. However, despite these advances, a comprehensive
understanding of intra-tumor heterogeneity has proved elusive thus
far.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails devising new mathematical
formulations and developing new algorithmic techniques for inferring
evolutionary histories of tumor cells in order to understand tumor evolution and
ITH. In particular, all the models and methods target single-cell sequencing
(SCS) data and account simultaneously for variant calling and genotyping, as
well as evolutionary history inference. This simultaneous inference accounts in
a principled manner for error in SCS data. Models based on both finite- and
infinite-sites assumptions will be derived. The research is highly
interdisciplinary, using combinatorial optimization and graph theory, as well as
statistical estimation, to provide practical solutions to problems that arise in
cancer genomics. While a major impact of the project will be on cancer biology,
the project will also stimulate research at the intersection of mathematics,
computer science and statistics. The project will provide training opportunities
for students in a truly interdisciplinary setting. The project will produce
freely available open-source software. The research results will be integrated
into courses and disseminated through publications. All models and algorithms
will be implemented in open-source software, and disseminated via Github and
Bitbucket.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.