* 1812795
* NSF INCLUDES Conference: A Convening on Community-Engaged Assessment
* O/D,OIA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Ted Fowler, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 03/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The conference will be a three-day gathering of national experts and
stakeholders in evaluation, research, and design. They will use creative design-
thinking processes to rethink assessment approaches aimed at the evaluation of
efforts to increase representation in STEM preparation pathways and eventual
entry into STEM careers. Broad community-based collaborative change efforts work
to benefit a variety of people. However, few initiatives take into account the
role of the community and those community stakeholders in the assessment and
evaluation process. This lack of representation creates unequal access and
control in defining progress and ultimate success. The conference will address
this problem by increasing knowledge and understanding of community-engaged
assessment. It will re-conceptualize how assessment is conceived and
constructed. The people attending (blended expertise of national experts and
stakeholders coupled with selected NSF INCLUDES evaluators and PIs) will have
deep insight into critical areas including developmental evaluation, collective
impact evaluation, culturally relevant evaluation, networked improvement
communities, action research, community-based participatory research,
appreciative inquiry, organization development, human-centered design, design
workshops, and public-interest design-build. They will engage in the real work
of what it takes to listen, understand, dream, argue, and create a different way
of assessing community collective impact efforts to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will not
only advance knowledge and understanding of community-engaged assessment that
supports collective impact but aims to re-conceptualize how assessment in
collaborative change initiatives is methodologically constructed: 1)
incorporating well qualified and diverse experts (from NSF INCLUDES and beyond)
who will facilitate and participate; 2) engaging experts as well as
practitioners in design sessions to ideate on "wicked problems" in community-
engaged assessment; 3) capturing the ideas, insights, and learnings of the
convening in a myriad of ways to be shared across the nation; and 4) leveraging
the networks created during the conference to continue the shared learning and
work. The results of this convening will support the designing and doing of
collaborative change work as well as the development of tools and resources that
measure effectiveness of these initiatives. These processes will move this work
beyond typical evaluation to an assessment system that engages the broader and
deeper community. Publications (both peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed) will
create artifacts, including two books written by conference participants, that
describe the process so as to encourage and support others to produce coherent
and clear visions for implementation and evaluation of complicated collaborative
change interventions to increase STEM representation. The results will be
especially beneficial to the INCLUDES Design and Development Launch
Pilots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.