* 1812844
* A Practice-Based Online Learning Environment for Scientific Inquiry with Digitized Museum Collections in Middle School Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Kirsten Butcher, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,313,939.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are an estimated 2-4 billion specimens in
the world's natural history collections that contain the data necessary to
address complex global issues, including biodiversity and climate. Digitized
natural history collections present an untapped opportunity to engage learners
in crucial questions of science with far-reaching potential consequences via
object-based research investigations. This project will develop and study a
prototype online learning environment that supports student learning via
Engaging Practices for Inquiry with Collections in Bioscience (EPIC Bioscience).
EPIC Bioscience uses authentic research investigations with digitized
collections from natural history museums. The project team will create a
curriculum aligned with the Next Generation of Science Standards (NGSS) for
middle school students, emphasizing a major disciplinary core idea in grades 6-8
life science, Ecosystems: Interactions, Energy, and Dynamics. The project has
three major goals: 1) Develop an online learning environment that guides
students through research investigations using digitized natural history
collections to teach NGSS life science standards. 2) Investigate how interactive
features and conversational scaffolds in the EPIC Bioscience learning
environment can promote deeper processing of science content and effective
knowledge building. 3) Demonstrate effective approaches to using digitized
collections objects for contextualized, research-based science learning that
aligns to NGSS standards for middle school classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine how and when interactive features of a digital learning
environment can be combined with deep questions and effective online scaffolds
to promote student engagement, meaningful collaborative discourse, and robust
learning outcomes during research with digitized museum collections. Research
activities will address: How can interactive features of EPIC Bioscience help
students learn disciplinary core ideas and cross cutting concepts via science
practices through collections-based research? How can effective patterns of
collaborative scientific discourse be supported and enhanced during online,
collections-based research? How does the use of digitized scientific collections
influence students' levels of engagement and depth of processing during
classroom investigations? A significant impact of the proposed work is expanded
opportunities for research with authentic museum objects for populations who are
traditionally underserved in STEM and are underrepresented in museum visitor
demographics (Title I schools, racial/ethnic minorities, and rural school
populations). Research activities will engage over 1,500 Title I and rural
students (50 classes across three years) in meaningful research investigations
with collections objects that address pressing global
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.