* 1812367
* Precise Measurement of the Ratio of (V-A) Coupling Constants in Free Neutron Beta Decay and Search for Non-Standard Model Couplings with the Nab spectrometer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stefan Baessler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

This award supports the measurement of two key parameters that describe how a
neutron decays. Those parameters are called "little a" and "little b", and they
are related to the momentum of the decay products and to the strength of the
radioactive decay. The experiment will be done with the Nab spectrometer that is
presently being installed at the Fundamental Neutron Physics Beamline at the
Spallation Neutron Source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This project
also prepares the way for an extension of the program, in which two more
parameters, A and B, can be determined. The precise measurement of these
parameters furthers a better understanding of the fundamental interactions
between elementary particles. The goal of this experimental program is to test
the Standard Model of particles and interactions in regions that were
inaccessible before, or not as precise. A discovery of physics beyond the
Standard Model would have important implications for nuclear and particle
physics, as well as cosmology. The project will have a valuable impact on higher
education: most of the work will be done by students at undergraduate and
graduate levels, and these students will learn valuable skills and experiences
for their future careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
motivation for the experimental program for the Nab experiment is to (1)
determine the ratio of the coupling constants in free neutron beta decay, lambda
=g_V/g_A, with unprecedented precision, (2) to contribute to a test of the
unitarity of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix, and (3) to search for
non-Standard Model (SM) forms of weak interaction that manifest themselves as
scalar and/or tensor interactions, that is, which interact with fermions with
the "wrong" helicity. The current Long Range Plan for Nuclear Science devotes a
paragraph to this effort. The studies are performed by the Nab collaboration, of
which the PI is the experiment manager and the DOE project manager. The award
supports the specific contributions of the PI and his group, the most important
of which are the characterization of the superconducting magnet, the assembly
and characterization of the spectrometer vacuum system, high voltage and main
electrodes, and the characterization of the efficiency of the proton detection
in a dedicated proton source. The PI is responsible for the development of the
present main analysis method for Nab. In addition, the PI will work on the
planning of the future program, which is the analysis of uncertainties for the
"A" and "B" coefficients, and the preliminary design and prototype testing of a
novel supermirror polarizer concept that would minimize the leading systematic
uncertainty in those measurements. The project will have a valuable impact on
higher education. Several undergraduate and graduate students will gain valuable
research experience working on the proposed projects. The PI is strongly
committed to attracting members of underrepresented groups, to help broaden the
human resource base of the field. The physics department became a new site for
the APS bridge program, and the PI is a prospective
mentor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.