* 1812128
* Modeling Temporal Dynamics of Large Systems from High-Dimensional Time Series Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Sumanta Basu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 125,000.00

The answers to many questions in the biological and social sciences require
understanding how the components of a large system dynamically interact with
each other and give rise to emergent behavior. For instance, simultaneous
failure of a handful of small but highly-connected firms can lead to huge
systemic losses in the financial system. Interactions among neurophysiological
signals in different brain regions relate to the organization of human brain
connectome. This project aims to develop rigorous and computationally efficient
statistical methods to jointly model the temporal dynamics of such large systems
using high-dimensional time series datasets. These methods will enable
researchers to gain deeper insights into the structure of these systems and help
with more accurate data-driven decision making. It is anticipated that the
methods under development can be used in clinical neuroscience to search for
functional connectivity patterns associated with neurological disorders, and in
financial regulation for monitoring systemic risk and identifying systemically
important firms in the financial systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project will focus on two classes of estimation and inference problems in
high-dimensional time series: (i) developing novel theory and methods for
estimating high-dimensional spectral density and coherence matrices, which can
be viewed as a natural generalization of covariance and correlation matrix
estimation problems to high-dimensional time series, and (ii) developing novel
theoretical machinery to quantify uncertainty (confidence intervals and
hypothesis tests) in high-dimensional vector autoregressive models. Broadly
speaking, the research will attempt to bridge a gap between current frontiers of
high-dimensional statistics for independent data and time series data using
tools from disciplines including optimization, statistics, signal processing,
and random matrix theory. This intellectual unification of ideas may provide
novel insights in deciphering the workings of complex systems in a data-driven
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.