* 1812550
* Collaborative Research: Closing the Gap Between Theory and Evidence: Coupled Phenomena in Unsaturated Bentonite Barriers Under Variable Temperature and Chemical Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Kristin Sample-Lord, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 348,716.00

Thermal-hydraulic-chemical (THC) behavior of bentonite, a high-swelling clay,
plays a critical role in the grand challenges of growing energy demand and
protection of water and the environment. Specifically, understanding coupled THC
phenomena in bentonite is important for safe radioactive, municipal and
hazardous waste disposal, liquid (e.g., petroleum) storage facilities, and
carbon sequestration. Although advances have been made in numerical and
conceptual models of coupled phenomena over the last 20 years, experimental
evidence remains limited due to challenges associated with laboratory testing.
This research utilizes novel experimental approaches to evaluate coupled
phenomena in different bentonites under various thermal, hydraulic and chemical
conditions, and advance current theoretical models. The results will narrow the
knowledge gap in our understanding of THC behavior of bentonites, promoting the
progress of science and improving our ability to predict how contaminants
migrate through environmental containment systems. The project includes
extensive involvement of underrepresented undergraduate students at both
universities, promoting campus cultures that value and support research
experiences for undergraduates and establishing best practices for future work.
The project also enhances existing STEM outreach efforts with the addition of
new workshops for grades K-12 on soil engineering properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing gap between advancements in theoretical
models and experimental data for coupled behavior of clays has limited our
ability to evaluate long-term resiliency of containment barriers subjected to
changes in field conditions. In addition, recent development of chemically-
modified bentonites for use as barrier materials with enhanced engineering
properties has gained momentum, although the performance of such clays under
unsaturated and elevated temperature conditions is poorly understood. Given the
limitations in our current understanding of coupled phenomena in bentonites,
this research seeks to answer the question: How do phenomenological coefficients
controlling the significance of coupled phenomena in bentonite barriers change
with temperature, concentration, and degree of saturation? The objectives of
this collaborative research are to: (1) develop novel laboratory testing systems
for measurement of chemical transport properties of clays under variable
hydraulic, thermal, and chemical conditions; (2) quantify properties controlling
coupled THC behavior of traditional and chemically-modified bentonites with
variable degrees of saturation under elevated temperatures; (3) validate or
improve conceptual and theoretical models of coupled clay behavior to advance
evaluation of geoenvironmental barriers commonly used for containment of
contaminants; and (4) increase undergraduate research involvement at University
of Wisconsin-Platteville and Villanova University. This collaborative research
represents the first comprehensive attempt at understanding fully coupled
phenomena in sodium and modified bentonites under variable temperature,
saturation, and chemical conditions, advancing understanding of fundamental
theory for THC behavior and prediction of long-term performance of
geoenvironmental systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.