* 1812847
* Probing the Nature and Origin of Ultra Diffuse Galaxies (UDGs) with Deep and Wide-Field Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Jin Koda, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 05/31/2023
* USD 486,967.00

Ultra-diffuse galaxies (UDGs) are a newly discovered population of galaxies.
They are extremely faint, but spatially very extended, and are almost blended in
the brightness of the night sky. Such diffuse galaxies are fragile, and cannot
survive in gravitational encounters with other galaxies. However, astronomers
are finding a great number of UDGs in clusters of galaxies, where such
encounters would occur. This research program will investigate the nature and
origin of these UDGs. It will study (1) whether UDGs are distinct from other
types of galaxies such as the Milky Way and dwarf galaxies; (2) how they are
protected from the gravitational disruptions; and (3) whether they have even
fainter outskirts. The effects of gravitational encounters should appear clearly
in the outskirts. This project will engage a variety of students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will use deep and wide-
field imaging of eight local clusters of galaxies. The data are taken with the
Hyper Suprime-Cam (HSC) on the Subaru telescope. These unique data will show the
very faint outskirts of UDGs, as well as their large-scale environments. The
program will perform the most reliable census and resolved analysis of the UDG
population within, outside, and among the clusters. The main goals are (1) to
confirm whether UDGs are distinct from dwarf and normal galaxies in their
properties parameter spaces; (2) to constrain how they formed and how they their
properties depend on their environments; and (3) to image their fainter
outskirts and to discover even fainter, more extended UDGs. The project focuses
primarily on UDGs, but aims to yield a broader, coherent picture that connects
UDGs, dwarfs, and normal galaxies. UDGs are faint and extended, and are
difficult to be detected and analyzed. The observations and data reduction will
be optimized to achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.