* 1812997
* DCL NSF INCLUDES: Bringing Conversations on Diversity and Inclusion in Data Science to the Ecological and Environmental Sciences
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Claire Lunch, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 232,110.00

As an emerging field, data science has the potential to broaden participation of
minorities in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) by
offering multiple career pathways that span a variety of fields. Growth in the
availability of large environmental datasets has also resulted in the need for a
diverse workforce with technical data science skills. A variety of organizations
support individuals currently underrepresented in STEM that are interested in
entering data science careers through training, mentoring, and networking
opportunities. However, many of these initiatives have been developed in
isolation, limiting opportunities for an exchange of ideas and lessons learned.
The Battelle Memorial Institute and its partners will host a 3-day conference to
strengthen initiatives across organizations to recruit and retain individuals
from underrepresented groups in data science careers. Conference attendees (with
selected allied representatives from NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch
Pilots) will be comprised of academic, training, and business partners that
offer training and career opportunities in the data sciences; project leaders
conducting research on recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups in
this and related fields; employers who have an interest in hiring and retaining
a diverse data science workforce; and individuals with experience in mentoring
interns and early career professionals in research and technical positions. The
products of the conference will include a conference proceedings report;
specific recommendations for filling the gaps in understanding the multiple
career pathways of underrepresented groups in data-intensive environmental
science careers; and a strategy for continued development and expansion of a
collaborative community focused on increasing workforce diversity in the data
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Conversation IDEaS (Conversations on
Inclusion in Data Science for Ecological and Environmental Sciences) Conference
will be a 3-day conference with the ultimate goal of developing a networked
improvement community (i.e., Environmental Data Sciences Inclusion Network) that
strengthens initiatives across existing alliances and organizations to recruit
and retain individuals from underrepresented groups in data science careers. By
establishing connections between existing organizations and alliances that are
working towards a common goal, this conference will build their capacity to
provide opportunities and remove barriers for underrepresented groups. Making
special efforts to bring in collaborators that may not currently be known as
potential stakeholders in these conversations will broaden the network's impact.
The conference will be structured around three primary components of potential
career pathways (awareness/recruitment, training, and retention/mentoring) at
each of three possible entry points (K-12, higher education, career
change/advancement). The conference activities will be designed to address the
following questions relevant to each day: (1) what is the problem we are trying
to solve?; (2) what expertise is needed to solve the problem?; and (3) how might
our network be structured to support our work? The products of the conference
will include a conference proceedings report; specific recommendations to the
INCLUDES network for filling the gaps in our understanding of the multiple
career pathways of underrepresented groups in data-intensive ecological and
environmental data science careers; and a strategy for continued development and
expansion of the networked improvement community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.