* 1812779
* Identification of Compact Binaries in the ZTF Alert Stream
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Eric Bellm, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 471,560.00

The Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) has begun operations in 2018 and will map
the Northern Galactic Plane twice nightly over the next three years, generating
a massive real-time data flow of order of a million transient events daily. This
creates an opportunity to make many important discoveries in stellar
astrophysics if astronomers can immediately follow up these transient events.
This research will use commercial open source software tools to provide the
filtering and cross matching of the events with external catalogs, which contain
contextual information to identify stars of interest and generate immediate
alerts to the celestial community. It will provide a coordination center for the
analysis of these events leading to discoveries and insights in stellar
astrophysics. Graduate and undergraduate students will take part in this
research which will develop their abilities in the rapidly developing fields of
cloud and streaming platforms such as Kafka, Spark and Amazon Web Services, with
the goal of developing a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ZTF offers an outstanding opportunity to
enhance our understanding of stellar astrophysics. To take advantage of this, an
alert stream will be developed that consists of open source software tools which
are used by commercial internet companies that specialize in massive real-time
data flows. These tools will allow rapid crossmatching and filtering of the ZTF
alert stream to identify significant Galactic transient events such as
cataclysmic variables, state changes of X-ray binaries, and stellar flares, and
to send out notices enabling immediate follow-up observations. Apache Kafka, an
open-source messaging queue, will provide a distributed, fault-tolerant event
stream at low latency. Apache Spark, an open-source cluster computing framework,
will be used to provide fast general-purpose data processing. It includes the
Spark Streaming interface to Kafka as well as SQL (Structured Query Language)
databases necessary for cross-matching the catalogs. The alerts will result in
discoveries and insights in stellar astrophysics. .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.