* 1812340
* Fundamental Studies in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,226,614.00

To search for new laws of nature beyond our current understanding researchers
can use very high energy accelerators, such as the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN, or alternatively they can make precise experimental measurements of basic
particle properties and search for deviations from the known physical laws. This
award supports research that centers around experiments making precise
measurements of physical properties of the free neutron. In the UCNA (Ultra-Cold
Neutron Asymmetry) experiment, carried out at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory, extremely slow neutrons are used, which have such low energy that
they can be trapped and studied. This allows the scientists to make a precise
measurement of the radioactive decay of the neutron into a proton, an electron
and a particle called an anti-neutrino. This provides needed information about
the theory of radioactivity (also called the weak nuclear force) as well as
looking for small deviations from the known physical laws as a signature of new
physics. In addition, this group is leading the development of equipment for a
very sensitive experiment to search for the electric dipole moment (EDM) of the
neutron. The existence of this EDM would be a signal of new physics beyond our
current knowledge and could help to explain why the observed universe is
dominated by matter. Our present Standard Model of particle physics predicts
that there should be nearly equal amounts of matter and antimatter in today's
universe, which is not observed. This remains one of the great puzzles in our
basic understanding of the evolution of our universe. Participation by
postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and undergraduates is an essential
part of the research program, affording young researchers exceptional
opportunities to advance their training and education in this frontier area of
nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is primarily focused on
experimental research addressing fundamental properties of the free neutron. In
particular the group will continue analyzing data from the UCNA experiment, in
particular searching for new scalar and tensor forces not present in our present
understanding of particle interactions. The group is also constructing
experimental equipment for a new, highly sensitive experiment to search for the
neutron's EDM. New results from the UCNA experiment will provide a sensitive
search for new scalar or tensor components in the weak force, the so-called
Fierz interference, by comparing the energy dependence of both the beta-decay
asymmetry and the electron energy spectra simultaneously to further improve the
sensitivity. The PI and his group are also collecting data for an improved
measurement of the neutron lifetime using UCN at the Los Alamos UCN facility and
anticipate results from both of these projects during the period of this grant.
The PI plays a leading role in the development and construction of a new
experiment searching for the electric dipole moment of the free neutron. The
goal of the new neutron Electric Dipole Moment experiment - nEDM - at the
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory is to improve
the sensitivity of the measurement by two orders of magnitude compared to
previous work. The observation of a neutron electric dipole moment signals
violation of time-reversal symmetry, and could provide important information
related to the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe and the
new physical phenomena that is responsible for it. The critical cryogenic
magnets and magnetic shielding of the experiment will be commissioned at Caltech
and should receive the first cold-neutron beam at SNS for neutron polarization
studies during the period of this proposed grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.