* 1812553
* CRII: SaTC CPS: RUI: Cyber-Physical System Security in Implantable Insulin Injection Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Xiali Hei, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 143,043.00

Increasingly medical devices are dependent on software and the wireless channel
for their operations, which also pose new vulnerabilities to their safe,
dependable, and trustworthy operations. Medical devices such as implantable
insulin pumps, which are in wide use today, continuously monitor and manage a
patient's diabetes without the need for frequent daily patient interventions.
These devices, not originally designed against cyber security threats, must now
mitigate these threats. This project examines security vulnerabilities in these
implantable medical device systems and offers new insights and understanding to
protect these devices and prevent their misuse by users and abuse by
hackers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research addresses how to
detect and defend against man-in-the-middle and replay attacks between the
glucose sensor and the insulin pump or monitor device held by patients.
Detection of such an attack is addressed via a personalized model to calculate
and recognize abnormal glucose levels. To remotely secure the dosage setting
over a wireless link, a bio-key based on personalized parameters unique to each
patient with diabetes mellitus, is used. Authentication is carried out via an
acoustic-based fingerprint scheme coupled with voice pattern recognition
technology. A mixed acoustic and radio wave-based secure channel in an
artificial pancreas is being developed to test and validate this approach. While
this project focuses on glucose sensors and insulin pumps, these security
schemes can be applied broadly to other wireless medical devices. This project
is being carried out at Delaware State University, a historically black college
or university, and leverages collaborations with the University of Pennsylvania
and University of Alabama to design a secure wireless insulin pumping system,
and will support diverse undergraduate and graduate students for two years. The
research results will also be used to design and implement course materials on
cyber-physical systems security and will help train students to become
tomorrow's cyber security professionals.