* 1812107
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Brett Aiello, Aiello                  Brett          R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2020
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Research Using Biological Collections. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will utilize biological collections in
innovative ways. Animals have a remarkable ability to maintain stability when
faced with unexpected perturbations, which occurs through both passive
(mechanical) and active (neural) mechanisms. In flight, passive stabilization
relies on the animal's body and wing morphology, while active stabilization also
relies on the nervous system to adjust flight. This research integrates museum
collections with approaches from biology and physics to develop a better
understanding of how different variables work to enhance flight stability using
moths as a model system. This research has the potential to impact the future
design of engineered devices based on biological design principles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Museum specimens belonging to the diverse group of moths,
Bombycoidea, are used to quantify body and wing morphology, and phylogenetic
analyses are used to study their evolutionary dynamics and impact on speciation.
The fellow utilizes comparative models of dynamic flight stability (typically
used in physics and aerospace engineering) as functions of morphology and
kinematics to determine how stability evolves in relation to these traits. The
fellow also quantifies the mechanical response to visual stimuli in different
species to test whether the sensorimotor system is tuned to interspecific
differences in stability. Through this research, the fellow receives training in
integrating museum collections with interdisciplinary methods from physics,
engineering, and biology. To advance discovery while promoting teaching,
training, and learning, the fellow acts as a key advisor for a group of
interdisciplinary undergraduates at the host institution as they conduct
independent research on the relationship between maneuverability and wing
morphology. Further, to broaden participation, the fellow and the undergraduate
team conduct a lesson at the G.I.R.L.S summer camp at the host institution that
uses the museum collections, a wind tunnel, and a 3-D printer to examine the
relationship between wing morphology and aerodynamic performance. Finally, the
collection of images generated by the fellow are being deposited in public
databases, complementing existing efforts to digitally preserve museum
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.