* 1812280
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Jennifer Phillips, Phillips                Jennifer       N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 11/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2018, Broadening Participation of Groups Under-represented in Biology. The
fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Recently, the
rise in anthropogenic (human-made) sensory pollution - noise and nightlight -
present conditions that are unprecedented in the fossil record and could
fundamentally disrupt the ways in which animals interact with the environment.
Limited research has focused on the singular effects of noise or light on animal
communication and reproduction. However, human-made noise and light typically
co-occur in today's human-dominated world, thus understanding their combined
influence is an urgent conservation priority. This research aims to understand
how human-caused noise and light affects reproductive success among a community
of birds. The fellow will study nest placement, nesting success, and fledgling
survival across noisy and dark, bright and quiet, noisy and bright, and quiet
and dark sites. By focusing on several species, the fellow will be able
determine how the bird community changes with sensory pollution, how behaviors
within species change (i.e. nesting timing, feeding rates, movement or avoidance
behaviors), and which species are more likely to succeed in sensory polluted
areas. Determining the consequences of sensory pollution caused by anthropogenic
activities lays the groundwork for conserving wild places, species, and
reconciling spaces where nature and humanity interact. Results will be used to
inform partners at the National Parks Division of Natural Sounds and Night Skies
and Bureau of Land Management to help protect species and reconcile human
pollution with conservation. This project broadens participation of groups
underrepresented or invisible in biology, including LGBTQ, minorities and
Hispanic students by funding multiple diverse students, and allowing the fellow
to engage in novel research in sensory ecology and educational outreach. The
fellow will mentor diverse students as a part of her field crew and is
developing sensory ecology workshops for underrepresented students in central
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will test the effects of noise and
light pollution on breeding success and fledgling survival of a community of
birds in New Mexico by implementing a large-scale manipulative field experiment
with four treatments (Noise, Light, Light + Noise, &amp; Control). By measuring
settlement patterns, reproductive success, and activity states, the fellow will
test mechanistic pathways that link exposure to sensory stimuli to changes in
fitness. Fledgling survival will be monitored with radio telemetry to test
hypothesized direct and indirect, predator mediated consequences of exposure.
The fellow expects noise to decrease hatching and juvenile success, while light
increases clutch size and provisioning rates but increases vulnerability to
predation. Thus, the fellow expects Light + Noise will have mixed effects on
fitness. The fellow will also recruit and train diverse students to gain
biological field experience and develop outreach and workshops for
underrepresented students in K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.