* 1812065
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Analysis of Partially Observed Shapes in Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Juliet Brophy, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 24,971.00

Classification of shapes has many important applications in a variety of fields.
For example, anthropologists use shape classification on fossilized faunal teeth
to reconstruct past environments and on variation in the shapes of stone tools
to assess different technological strategies. Other applications include
classification of plants based on the shape of their leaves and identification
of shapes of tumors. While there are many statistical tools that can be used for
classification, most methods are based on complete shapes with relatively few
methods available for partially observed or incomplete shapes. This project
focuses of the development of new statistical methodology, based on the ideas of
multiple imputation, for the analysis of partially observed
shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes as a starting point
leveraging the ideas of nonparametric, hot-deck type multiple imputation to
shapes that are defined by unlabeled points and/or functions, as opposed to
shapes defined by landmarks where traditional methods of multiple imputation may
be applied. The proposed method involves matching partially observed shapes to
fully observed shapes, randomly choosing a fully observed donor shape among the
shapes that are good matches for the partial shape, and then completing the
partial shape with the unmatched part of the donor shape. A simulation study
will be conducted to compare the relative merits of different partial matching
methods. The imputation framework will be tested using teeth from the Family
Bovidae, whose classification plays an important role in biological anthropology
for identifying the taxa of specimens, which in turn is used to reconstruct
paleoenvirnoments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.