* 1812014
* The Covers, Symmetries, and Combinatorics of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Darren Long, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2019
* USD 124,997.00

Geometry and topology are concerned with the study of shapes. In Euclidean
geometry, we study objects such as circles and rectangles. A circle is highly
symmetric; for example, any rotation about the center of the circle preserves
the circle. A rectangle, though still symmetric in some ways, has less symmetry
than the circle; its two sides may have different lengths. In low-dimensional
topology we study more complicated objects or spaces of two, three, and four
dimensions. A central aim of this National Science Foundation funded project is
to understand these spaces through symmetries. Topological objects arise
naturally in other fields, including biology, chemistry, physics, and
engineering. At times, the best way to understand one is via its relationship
with another through what is known as a "covering map". A second project is to
analyze covering maps. A challenge in studying more intricate three or four
dimensional spaces is that one cannot always visualize or draw these even using
a computer. It is therefore helpful to break them into building blocks. One of
the projects is to do so with objects called hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In addition
to the mathematical research, the PI has demonstrated a strong dedication to
outreach, mentoring, and advocating for underrepresented individuals in the STEM
disciplines. With the NSF travel funds she will continue to engage in
opportunities inside and outside the academia directed at promoting mathematical
research and education.

The focus of this research project is to understand the finite degree covering
spaces, the group of symmetries, and the combinatorics of hyperbolic manifolds
in low dimensions. The PI plans to tackle the following projects during the
funding period: (1) making effective the Virtually Haken Theorem, (2)
quantifying separability properties to determine whether or not the fundamental
groups of three-manifolds and the mapping class groups of closed surfaces are
linear, (3) exploring infinite-type surfaces, their mapping class groups, and
the actions of these groups on hyperbolic complexes, and (4) giving a
combinatorial characterization for hyperbolic three-manifolds. Though the
research project primarily focuses on questions in topology, geometry, and
geometric group theory, the topics explored by the PI have deep connections to
combinatorics, representation theory, dynamics, and topological quantum field
theory (TQFT) as well.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.