* 1812402
* NSF-BSF: Exploring the Proton Radius Puzzle and Phenomena Beyond the Standard Model with Low-energy Lepton Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Kohl, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 948,204.00

This award provides funding for Dr. Michael Kohl and his group at Hampton
University, a Historically Black College und University in Virginia, USA. The
group has a core function in the Muon Scattering Experiment (MUSE) in
preparation at Paul-Scherrer Institute in Switzerland, and in the DarkLight
project at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson
Laboratory) in the US. The MUSE project is a dedicated investigation of the so-
called proton radius puzzle, a very prominent topic in nuclear physics. The
experiment will measure the proton charge radius with high precision via lepton-
proton elastic scattering, and will compare the interactions of muons and
electrons of either charge with the proton at a fundamental level. The
experiment will severely constrain possible explanations of the puzzle and has
the potential to reveal new physics beyond the Standard Model. The DarkLight
experiment in preparation at Jefferson Lab aims to discover a new particle
associated with a fifth interaction suited to explain several observed anomalies
in particle physics while offering a connection to dark matter. Both projects
offer high-profile opportunities for students and postdocs at the forefront of
international nuclear and particle physics research. The PI's research program
has many facets and offers excellent opportunities for cutting-edge education
and research purpose domestically and abroad. This proposal combines state-of-
the-art detector development at Hampton University with its application in
forefront research at PSI and at Jefferson Lab. This provides new research and
educational opportunities at first-class research facilities for students from
minority populations, predominantly African-Americans, and postdoctoral
researchers. The development and operation of GEM detectors in the MUSE and
DarkLight environments will be beneficial to advance this still novel technology
with potential future applications in other experiments, as well as in the
medical sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MUSE experiment has been proposed and
approved to provide key insight in the quest to explain the so-called proton
radius puzzle - the over five-standard deviation discrepancy between proton
charge radius measurements with electronic and muonic probes, respectively.
Possible explanations also include new physics beyond the Standard Model. The
MUSE experiment aims to address one of the most pressing questions in nuclear
and particle science to date. MUSE uses mixed muon and electron beams of either
charge (mu+, e+, mu-, e-) to make precise measurements of the lepton-proton
elastic scattering cross sections and proton form factors, with the goal to
extract the proton charge radius for each probe. It will determine with the
highest precision, model independently and conclusively, if there is any proton
charge radius difference observed in electron versus muon scattering. At the
same time it will determine the role of two-photon exchange and provide tight
constraints on theory. Dr. Kohl is one of the co-initiators of the MUSE project.
The role of Dr. Kohl's group in MUSE is essential to this project. This project
focuses on the challenging task of high-resolution beam particle tracking at
MUSE with GEM detectors, in a way not done before at low beam energies. The
tracker is exposed to high rate density and beam flux, and needs to operate
efficiently at a trigger rate of a few kHz. The DarkLight Phase-I project at
Jefferson Lab includes a focused search for a dark photon or neutral boson in
the mass region around 17 MeV/c2, where evidence for a fifth-force carrier has
been reported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.