* 1812232
* Evaluating the Cost of Domestication in Sunflower
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Emily Dittmar, Dittmar                 Emily          L
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2021
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2018. The fellowship supports a research and
training plan in a host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to
broaden participation in biology. The title of the research and training plan
for this fellowship to Dr. Emily Dittmar is "Evaluating the Cost of
Domestication in Sunflower". The host institutions for the fellowship are the
University of Georgia and the University of Minnesota, and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. John Burke and Peter Morrell.

Deleterious mutations are present in the genomes of all organisms. Recent
evidence suggests that crop genomes harbor a greater number of deleterious
mutations (i.e. mutational load) than their wild relatives. This mutational load
may be caused by the process of domestication itself, which is often
characterized by a reduction in genetic diversity and strong selection for
traits of agronomic interest. This project aims to understand the causes and
consequences of mutational load in cultivated sunflower. Results from this study
will provide knowledge about how domestication-related processes increase
deleterious variants and the effects of overall mutational load on crop
performance. Training objectives include genomics and computational training in
the analysis of genomic data. Broader impacts include developing lesson plans
about crop evolution and genetic variation for K-12 students.

The relative importance of selective sweeps versus genetic drift on the
accumulation of deleterious variants in sunflower will be inferred through a
determination of the genome-wide distribution of deleterious mutations and by
comparing mutational load in elite cultivars to that of historical landrace
varieties. These deleterious variants will be identified using computational
approaches that estimate deleterious effects based on the degree of phylogenetic
sequence conservation. This study will test the explanatory power of these
methods using performance data from hundreds of cultivated sunflower lines to
determine how well the identified deleterious variants explain variation in
performance. A completely novel component to this project is that it will
investigate whether the effects of deleterious variants are elevated in
stressful environments. Evidence from wild species show that deleterious
mutations sometimes have greater effects under stress, but the degree to which
the environment interacts with mutational load in crops has so far been
unexplored. Results from this research which will focus almost exclusively on
publicly available data will be shared through publications, presentations at
conferences, and software, code and analyses will be accessible through GitHub.

Keywords: domestication, phylogenetic analysis, population genomics, sunflower,
mutational load, deleterious mutations, plant biotic stress

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.