* 1812374
* A Midscale U.S. Proposal for the LEGEND 200 Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* John Wilkerson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 7,802,481.00

Neutrinos are the most prolific particle in the Universe and they have an
important role in understanding why the Universe has more matter than anti-
matter. Neutrinos have very small mass and zero electric charge so they could be
their own anti-particle. If that is the case, this might explain why there is
more matter than anti-matter. The only experimentally feasible way to answer
this question is to look for neutrinoless double beta decay (NLDBD), a very rare
form of nuclear decay. This award will support a project that adds to and brings
together the best U.S. (Majorana Demonstrator) and European (GERDA) experiments
using germanium to look for neutrinoless double beta decay into a new experiment
called LEGEND-200. The experiment will use 200 kg of special detectors made out
of enriched germanium and will take place at the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran
Sasso in Italy. Among the fields that may benefit from the new technology
developed as part of the experiment are: environmental monitoring; atmospheric,
ocean, and groundwater environmental transport; methods of radioactive dating;
reactor monitoring; bioassay for determining very low occupational exposures to
radiation; and biological studies involving radiotracers at very low activities.
Students and postdocs will be trained in underground science related
disciplines, such as low-background techniques, detector technology, nuclear
physics and neutrino physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current generation Ge-76
experiments, GERDA and the Majorana Demonstrator (MJD), utilizing high purity
Germanium detectors with an intrinsic energy resolution of 0.12%, have achieved
the lowest backgrounds by over an order of magnitude in the NLDBD signal region
compared to other NLDBD experiments. Building on this success, the LEGEND
Collaboration is developing a next-generation NLDBD experiment with discovery
potential at a half-life of 1028 years. This award provides mid-scale support
for U.S. involvement in building and commissioning an almost-next-generation
NLDBD experiment using up to 200 kg of Ge-76 diodes ie LEGEND-200 (L-200) that
has potential to deliver physics and serve as a forerunner to a future ton-scale
experiment. L-200 is based on combining the techniques developed by MJD to
produce ultra-clean components and GERDA's background suppression from shielding
the detectors in a liquid argon bath, in addition to physically combining the
existing MJD and GERDA detectors, resources and infrastructure with new
detectors. L-200 will be based at the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso in
Italy, and deploy the detectors in the existing GERDA cryostat. L-200 would have
world leading discovery potential and a half-life sensitivity of 10^27 yr for a
1 t*yr exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.