* 1813252
* III: Small: RUI: Investigating Fragmentation Rules and Improving Metabolite Identification Using Graph Grammar and Statistical Methods
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Myungjae Kwak, Middle Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2020
* USD 479,584.00

The proposed work addresses the long-standing challenge of metabolite
identification: the lack of fragmentation rules for the large amounts of data
from various approaches to analysis. This project can not only advance
metabolomics, but also enhance related fields. Tandem mass spectrometry, MS/MS,
is a generally used approach, so a range of fields can benefit from improved
identification performance, and may be applied to other systems. Moreover,
successfully applying graph grammar to solve the graph theory problem in
metabolomics will provide support to other scientists who also use graphs to
address their research problems by adopting graph grammar methods. A clear focus
of this project is to involve undergraduate students in computational research,
with the aspects of the overall research project designed at an appropriate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives of this project is
to (1) convert the problem of analyzing MS/MS data into a graph theory problem,
(2) use graph grammar and statistical methods to investigate fragmentation
rules, and (3) integrate these rules into an identification tool, MIDAS-G. Graph
grammar can flexibly represent and process adjacent structures. By taking
advantage of its high level for interpretation, graph grammar can work with
statistical methods for explicitly investigating fragmentation rules from
annotated MS/MS data. These learned rules will in turn be integrated into the
identification tool and algorithms will be designed to enable the tool to
identify metabolites efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.