* 1813087
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Design of Efficient, Horizontally-Scaling, and Strongly Anonymous Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Srini Devadas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Anonymous communication is an important aspect of freedom of speech. In many
cases, anonymity remains the most important defense for persons expressing
unpopular or prohibited opinions, from protest organizers who are fighting
against repressive governments to whistleblowers who report sensitive news
against powerful entities. Owing to its importance, there have been many systems
that were designed to protect users' anonymity in the past several decades.
Unfortunately, most existing anonymity systems fall into one of two categories:
systems that defend against global adversaries but are hard to scale and
inefficient, and systems that are easy to scale and efficient but do not defend
against powerful adversaries. Thus, anonymity network administrators are forced
to either support only a limited number of users or suffer from attacks against
their system. This project aims to design, implement, and deploy a system that
marries the best aspects of the two categories so as to produce an efficient
anonymous communication network that can scale easily while providing provable
guarantees against a global adversary. Such a system can enhance users' freedom
of speech by guaranteeing strong anonymity for a large number of users, and
provide more privacy enhancing choices for Internet users
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to create a
system that provides provable anonymity against an adversary that controls (1)
the network connection between all participants (2) a large number of users, and
(3) any fraction of the servers, while scaling to large numbers of users with
more servers. To achieve this goal, this project will answer the following three
questions: (1) How can the system organize and utilize the servers in a scalable
manner to provide anonymity against an adversary that monitors all of Internet?
(2) How does the system prevent malicious users from deviating from the
protocol? (3) How does the system prevent malicious servers from de-anonymizing
users? The answers to these questions will lead to the design of a scalable
strong anonymity system. A prototype of this design will be implemented,
evaluated, and deployed across a volunteer network of many servers in an effort
to reach a broad audience of users. In addition to graduate student theses, this
project will provide research projects for high school students who are part of
the MIT PRIMES outreach program, as well as MIT undergraduates through the MIT
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.