* 1813981
* On the Impacts of Cloud Radiative Heating on General Circulation and Extreme Events
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Paul Staten, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 389,131.00

This project will train two graduate students. Both the dynamics-based
diagnostic tools developed and data produced in the research project will be
made publicly available via online repositories. The funded project will augment
previously NSF-funded science outreach programs at Indiana University, including
the Jim Holland Research Program which serves under-represented high school
students throughout Indiana. The research team will partner with WonderLab, a
local museum for Science, Health, and Technology, and local school districts to
create and disseminate climate change modules, thereby enhancing Indiana Science
Teaching Standards in local K12 classrooms. The results from the research
project will be widely disseminated in conferences and peer reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clouds and the associated precipitations are
products of storms of various sizes ranging from a few kilometers to few
thousand kilometers. In extratropics, particularly in winter seasons, clouds and
precipitations are produced mainly by cyclones or storms that are few thousand
kilometers wide. These large-scale storms are organized by mid-latitude westerly
jet stream meandering meridionally along the latitude circle and tend to amplify
over the North Pacific and North Atlantic off the east coasts of the two major
continents. Latent heating release occurring during the formation of clouds and
precipitations is known to play a critical role in the rapid amplification and
lengthening of the life cycle of these storms. Besides releasing latent heat,
clouds also alter atmospheric radiative heating profile by absorbing thermal
energy emission from the surface and atmosphere below that are warmer while
radiating heat out at a colder temperature, as well as reflecting more incoming
solar energy back to space that causes cooling at the surface. Cloud-induced
radiative heating anomalies may have long-lasting effect not only on the
development of these storms but also on the westerly jet stream that carries
them, as cyclones tend to preferentially amplify or redevelop over certain
longitude sections in mid-latitudes, such as the North Pacific and North
Atlantic. This research will diagnose how radiative heating anomalies associated
with clouds affects the westerly jet and Rossby waves in which cyclones that
produce clouds are embedded. Specifically, the research team will calculate 3D
cloud-induced radiative heating rate anomalies in mid-latitudes using
observational datasets and modeling output. They will examine the contribution
from such anomalies to the low-frequency variability of the westerly jet stream
and large-amplitude long-lasting atmospheric circulation anomalies, such as
blocking flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.