* 1813499
* Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Closed Interacting Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Anatoli Polkovnikov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education towards understanding the dynamics of quantum systems
away from equilibrium. Statistical mechanics is a powerful formalism that allows
us to determine, at least in principle, various properties of materials at
equilibrium. Away from equilibrium, for example when a material is subject to
external electromagnetic radiation, the situation is much more complex even at a
basic level, and very few general principles exist. The fundamental question
underlying this project concerns how to bridge disparate approaches for
describing microscopic and macroscopic systems, merging the corresponding
quantum and classical counterparts into a single unifying framework that
accounts for quantum behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of this
project is finding protocols for suppressing heating losses in systems that are
brought into nonequilibrium by external stimuli, such as electromagnetic
radiation. Finding such protocols is important for many areas of science and
technology, ranging from the design of fast heat engines that are operating near
maximum efficiency, to the development of optimal quantum computation
algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also involve redesigning the
graduate quantum mechanics course at the PI's institution by significantly
updating the materials with modern developments and by adding computation-
centric modules. The project also involves mentoring and training of graduate
and undergraduate students both from Boston University and from other
institutions through discussions and collaborations. The PI will continue
providing pedagogical reviews and lecture notes aimed at both graduate and
undergraduate student audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education towards understanding the dynamics of quantum systems away from
equilibrium. At equilibrium, statistical mechanics is a powerful formalism that
allows us to determine, at least in principle, equilibrium phase diagrams, to
identify possible phases and phase transitions, and to characterize various
properties of materials. Away from equilibrium, the situation is much more
complex even at a basic level, and very few general principles exist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to build upon prior work and to develop
new theoretical ideas focusing on three parallel topics: i) Developing
semiclassical phase-space methods that encode quantum correlations in the form
of extra classical degrees of freedom or extra dimensions in a controlled way,
ii) Designing local protocols for the fast preparation of many-body states that
minimize dissipative losses as well as understanding the general structure of
adiabatic transformations in complex systems and their implications for
(pre)thermalization, time-dependent integrability, dynamical phase transitions,
and related topics, and iii) Understanding the structure and robustness of
steady- or nearly-steady states in periodically driven systems. The new
theoretical findings will be applied to and tested on experimental setups,
continuing an active collaboration with various experimental groups to implement
theoretical ideas in real systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also
involve redesigning the graduate quantum mechanics course at the PI's
institution by significantly updating the materials with modern developments and
by adding computation-centric modules. The project also involves mentoring and
training of graduate and undergraduate students both from Boston University and
from other institutions through discussions and collaborations. The PI will
continue providing pedagogical reviews and lecture notes aimed at both graduate
and undergraduate student audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.