* 1813802
* Developing a Generalized Storyline that Organizes the Supports for Evidence-based Modeling of Long-Term Impacts of Disturbances in Complex Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,747,854.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support students to develop
evidence-based explanations for the impact of disturbances on complex systems.
The project will focus on middle school environmental science disciplinary core
ideas in life, Earth, and physical sciences. There are a wide variety of complex
systems principles at work in disturbance ecology. This project serves as a
starting point on supporting students to coordinate different sources of
information to parse out the direct and indirect effects of disturbances on
components of a system and to examine the interconnections between components to
predict whether a system will return to equilibrium (resilience) or the system
will change into a new state (hysteresis). These same complex systems principles
can be applied to other scientific phenomena, such as homeostasis and the spread
of infectious disease. This project will bring the excitement of Luquillo Long
Term Ecological Research (LTER) to classrooms outside of Puerto Rico, and has a
special emphasis on low performing, low income, high minority schools in
Chicago. Over 6000 students will directly benefit from participation in the
research program. The units will be incorporated into the Journey to El Yunque
web site for dissemination throughout Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and the LTER
network. The units will be submitted for review at the Achieve network, thus
extending the reach to teachers around the country. The project will impact
science teachers and curriculum designers through an online course on storyline
development. This project aims to improve students' ability to engage in
argument from evidence and address what the literature has identified as a
significant challenge, namely the ability to evaluate evidence. Researchers will
also demonstrate how it is possible to make progress on implementing Next
Generation Science Standards in low performing schools. Through the web-based
platform, these results can be replicated across many other school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will to use the scientific context
of the LTER program to develop a generalized storyline template for using
evidence-based modeling to teach basic principles of disturbance ecology. Though
a co-design process with middle school teachers in CPS, researchers will test
the application of learning principles to a generalized storyline template by
developing and evaluating three units on disturbance ecology - one life science,
one Earth system science, and one physical science. Through a task analysis,
researchers have identified three key areas of support for students to be
successful at explaining how a system will respond to a disturbance. First,
students need to be able to record evidence in a manner that will guide them to
developing their explanation. Causal model diagrams have been used successfully
in the past to organize evidence, but little is known about how students can use
their causal diagrams for developing explanations. Second, there have been a
wide variety of scaffolds developed to support the evaluation of scientific
arguments, but less is known about how to support students in organizing their
evidence to produce scientific arguments. Third, evidence-based modeling and
scientific argumentation are not tasks that can be successfully accomplished by
following a recipe. Students need to develop a task model to understand the
reason why they are engaged in a particular task and how that task will
contribute to the primary goal of explanation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.