* 1813662
* III: Small: Mirador: Explainable Computational Models for Recognizing and Understanding Controversial Topics Encountered Online
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Allan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,682.00

This project aims to develop algorithms and tools that allow a person to
recognize that a web page or other document discusses one or more topics that
are controversial -- that is, about which there is strong disagreement within
some sizeable group of people. The project will develop algorithms and tools
that explain the controversy surrounding the topic, identifying the populations
that disagree, the stances that they take, and how those stances conflict with
each other. The advances in these algorithms will broaden the research
community's understanding of how discussions and disagreements on topics can be
modeled computationally and how that resulting information can be conveyed to a
general user. The project will assist people in critical evaluation of on-line
material and help them understand why a page is educative or why it is not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to provide users with tools
that illuminate the broader context of the topic or topics of a single page or
document that someone finds. Previous work has shown that it is possible to
recognize with reasonable accuracy that a document is part of a controversial
topic, but that work is fragmented across different genres, demands more robust
modeling and more thorough evaluation, and lacks explanatory power that can help
a reader understand why and how a text is contentious. In this project, the
researchers explore fundamental questions about how controversy can be modeled
computationally so that it can be recognized "in the wild". The project also
explores model variations that allow an algorithm to extract an explanation of
the nature of the controversy. The project applies and extends text analysis and
comparison techniques. It leverages powerful statistical language modeling
methods as well as recent neural network (deep learning) approaches to represent
text, its controversial nature, its stances, and their relationships, all
extracted from Web pages and other documents. The modeling will be initially
used offline to identify collections of topics known to be controversial and
then adapt that collection by monitoring slowly-changing news sources and blog
postings as well as ephemeral microblog sources of data to capture rapid changes
in controversy. The researchers will make the resulting techniques available by
providing an open-source example server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.