* 1813571
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Keyphrase Extraction in Document Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/26/2017,08/31/2019
* Cornelia Caragea, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 64,960.00

Keyphrases for a document concisely describe the document using a small set of
phrases (i.e., sequences of contiguous words in a document). For example, the
keyphrases "social networks" and "interest targeting" quickly provide us with a
high-level topic description (i.e., a summary) of a document focused on
targeting interest for recommending services such as products and news to users,
in the context of social networks. Given today's very large collections of
documents, these keyphrases are extremely important not only for summarizing a
document, but also for the search and retrieval of relevant information.
However, keyphrases are not always available directly. Instead, they need to be
gleaned from the many details in documents. This project addresses the problem
of automatic keyphrase extraction from research papers, which are enablers of
the sharing and dissemination of scientific discoveries. The goal of the project
is to explore accurate approaches that automatically discover and extract
keyphrases in documents, using document networks, which will help users handle
and digest more information in less time during these "big data" times.
Educationally, this research will involve training of both graduate and
undergraduate students in the active area of research of keyphrase extraction,
which has high impact in many real-world applications such as online
advertising, document categorization, recommendation, and summarization, Web
search and discovery, and topic tracking in newswire. Although much research to
date has been done on automatic keyphrase extraction, no previous approaches
have captured the impact of documents on one another via the citation relation
that connects documents in a network. This project will investigate models that
take into consideration the linkage between citing and cited documents in a
document network and will explore various qualitative and quantitative aspects
of the question: "What are the key phrases or concepts in a document?" Scalable
iterative algorithms will be designed and developed that capture different
aspects of documents (e.g., topics or concepts), as well as the impact of one
document on another (e.g., influence or topic evolution) in a document network.
The results of this research will have a direct pipeline to the CiteSeerX
digital library (http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu). The software, tools, and
benchmark datasets developed during the course of this project will be broadly
disseminated via the project website
(http://people.cs.ksu.edu/~ccaragea/keyphrases.html). All findings will be
shared to the research community through publications in academic journals and
presented in Information Retrieval, Text Mining and Natural Language Processing
conferences.