* 1813760
* Usable Measures of Teacher Understanding: Exploring Diagnostic Models and Topic Analysis as Tools for Assessing Proportional Reasoning for Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Allan Cohen, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,168,584.00

One of the great challenges related to teachers and their knowledge is measuring
their learning in ways that are both formative and meaningful in relation to
their likely impact on students. This challenge persists despite efforts to
define the knowledge teachers should have and despite previous innovative
efforts to create good measures. This project tackles the challenge by
specifically aiming to measure the kinds of knowledge developed in professional
development (PD) programs that has been shown to matter for teachers' classroom
practices and their students' learning. The project aims to develop an
assessment that identifies patterns in the teachers' learning in a way that
helps drive subsequent professional development. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to pursue a potentially transformative approach
to the assessment of teacher proportional knowledge by developing a measure that
is well aligned with the content and skills taught in various PD programs. This
instrument will be based on a new approach that builds on emerging psychometric
models. Specifically, diagnostic classification models (DCMs) will be utilized
to diagnose teachers' learning during a PD program as well as employed to
identify the progression in teachers' learning. Statistical topic models (STMs)
will be used to look for patterns of understanding that emerge from open-ended
responses and provide natural-language insight into teachers' reasoning. A final
version of the assessment will be constructed for a national sample based on the
results from the predictive validity stage, and this version will be tested with
teachers who participate in various types of PD programs targeting proportional
reasoning. This project has broad implications for the creation of assessments
and for teacher education. It will provide insights about whether there is a
clear learning progression for teachers. While much work has been done with
students' learning progression, much less is known about how teachers learn.
Another implication is that the STM approach allows machine scoring of natural
language in a way that highlights strengths and weaknesses in reasoning rather
than simply returning a score. For formative use, this is information that is
more helpful as it highlights areas for further instruction. A third implication
is that DCMs will allow to assess teacher knowledge at a finer-grained
understanding than is typically available, thus allowing for careful refinement
of PD as well as a tool for showing overall growth in PD. A fourth implication
is that a more systematic approach will be followed to capture the kinds of
knowledge teachers need. Assessments developed using DCMs and STMs have the
potential to serve as models for developing further instruments in other STEM
content areas. Such assessments have the potential to not only help identify
successful PD programs, but also to provide PD providers with rich data from
which they can make instructional decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.