* 1813903
* Developing Pre-Service Teachers' Capacity to Teach Students with Learning Disabilities in Algebra I
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Casey Hord, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This exploratory project, within the DRK-12 teaching strand, is a collaborative
effort between researchers in special education and mathematics education to
teach pre-service teachers to be effective tutors for students with learning
disabilities in Algebra 1. There is an ongoing need to improve opportunities for
students with learning disabilities to be engaged and successful in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines, and Algebra 1 is an
important gatekeeper to STEM pathways. By training pre-service teachers to
support meaningful learning opportunities for students with LD, and by measuring
the long-term impact of that training on the pre-service teachers, this project
has the potential to provide a sustainable model to better serve the needs of
students. In addition, the project will contribute to understanding how
experiences can be created for pre-service teachers to learn about teaching in
school-based settings. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will implement, and document the outcomes of, a training program for two cohorts
of tutors, who will provide 1-1 tutoring for students with learning
disabilities. The training program is based upon research on the use of gestures
in coordination with written and spoken language and research on the types of
questions that can promote mathematics learning. Tutors who participate in our
training program will develop their content knowledge in Algebra 1 and their
knowledge of teaching practices related to gesturing and posing questions. The
goals of this research effort are to: (1) Implement a tutor-training program to
help pre-service teachers to facilitate the success of students with learning
disabilities in Algebra 1; (2) Show evidence of tutors improving in their
capacity to support students with learning disabilities in Algebra 1 using
gestures and strategic patterns of questioning; (3) Document the degree to which
tutors sustain their capacity to use gestures and strategic patterns of
questioning beyond the conclusion of the training program; and (4) Show the
development of students' conceptual understanding, procedural knowledge, and
productive dispositions towards Algebra 1 through interactions with tutors. The
research design includes analysis of video, written records, observation, and
field notes from tutoring sessions. A systemic functional linguistics framework
will be used to analyze the connections students and pre-service teachers make
between mathematics concepts and procedures during tutoring
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.