* 1813740
* Collaborative Research: Engaging High School Students in Computer Science with Co-creative Learning Companions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Kristy Boyer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 862,472.00

This research investigates how state-of-the-art creative and pedagogical agents
can improve students' learning, attitudes, and engagement with computer science.
The project will be conducted in high school classrooms using EarSketch, an
online computer science learning environments that engages over 160,000 learners
worldwide in making music with JavaScript or Python code. The researchers will
build the first co-creative learning companion, Cai, that will scaffold students
with pedagogical strategies that include making use of learner code to
illustrate abstraction and modularity, suggesting new code to scaffold new
concepts, providing help and hints, and explaining its decisions. This work will
directly address the national need to develop computing literacy as a core STEM
skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work brings together an experienced
interdisciplinary team to investigate the hypothesis that adding a co-creative
learning companion to an expressive computer science learning environment will
improve students' computer science learning (as measured by code sophistication
and concept knowledge), positive attitudes towards computing (self-efficacy and
motivation), and engagement (focused attention and involvement during learning).
The iterative design and development of the co-creative learning companion will
be based on studies of human collaboration in EarSketch classrooms, the findings
in the co-creative literature and virtual agents research, and the researchers'
observations of EarSketch use in classrooms. This work will address the
following research questions: 1) What are the foundational pedagogical moves
that a co-creative learning companion for expressive programming should
perform?; 2) What educational strategies for a co-creative learning companion
most effectively scaffold learning, favorable attitudes toward computing, and
engagement?; and 3) In what ways does a co-creative learning companion in
EarSketch increase computer science learning, engagement, and positive attitudes
toward computer science when deployed within the sociocultural context of a high
school classroom? The proposed research has the potential to transform our
understanding of how to support student learning in and broaden participation
through expressive computing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.