* 1813567
* SHF: Small: Fast Sign-Off of Machine Learning Systems: From Circuit-Level Modeling to Statistical System Validation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kishor Trivedi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Machine learning has been adopted by a broad range of emerging applications,
including health monitoring, autonomous driving, advanced manufacturing, etc.
However, any machine learning system cannot be 100% accurate due to the accuracy
limitation posed by machine learning algorithms and the circuit-level non-ideal
features associated with its hardware implementation. This project investigates
a radically new framework for efficient validation of machine learning systems
implemented with nano-scale integrated circuits. It aims to identify and
synthesize the critical corner cases for which a machine learning system is
likely to fail. The project is expected to initialize a paradigm shift in
today's design methodology for complex machine learning systems, thereby leading
to an immediate impact on a broad range of industrial sectors relying on machine
intelligence. In addition, the proposed education activities create a large
number of unique training opportunities for both academic and industrial
participants, substantially improving the education infrastructure and generate
high-quality researchers and practitioners for the society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, validating a machine learning system with high
throughout, low power and complex functionality is an extremely challenging
task. This project attacks the grand challenge by developing a novel validation
framework composed of two major components: (1) corner-case generation and (2)
rare-failure rate estimation. Both physical circuit models and statistical
generative models are proposed to synthesize a large amount of test cases,
reducing the experimental cost to physically record the corner-cases that are
difficult to observe. Furthermore, a novel formulation, based on subset
partition and graph embedding, is developed to efficiently inspect the likely-
failed test cases and consequently estimate the rare- failure rate that is
expensive to capture by random sampling. Built upon these mathematical tools,
the project's framework offers a fundamental infrastructure that could
facilitate radical breakthroughs over numerous machine learning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.