* 1813313
* Collaborative Research: Visualizing Chemistry with Infrared Imaging
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Andrew Torelli, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 09/30/2019
* USD 90,053.00

This project will explore how chemical and physical phenomena can be visualized
using low-cost infrared (IR) cameras. Many chemistry concepts are difficult to
comprehend because they cannot be seen directly. IR camera imaging uses false
color on the screen of portable electronic devices to indicate thermal
differences, and is readily accessible in the undergraduate chemistry
laboratory. By observing the heat absorbed, released, or distributed in a
chemical process, rich information about the process can be rendered visible.
This project will develop seven curriculum units based on the use of IR imaging
to support, accelerate, and expand inquiry-based learning for a range of
chemistry concepts, such as heat transfer, chemical reactions, phase changes,
colligative properties, enzyme kinetics, and light-matter interaction. New
evidence regarding the impact of direct visualization of invisible processes on
student learning and concept development will be generated.

Bowling Green State University (BGSU) and Concord Consortium will develop new
curriculum units that explore visualization of thermal processes using low-cost
IR cameras, and conduct research on student learning associated with
visualization. The units will employ the predict-observe-explain (POE) cycle to
scaffold inquiry in the activities developed. To demonstrate the versatility and
generality of this approach, the units will cover a range of topics in the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Educational research will investigate robust
evidence of learning and identifying the underlying cognitive mechanisms that
lead to improved student learning. This information will lead to effective
strategies for using IR imaging in the chemistry classroom. This study will be
conducted using a diverse student population at many collaborating institutions:
BGSU, Boston College, Bradley University, Owens Community College, Parkland
College, Saint John Fisher College, and State University of New York at Geneseo.