* 1813777
* Advancing Methods and Synthesizing Research in STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2022
* USD 739,452.00

Rigorous research and development methods are essential for developing and
testing new approaches in STEM education. This project will address two critical
opportunities to improve the translation and connection of innovations and
evidence across federally funded STEM education projects. First, the project
will aim to build capacity and learning opportunities for STEM education
research and development. Second, the project will synthesize evidence of
discovery and innovation across NSF-funded work. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct four research syntheses. Final topics will be determined
but may include early math education, early learning in science, and engineering
in the elementary grades. As part of this work, the team will produce a brief
report for each topical synthesis, designed to highlight and elevate evidence
and contributions across a set of projects, in a nontechnical format that
combines graphics with text. Content will include a rationale for the topic and
its importance in STEM education; synopsis of the investments in this area and
the projects sampled; synopsis of the cross-project contributions, with
illustrative highlights or examples from projects; commentary on the quality of
evidence; and discussion of the contributions and potential broader impacts of
the investments. The project will also plan and conduct a series of methods-
focused webinars which may include topics such as rigorous quasi-experimental
designs; measuring implementation fidelity and adaptation; applying improvement
science methods; cluster randomized controlled trials; design-based research; or
developing and testing valid measures. The materials from the webinars will be
procured and made publicly available for the education research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.