* 1813675
* CHS: Small: Support for Self-Tracking and Patient-Provider Collaboration Using Data for Multiple and Evolving Goals in People with Migraine
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Allison Cole, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,795.00

Technology-supported self-tracking is increasingly common across a variety of
everyday domains, including finances, food, location, physical activity, time
use, and weight. In the context of personal health, many patients and providers
believe technology-supported self-tracking can offer a more complete, accurate,
and long-term understanding. However, current tools for technology-supported
self-tracking often fail to effectively support the relationship between self-
tracking data and the goals that people have for that data. This project will
develop new methods and tools to help people represent, manage, and track goals
and their relationships to personal data. Working in the specific context of
migraine-related tracking, the team will characterize patient self-tracking
goals, patient-provider collaboration goals, and the implications of those goals
for needs in data collection and analysis. The team will develop new methods and
tools for self-tracking, based on using goal templates, as well as new methods
and tools for patient-provider collaboration around these goals. The team will
work closely with people with migraine and health providers in both the design
and assessment of methods and tools, and will further pursue broader impacts
through disseminating the methods, tools, and datasets to support others in
doing self-tracking research. The project will also provide research and
education opportunities for students from grade school to grad school, with the
team specifically targeting students from groups that are underrepresented in
computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will characterize patient
self-tracking goals, patient-provider collaboration goals, and relationships to
underlying data through participatory design processes, deployments with people
with migraine, and interviews and observations examining patient-provider
collaborations. They will develop goal templates that scaffold the process of
deciding what, when, and how to track, and will implement these templates
together with appropriate analyses and visualizations in a constellation of
mobile, web, and back-end self-tracking tools. They will then leverage this
novel self-tracking infrastructure to examine the use of goal templates in
addressing challenges of customizing tracking to a person's multiple and
evolving goals, challenges of integrating tracking into everyday life, and
challenges of using heterogeneous data in modeling across multiple and evolving
goals. They will also examine the use of goal templates in patient-provider
collaboration, including in the collaborative definition of tracking goals and
in interactive curation and transformation of data according to the distinct
goals and perspectives that patients and providers can bring to the same
underlying data. Assessment will be conducted in field deployments, including
deployments examining self-tracking by people with migraine, examining patient-
provider collaborations in a specialty headache clinic and primary care
contexts, and examining approaches to scaffolding of expertise for patients and
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.