* 1813930
* AF: Small: Research in Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Emanuele Viola, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2021
* USD 507,896.00

Computational inefficiency is a common experience: the computer cannot complete
a certain task due to lack of resources such as time, memory, or bandwidth. The
theory of computational complexity classifies -- or aims to classify --
computational tasks according to their inherent inefficiency. Inefficiency can
also be harnessed to our advantage. Indeed, modern cryptography and electronic
commerce rely on the (presumed) inefficiency of certain computational tasks.
From the study of computational complexity there have arisen questions that
stand as grand challenges of contemporary science. The objective of this project
is to enrich the theory of computational complexity with new directions and
techniques, and to use these techniques to make progress on long-standing open
problems. Specific areas of investigation include the complexity of sampling
tasks and of distributed tasks, and randomness. The investigator has a track
record of fruitful exchanges with the mathematics community and will foster
further cross-fertilization between mathematics and computer science. The
project will develop publicly-available educational material, including lecture
notes, surveys, slides, and videos, both at the advanced and at the introductory
level. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the project will seek to prove
computational lower bounds for sampling tasks. These lower bounds provide an
under-explored angle for attacking problems on extractors and data structures.
Preliminary results by the investigator have already found application in a
breakthrough known as two-source extractors. The project will also bring a new
set of techniques in group theory to bear on communication complexity and
cryptography. This project will strengthen these techniques and develop more
applications. Finally, the project will explore extensions of small bias
generators, which have the potential to answer central open questions in pseudo-
randomness and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.