* 1813254
* Developing and Validating Assessments to Measure and Build Elementary Teachers' Content Knowledge for Teaching about Matter and Its Interactions within Teacher Education Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jamie Mikeska, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,699,785.00

This is an Early-Stage Design and Development collaborative effort submitted to
the assessment strand of the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) Program. Its
fundamental purpose is to examine and gather initial validity evidence for
assessments designed to measure and build Kindergarten-fifth grade science
teachers' content knowledge for teaching (CKT) about matter and its interactions
in teacher education settings. The selection of this topic will facilitate the
development of a proof-of-concept to determine if and how CKT assessments can be
developed and used to measure and build elementary teachers' CKT. Also, it will
facilitate rapid and targeted refinement of an evidence-centered design process
that could be applied to other science topics. Plans are to integrate CKT
assessments and related resources into teacher education courses to support the
ability of teachers to apply their content knowledge to the work of teaching and
learning science. The project will combine efforts from prior projects and
engage in foundational research to examine the nature of teachers' CKT and to
build theories and hypotheses about the productive use and design of CKT
assessment materials to support formative and summative uses. Likewise, the
project will create a set of descriptive cases highlighting the use of these
tools. Understanding how CKT science assessments can be leveraged as summative
tools to evaluate current efforts, and as formative tools to build elementary
teachers' specialized, practice-based knowledge will be the central foci of this
effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research questions will be: (1) What is
the nature of elementary science teachers' CKT about matter and its
interactions?; and (2) How can the development of prospective elementary
teachers' CKT be supported within teacher education? To address the research
questions, the study will employ a mixed-methods, design-based research approach
to gather various sources of validity evidence to support the formative and
summative use of the CKT instrument, instructional tasks, and supporting
materials. The project will be organized around two main research and
development strands. Strand One will build an empirically grounded understanding
of the nature of elementary teachers' CKT. Strand Two will focus on developing
and studying how CKT instructional tasks can be used formatively within teacher
education settings to build elementary teachers' CKT. In addition, the project
will refine a conceptual framework that identifies the science-specific teaching
practices that comprise the work of teaching science. This will be used as well
to assess the CKT that teachers leverage when recognizing, understanding, and
responding to the content-intensive practices that they engage in as they teach
science. To that end, the study will build on two existing frameworks from prior
NSF-funded work. The first was originally developed to create CKT assessments
for elementary and middle school teachers in English Language Arts and
mathematics. The second focuses on the content challenges that novice elementary
science teachers face. It is organized by the instructional tools and practices
that elementary science teachers use, such as scientific models and
explanations. These instructional practices cut across those addressed in the
Next Generation Science Standards' (NGSS; Lead States, 2013) disciplinary
strands. The main project's outcomes will be knowledge that builds and refines
theories about the nature of elementary teachers' CKT, and how CKT elementary
science assessment materials can be designed productively for formative and
summative purposes. The project will also result in the development of a suite
of valid and reliable assessments that afford interpretations on CKT matter
proficiency and can be used to monitor elementary teachers learning. An external
advisory board will provide formative and summative feedback on the project's
activities and progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12 Program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research
and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.