* 1813434
* SHF: Small: Bitstream Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mikko Lipasti, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 449,997.00

Embedded computing systems are becoming very common in today's world, ranging
from wearable devices, to in-home smart speakers, to autonomous appliances and
vehicles. Many of the computational tasks that these systems implement require
very high performance hardware for tasks like audio voice recognition, visual
object recognition, path optimization, and autonomous control. Historically,
such high-performance hardware relied on binary fixed-point algorithms deployed
on low-power microcontrollers or digital signal processors. However, the sensing
and control interfaces themselves do not use binary number representations, but
instead use bitstreams, which encode numeric input and output values using the
density of ones over time. Conventional computing substrates requires conversion
of both inputs and outputs to interface with physical systems that utilize
bitstreams. This project is developing novel, biologically-inspired approaches
for directly operating on data represented in the native bitstream format.
Compute hardware that directly operates on these bitstreams can be seamlessly
integrated into systems that sense the real world, process sensory data, and
issue control commands based on the processed data as well as learned actions
based on rewards from the environment. The capability of these new approaches
will be demonstrated through two experimental platforms: a very low power speech
recognition system that operates on bitstream audio data, and an autonomous
airborne vehicle that learns to navigate its environment. This research has
broad industry- and economy-wide impact since it will lead to the discovery and
realization of novel, powerful, and energy-efficient approaches for implementing
power- and energy-constrained embedded computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advocates development of novel,
biologically-inspired approaches for processing data represented as bitstreams.
Bitstreams, which encode numeric values using density of ones (unary) or ones
and zeroes (binary) are a natural representation for data sensed from the
environment (input) as well as robotic control (output), and can be
inexpensively generated using low-cost, yet accurate, sigma-delta modulators.
The initial phase of this research project focuses on developing the theoretical
and algorithmic underpinnings for visual, auditory, and inertial sensory
processing, including feature extraction, bandpass filtering, perspective and
coordinate transforms, linear optimization, and memory formation, which are
grounded in principles from the speech processing, computer vision, spiking
neural networks, reinforcement learning, and signal processing domains. The
novel sensory processing capabilities are then deployed in two experimental
platforms: first, an ultra-low power acoustic model for speech recognition that
can demonstrate the suitability of bitstream processing for feature extraction
and sequence learning via long short-term memory. Next, bitstream sensory
processing technology is coupled directly to a control system that enables an
unmanned aerial vehicle to navigate in a controlled indoor environment while
learning, with increasing efficiency, to identify and target sources of rewards.
Both demonstration platforms rely on concepts from biological spiking neural
networks, stochastic computing for arithmetic operations, as well as oversampled
sigma-delta modulation theory for data representation and signal processing
tasks, and provide unprecedented levels of efficiency in terms of energy
consumption, compute density, and autonomous
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.