* 1813012
* Science Communities of Practice Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jeffery Seitz, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,406,195.00

This project will study implementation of an effective professional learning
model for elementary science teachers that includes teacher leaders,
administrators and university educators in a system perspective for improving
science instruction in ways that make it sustainable. The working model involves
reciprocal communities of practice, which are groups of teachers, leaders and
administrators that focus on practical tasks and how to achieve them across
these stakeholder perspectives. The project will provide evidence about the
specific components of the professional development model that support
sustainable improvement in science teaching, will test the ways that teacher
ownership and organizational conditions mediate instructional change, and will
develop four tools for facilitating the teacher learning and the accompanying
capacity building. In this way, the project will produce practical knowledge and
tools necessary for other school districts nationwide to create professional
learning that is tailored to their contexts and therefore sustainable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of instructional innovations. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects. This study posits that communication among district teachers,
teacher leaders, and administrators, and a sense of ownership for improved
instruction among teachers can support sustainable change. As such, it tests a
model that fosters communication and ownership through three reciprocal
communities of practice--one about district leadership including one teacher per
school, coaches and university faculty; another about lesson study including
teachers, coaches and faculty; and a third about instructional innovation
including teachers and administrators, facilitated by coaches. The research
design seeks to inform what the communities of practice add to the effects in a
quasi-experimental study involving 72 third to fifth grade teachers and 6500
students in four urban school districts. Mixed methodologies will be used to
examine shifts in science teaching over three years, testing the professional
development model and the mediating roles of reform ownership and organizational
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.