* 1813910
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Signal Processing for Nonlinear Diffractive Imaging: Acquisition, Reconstruction, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ulugbek Kamilov, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 265,293.00

There is a growing need in biomedical research to observe biological structure
and processes on the length scales smaller than 100nm. Conventional optical
systems cannot effectively provide such information, however, due to the
infamous diffraction limit. The formulation of the diffraction limit
fundamentally relies on the presumed linearity in the interaction between the
illuminating light and the object. The goal of this project is to overcome the
diffraction limit by exploiting nonlinearities from a modern signal processing
perspective. This project will lay out theoretical, algorithmic, and
instrumentation foundation for nonlinear diffractive imaging. The outcome of
this project can open up many possibilities of high-resolution imaging in highly
scattering media that are ubiquitous in science and medicine, including
histology, cytometry, brain mapping, and drug discovery. The proposed activities
will also promote education through the training of students in a wide range of
topics within signal processing, computational imaging, and optics, and through
related curriculum development efforts where the basic themes of the proposed
research will be incorporated in courses taught by the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is to develop
computational imaging methods that fully harness the information encoded in two
types of nonlinearities: object-light interactions and prior assumptions on the
objects. Concretely, the work will focus on: (a) efficient schemes for data
acquisition, (b) scalable algorithms for 3D reconstruction, and (c) two novel
application platforms for validation. Results from this research will lead to a
single, holistic signal processing framework that can maximally extract the
information encoded in nonlinear measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.