* 1813956
* Strengthening Data Literacy across the Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Beth Chance, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,021,760.00

The Strengthening Data Literacy across the Curriculum (SDLC) project seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) high school students and teachers through
the development of resources, models and tools. This project is designed to
promote statistical understandings and interest in quantitative data analysis
among high school students. The project will target students outside mathematics
and statistics classes who seldom have opportunities formally make sense of
large-scale quantitative data. The population for the initial study will be
humanities/social studies and mathematics/statistics high school teachers and
their classes. The focus on social justice themes are intended to engage
students with content that resonates with their interests. This strategy has the
potential to demonstrate ways to provide rich, meaningful statistical
instruction to a population that seldom has the opportunity for such learning.
By capturing students' imagination and interest with social justice themes, this
project has the potential of high impact in today's society where understanding
and preparing statistical reports are becoming more critical to the general
populace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on prior theory and
research to develop a new set of statistics learning materials, with data
visualization tools and an applied social science focus to design three 2-week
applied data investigations (self-contained modules) addressing real-world
socioeconomic questions with large-scale social science data. The modules will
be aligned with the high school Common Core State Standards for Mathematics and
key statistical content for college students. The purpose of the study is to
strengthen existing theories of how to design classroom learning materials to
support two primary sets of outcomes for high school students, particularly
among those historically underrepresented in STEM fields: 1) stronger
understandings of important statistics concepts and data analysis practices, and
2) interest in statistics and working with data. The modules will engage
students in a four-step investigative process where they will (1) formulate
questions that can be answered with data; (2) design and implement a plan to
assemble appropriate data; (3) use numerical and graphical methods to explore
the data; and (4) summarize conclusions relating back to the original questions
and citing relevant components of the analysis that support their interpretation
and acknowledging other interpretations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
employ a Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) design using both
quantitative and qualitative data to determine results of targeted outcomes
(noted above) as well track whether there is any evidence to support the
conjectures that key module components directly impact targeted student
outcomes. Starting with a well-defined, preliminary conceptual framework for the
study, the project team will conduct four cycles of iterative design and testing
of the proposed SDLC modules over two academic years, with each cycle occurring
during a fall or spring semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.