* 1813825
* Collaborative Research: Searching for the Expelled Envelope of Stripped-Envelope Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* John Wheeler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 463,650.00

Astronomers study supernovae because the maximum luminosity of a stellar
catastrophe can equal that of a billion suns, which is an awesome spectacle to
see. By studying which stars become supernovae, we gain new insights into the
course of the stellar life cycle. The explosion causes the star to expand and
thin out, and this allows us to see ever deeper into the exploding matter.
Matter is thrown into space at a few percent of the speed of light. When this
happens, astronomers can read the signals from the outer layers of the stars and
probe the nature of the star both before and after it exploded. Through these
observations, we gain new insight into the formation of compact objects, such as
neutron stars and black holes. The ejected matter is enriched in new elements,
and thus, Supernovae are principal drivers of the nuclear evolution of the
Universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supernovae are also an important factor in the
physical structure and composition of galaxies. The energy released by
supernovae may stimulate or inhibit the formation of stars. Supernovae may also
eject matter from galaxies in supernova-heated galactic winds. Additionally,
Supernovae serve as exquisite indicators of extragalactic distances. Through the
study of Supernovae, we can determine the history of the cosmic
expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major issue in supernova research is
determining how stars shed mass prior to explosion. The investigators will study
the interaction of the exploding star, when the explosion collides with matter
that was expelled before the explosion. Deeper understanding of these issues
will expand our knowledge of how and when stars eject matter. The investigators
seek to determine whether stars have multiple episodes of mass loss. They also
want to know how the loss of mass alters the distribution of matter around the
star. To better understand these questions, the investigators will study select
stars that contain no hydrogen by the time they explode as supernovae because
this means either the stars have expelled all their hydrogen-rich material into
space or a companion star has accreted it. The investigators will also determine
how the strength of the collision varies in time because the collision
properties are related to the nature of the underlying
supernova.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will help further our
understanding of our place in the Universe. It will serve to train young
scientists in the STEM fields. It will promote deeper understanding of science
in the public. It will be accompanied by broad outreach in appropriate venues
for writing and speaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators use the 2.7m
Harlan J. Smith telescope at McDonald Observatory, in Texas, to search for the
collision of supernovae. Narrow-band filters permit a rapid search for emission
of hydrogen features that signify the presence of the collision of the supernova
with previously-expelled hydrogen-rich material. The narrow-band filter
observations also indicate variations in the strength of the hydrogen emission,
which is a further clue to the nature of the interaction. The investigators will
continue studies of collisions with the Hobby-Eberly Telescope to confirm that
the hydrogen emission is from shocked material and not from ambient
concentrations of hydrogen in the interstellar medium. They perform observations
at other wavelengths, including the use of the NSF's Very Large Array radio
observatory, to further constrain the properties - temperature and density - of
the shocked material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.