* 1813496
* Workshops: Examining the Relationship Between Culture, Stress, and Health in Two Inuit Communities Through Community Based Participatory Research
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Elspeth Ready, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2023
* USD 35,259.00

Poor health and its relationship to social and economic stress are hallmarks for
Native peoples across North America, especially for those living in the Arctic.
Five decades of academic research among Inuit peoples in North America has
established a trend of declining health and increasing health disparities that
corresponds with the rapid socioeconomic and environmental changes occurring in
the Arctic regions, indicating the need for more effective health interventions.
Despite decades of epidemiological and public health research and increasing
efforts to improve health in these communities, poor health, higher mortality,
and attendant social concerns remain far higher than elsewhere in North America.
Ongoing health interventions have proven ineffective, suggesting new, locally-
based, and culturally appropriate approaches are needed. This project focuses a
local lens on how Arctic residents understand and experience health and stress
and how they prioritize health problems, making its outcomes critical for
developing programs and policies that lead to lasting improvements in health and
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will be conducted in the
communities of Ulukhaktok, Inuvialuit Settlement Region and Kangiqsujuaq,
Nunavik to develop Community Based Participatory Research designs addressing
community concerns about health and stress with direct Inuit input. Drawing upon
the investigators' decades of experience working in these communities, this
project is well-suited for a co-produced approach, allowing for both for
efficient use of resources and the necessary rapport to work with community
members to develop a research project that meets both academic and community
needs. The investigators will travel to both communities to conduct mini-
conferences with community members to set a research agenda for investigating
health disparities and the experience of social stress in these communities.
These meetings will solicit community involvement and input in targeting
research priorities related to health, generate frameworks for working
collaboratively with local governance, and identify mechanisms for improving
local research capacity and developing sustainable solutions for improving
health in Arctic communities. The outcome of this research will be a fully
developed research project in which knowledge about health and stress is co-
produced with the community of focus, which then retains significant input into
the execution and outcome of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.