* 1813011
* Understanding the Mechanism of Protection Following Challenge and Immunization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* M. Stanca Ciupe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,656.00

The goal of vaccines is to mimic natural infections, induce potent immune
responses and, most importantly, establish immunological memory. This empirical
approach has failed to induce protection against some pathogens, as vaccine
effectiveness can be hindered by a combination of factors including pathogen
genetic diversity, complex pathogenesis, and/or ability of pathogens to evade
the immune system. Mathematical models in combination with data analysis can
help advance the understanding of correlates and mechanisms of protection. This
research project provides an interdisciplinary approach into the study of such
mechanisms of infection, persistence, and protection. It combines development of
mathematical techniques and the use of biological data for the investigation of
the role of antibody in the clearance of viral infections, the dynamic
mechanisms that induce immunological priming and memory following external
challenge, and the complex immune cell interactions following vaccination and
boosting. The project aims to help identify key mechanisms involved in the
formation of immunological memory after challenge and vaccination with the aim
of guiding strategies for disease prevention and control. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, mathematical models will be developed, analyzed, and
compared with temporal data with the aim of (1) evaluating the relationship
between protection and the quantity, quality, and dynamics of antibodies
following virus challenge; (2) investigating the molecular mechanisms that tilt
innate immune cells into inflammatory or tolerant phenotypes; (3) determining
the relationship between immunological memory and the size and dynamics of
cellular and molecular markers induced through vaccination. The project's
investigation of complex non-linear dynamical systems of biological switches is
intended to lead to rigorous theoretical criteria on asymptotic, global
behavior, as well as model features needed for the emergence of bistable
solutions. Model validation against data will provide insight into the
relationship between protection and antibody development, and will advance
understanding of the relationship between immune factors and vaccination
outcomes. Most importantly, it will predict key mechanisms, at cellular and
molecular level, involved in the formation of immunological memory following
challenge. Such knowledge is essential for rational vaccine design. The project
will promote the advancement of mathematical and biological knowledge, will
provide an opportunity for interdisciplinary collaboration with researchers in
the mathematical and medical communities, and will involve training of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.