* 1813041
* SHF: Small: Retrospective and Prospective Studies of the Effects of Gender Bias in Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Emerson Murphy-Hill, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 0.00

Gender bias has been researched extensively in the social science community, but
relatively little research has been done in software engineering specifically,
despite such issues coming to prominence in the technology sphere. In 2017, the
investigator published a study on gender differences and bias in open source on
a large scale, looking at contribution success rates in open-source software
projects. The results showed that the likelihood of a contribution being
accepted was higher for women than for men, but the trend is reversed when the
gender of the pull requester is visible. By increasing understanding of the
biases that decrease exclusivity of women, the largest underrepresented group in
software engineering, this project aims to broaden participation and have
significant benefits to society.

The project will conduct four families of foundational studies about gender bias
in software engineering, leveraging a unique and extensive dataset. The first
family of studies will re-examine existing studies using several new methods.
The second family will triangulate prior results using other platforms and other
outcome measures. The third family will investigate four aspects of bias
uncovered in prior literature. The fourth family of studies will be experiments
that isolate the effect of biases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.