* 1813574
* RAPID: Risk and Resilience Post-Hurricane Harvey: A Longitudinal Examination of Pre-Disaster Sleep in Youth
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Candice Alfano, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,591.00

This award supports research on children affected by Hurricane Harvey. This
research project will examine how Hurricane Harvey and events surrounding the
hurricane impacted children's development, particularly children's sleep
patterns. Children are especially vulnerable to traumatic events. This project
will enhance the ability to identify youth at the highest levels of risk both
before and after a natural disaster. It will also provide information about how
children react to trauma and how their development is impacted by trauma. The
study will have broader impacts, because results will likely help local
officials, schools, and parents in disaster-prone communities reduce the long-
term effects of catastrophic events on children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior
research on adults shows that certain sleep patterns either elevate or buffer
against psychological risk in the face of a disaster. Little is known about the
connections between natural disasters, trauma, sleep, and psychological risk
among children. This project will include a sample of youth living in the
Houston, Texas metropolitan area during Hurricane Harvey. Those youth completed
a comprehensive assessment of sleep and psychological functioning prior to
Hurricane Harvey. The current study will take advantage of those data collected
before the hurricane. This study will enable data to be collected after the
hurricane, which will give investigators the ability to compare pre- and post-
hurricane social, emotional, behavioral, and academic functioning using parent,
teacher, and youth reports. Researchers will examine whether the presence of
certain sleep patterns and features, exhibited by children prior to Hurricane
Harvey, decreases or increases risk of poor social, behavioral, emotional, and
academic functioning. The primary hypothesis is that pre-disaster sleep
characterized by (a) less total and more fragmented REM (rapid eye movement)
sleep periods; (b) less slow wave sleep; (c) less sleep spindle activity; and
(d) longer sleep onset latency, will amplify the negative effects of hurricane
exposure on social, behavioral, emotional, and academic functioning. Emotional
functioning will be assessed using subjective reports as well as
psychophysiology (electrodermal activity, respiratory sinus arrhythmia).
Families will also complete a semi-structured diagnostic clinical interview to
assess for psychiatric diagnoses. This study has the potential to inform models
of trauma. This study will help the general public better understand the impact
natural disasters have on children. This proposal is appropriate for the NSF
RAPID mechanism because the ephemeral nature of the data to be collected means
there is an urgency to the project. The ability to begin collecting data as soon
as possible is crucial.