* 1813280
* Integrating Science with Mathematics and Engineering: Linking Home and School Learning for All Young Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Savitha Moorthy, Digital Promise Global
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 02/28/2023
* USD 2,754,363.00

Children in preschool programs have few opportunities to engage meaningfully in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. This is
especially true in programs serving children from low-income communities, where
resources are scarce. This study will investigate the integration of science
with mathematics and engineering and develop resources that provide preschool
children with integrated STEM learning experiences. The study will also
investigate the connection between home and school learning and will develop
resources that strengthen children's experiences at school and home. This will
include investigating the needs of and designing for dual language learners who
represent a large (and growing) proportion of the population served in public
preschool programs. This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of STEM by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using design based research (DBR), the
researchers will: (1) Develop learning blueprints to guide the design of
classroom and family learning resources. (2) Co-design resources with teachers
and parents from low-income as well as culturally and linguistically diverse
communities. (3) Conduct a series of formative pilot studies with partner
teachers and parents. (4) Conduct a quasi-experimental field study in preschool
classrooms and homes to examine both implementation and learning outcomes. Data
sources will include observations in classrooms and homes, surveys and
interviews with teachers and parents, and child learning assessments. Analysis
will include qualitative approaches to examine patterns of interaction and
engagement with resources in classrooms and homes, as well as quantitative
approaches to examine children's learning accounting for the multilevel
structure of the data. The project involves a collaboration between Digital
Promise Global, Education Development Center, WGBH and multiple early childhood
programs in California and New York. A total of 28 preschool centers, 56
classroom teachers, 208 families and 560 children are expected to participate.
Results from this project are intended to inform understanding of how young
children learn STEM, how adults at school and home can support children's early
STEM learning, and what supports are useful to diverse learners specifically.
Results could also highlight design principles that can inform future early STEM
education research and development efforts integrating media and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.