* 1813188
* AF: Small: New Directions in Algorithmic Game Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Tim Roughgarden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 451,617.00

The goal of this research project is to develop new results in theoretical
computer science that are useful for reasoning about fundamental economic
problems. For example, consider the problem of selling items in an auction ---
such as collectables on online auction websites, wireless spectrum to
telecommunication companies in a government auction, or sponsored links to
advertisers through a search engine auction. How can a seller use past
experience to design better auctions? To what extent can simple and practical
solutions substitute for complex but theoretically justified solutions? Another
example of a fundamental economic problem is fair division (as seen, for
example, when dividing an estate among its heirs). What's the most sensible way
of defining a "fair outcome," and how much work is required to find one? This
research project will develop theory to help answer all of these questions. The
research project also involves the mentoring of PhD students, innovation in
graduate teaching, the dissemination of lecture videos and notes for graduate
courses, and the teaching of algorithmic fundamentals through massive online
open courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the project are divided
into four categories. The first set of goals seeks relatively simple solutions
to economic design problems that provably approximate the theoretical optimum.
The project includes two new directions for this area: the design of simple
contracts for principal agent settings, and the design of resale-proof revenue-
maximizing auctions. The second set of goals investigates the question of how to
best learn near-optimal auctions from data, focusing on the important but
unresolved algorithmic and strategic issues of the problem. The third set of
goals develops complexity-theoretic barriers in economics, with specific
applications to equilibria in markets with divisible goods, to extended
formulations for the polytope of interim allocation rules, and to the inherent
complexity of optimal prior-free digital goods auctions. The fourth set of goals
concern fair division, where the goal is to distribute resources among competing
players in a "fair" way, with a focus on the multi-party communication
complexity of the problem with indivisible items.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.