* 1813033
* OP: High Accuracy Modeling of Graphene Plasmonics in Three Dimensional Grating Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* David Nicholls, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

Since it was first isolated experimentally in 2004, graphene (a single layer of
carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice) has transformed the fields of plasmonics
and photonics. Graphene has remarkable mechanical, chemical, and electronic
properties, and is finding its way into devices of engineering interest from
communications and military capabilities to medical sciences and biological
sensing. Of particular note is graphene's semi-metallic character which permits
one to tune its electrical properties. It is not surprising that extensive
investigation of graphene has been conducted in the engineering community,
however, there is very little to report in the applied mathematics literature.
There is an opportunity to make valuable contributions. The goal of this project
is to provide a rigorous mathematical framework for the study of graphene in
grating structures and to describe a computational framework for highly accurate
simulation of these models. With these, the project aims to guide the design of
engineers to deliver devices of interest in a greatly expedited
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The family of High-Order Perturbation of Surfaces
(HOPS) methods, which the Principal Investigator has developed over the past
decade, are an ideal choice for the model at hand. However, further algorithmic
enhancements and extensions are required to produce tools which will continue to
be useful to practitioners. In particular, the project will advance the state of
the art in the modeling, numerical simulation, and design of grating structures
featuring two-dimensional materials with the following objectives: (1) While
materials such as graphene have been incorporated into the existing models in
two-dimensional, scalar configurations, these efforts must be extended to the
case of three-dimensional vector electromagnetic simulations; (2) The Method of
Transformed Field Expansions (TFE) is a stabilized HOPS algorithm with which one
can not only derive rigorous existence, uniqueness, and analyticity results, but
also provide highly accurate numerical approximations, and these recursions must
be extended to the three-dimensional vector electromagnetic case; (3) The
surface formulations advocated by the PI are affected by the choice of surface
integral operator relating Dirichlet and Neumann traces, and the project will
investigate the performance of Impedance-Impedance Operators which are free of
the "Dirichlet Eigenvalues" which plague the straightforward Dirichlet-Neumann
Operators used in previous implementations; (4) the PI and collaborators
recently studied the statistical properties of scattering by random rough
gratings and will include two-dimensional materials in three-dimensional
structures into this framework as part of the project; and (5) In addition to
using these HOPS methods to identify grating structures featuring graphene, the
project also aims to design them for optimal
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.