* 1813877
* CIF: Small: Precise Computational and Statistical Tradeoffs for Iterative Signal Estimation and Supervised Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 490,691.00

Due to the proliferation of new sensors and acquisition devices, massive data
sets are gathered in many modern applications ranging from medical imaging to
online advertisement. Conventional statistical signal estimation and machine
learning theory aims to understand how the predictive ability or accuracy of
data analysis algorithms scales with data sizes. However, given the sheer size
of modern data sets, these classical statistical theories are insufficient as
algorithms have to operate effectively under a variety of new constraints such
as, limited processing time, fixed computational budget and communication
constraints. This project aims to develop the fundamental limits of how
statistical accuracy tradeoffs with these resource constraints together with
algorithms that nearly achieve such performance limits. The resulting signal
estimation and learning algorithms are deployed in novel applications aimed at
decreasing the acquisition time in medical imaging devices and speeding up
parallelized algorithms in other data processing domains. Parts of this project
are integrated into an advanced graduate class and select results will serve to
motivate K-12 students to pursue careers in STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team of
researchers study a family of convex optimization algorithms used for signal
estimation and unsupervised learning. The main goal of this project is to
understand how the statistical performance of iterative convex optimization
algorithms tradeoffs with various statistical and computational resources such
as run time, data size, communication, etc. The theoretical investigations
utilizes techniques from convex analysis, probability, and information theory.
The theoretical analysis can be used to establish fundamental performance bounds
for popular convex optimization problems and guide the design of new algorithms
that achieve optimal trade-offs between competing resource
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.