* 1813219
* CIF: Small: Adversarial Network Tomography: Inferring Network State from Manipulated End-to-End Measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ting He, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Armand Makowski
* 09/30/2021
* USD 170,000.00

An accurate and timely view of a network's internal state (e.g., distributions
of link delays/jitters/losses or various statistics of these distributions) is
at the heart of many network management functions, such as traffic engineering,
service placement, and fault detection/localization. Obtaining such a view has,
however, become more challenging than ever in modern computer communication
networks such as the Internet, hybrid optical/copper networks, future cellular
networks, and distributed cloud networks, due to their increased complexity and
heterogeneity. The traditional network monitoring approach that is based on
pervasively deployed monitoring agents (e.g., SNMP) or pervasively supported
network protocols (e.g., traceroute) faces severe limitations in such complex
and heterogeneous environments. Network tomography, which aims at inferring the
network internal state from end-to-end measurements taken from the peripheral of
the network, provides a powerful alternative approach that can construct a view
of the internal state without directly monitoring the internal links/nodes.
Existing network tomography solutions, however, assume that all the internal
nodes behave consistently in traffic forwarding, which makes them vulnerable in
an adversarial setting, where certain nodes can manipulate the traffic
traversing them to alter the end-to-end measurements. This project will
investigate the vulnerability of existing network tomography solutions in an
adversarial setting and develop guidelines for defense mechanisms.

The primary objective of the project is to quantify the vulnerability of
existing network tomography algorithms through rigorous vulnerability analysis,
which involves actually developing the optimal attack strategy for each
representative tomography algorithm and analyzing its impact in terms of the
maximum performance degradation that an adversary can cause without being
detected/localized. Concrete optimization problems will be formulated and solved
for network tomography algorithms designed for different types of network
states, including additive metrics that represent link delay/loss statistics,
min metrics that represent available link capacities, and Boolean metrics that
represent link congestion/failure states. Based on the vulnerability analysis,
insights will be drawn on the reliability of tomography-based network monitoring
in adversarial environments, and guidelines will be developed for future network
tomography algorithms. The proposed research is grounded on latest advances on
network tomography in the benign setting, including state estimation algorithms,
measurement design algorithms, and theory about their limitations and
performance. The research will be performed at the intersection of optimization
and algorithm design, involving linear/non-linear optimization, combinatorial
optimization, parameter estimation, and empirical validations. The project will
provide training experience for students, some from underrepresented groups,
through participation in the theoretical study, implementation of algorithms,
and conduct of empirical validations based on real datasets from the Internet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.