* 1813556
* Accelerating Higher Order Thinking and STEM Content Learning Among Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Janis Bulgren, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,567,315.00

The need for reduction in achievement gaps and the growing adoption of rigorous
curriculum standards has raised expectations for all students, but especially
for students with learning disabilities. Students are expected to learn science
concepts and use their understanding to investigate the natural world through
scientific inquiry. They must also develop higher-order reasoning skills,
integrate knowledge and ideas using primary sources, use causal reasoning to
understand the chain of events, delineate and evaluate claims, and assess the
reasoning used in arguments. Lower participation and achievement in science
courses makes students with learning disabilities less likely to pursue STEM
degrees, STEM careers, and succeed in the labor market where higher order
thinking skills and scientific literacy are increasingly important. It is
important to develop innovative tools that build on evidence based practices in
combination with promising new technologies to improve the academic trajectory
in STEM disciplines. The purpose of this project is to develop and refine an
innovative Google-platform based application called CORGI for use with middle
school students in physical, life, and earth science classrooms. The new
version, CORGI_2, will include supports for content learning and higher order
thinking and will pair with the cloud-based applications of the Google
environment to offer multiple means of representation, response and engagement
as well as videos, models, supports for decoding, and supports for background
knowledge. The team will refine CORGI to offer enhanced functionality and
supports for scientific argumentation, concept mastery, collaboration strategies
and social skills for cooperative groups. Technology enhancements will include
multimedia input and output, writing supports (e.g., sentence starters),
discussion threads, and affective reactions to content/lessons. This project is
funded by the Discovery Research PreK-12 Program, which funds research and
development on STEM innovations and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will work with both teachers and students to develop integrated
units, new higher order thinking routines, learning and collaboration
strategies, and new technological functionality in CORGI_2. Researcher-
practitioner-student design teams will use Design-Based Intervention Research
(DBR) methods to iteratively: (a) identify the science content for inclusion,
(b) develop integrated content units in life, physical, and earth science, (c)
integrate additional higher order thinking and learning strategies to promote
higher-order thinking and reasoning, and (c) design and implement additional UDL
and mobile functionality for CORGI_2. Participants will include 30 middle school
teachers and approximately 200 students with learning disabilities, including
reading disabilities. Researchers will collect formative evaluation data from
teachers and students to examine the usability, science content learning, higher
order thinking skills, engagement, and motivation of general education and
special education students in middle school classrooms. Professional development
modules will be developed to support the DBR cycles as well as to support wider
scale adoption and use by all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.