* 1813850
* The Dawn of Hydrogen Cosmology: First Stars, Dark Matter, and the Thermal History of the Early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 620,452.00

The goal of cosmology is to understand the history of the Universe from the Big
Bang through the present day. Initially, the universe was filled with a gas of
hydrogen and helium atoms. Eventually gravity caused stars to form from this
gas. Astronomers have seen distant galaxies--collections of stars--as they
looked when the universe was less than 500 million years old. But the stars in
these galaxies are probably not the first stars that formed in the universe. It
is important to determine the properties of the earliest stars in the universe.
These stars created new elements like carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen for the first
time. This changed how future stars would form and evolve. Detecting light from
early stars is very challenging. This research will instead analyze radio
observations. Radio signals from the early universe can record the effects of
the first stars indirectly. By studying these signals, this research will help
astronomers understand the role of early stars in shaping the modern universe.
Early-career researchers at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels
will be trained as part of this project. Results from the research will be
shared with children and adults at local and regional science
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of the first stars, galaxies, and
black holes during Cosmic Dawn is the next frontier in observational cosmology.
During this epoch, the intergalactic medium (IGM) is dominated by neutral
hydrogen gas, accessible to observations through its redshifted 21 cm line. The
thermal and ionization history of the early IGM encodes unique information about
the properties of the first luminous objects. Once the first stars form at z ~
30, they produce a background of Lyman-alpha photons that couple the neutral
hydrogen spin temperature to the physical gas temperature in the IGM. This
causes the 21 cm line to become visible in absorption against the warmer cosmic
microwave background (CMB). Later, X-rays traveling long distances deposit their
energy as heat and raise the IGM temperature. This heating drives the average 21
cm signal to switch into emission above the CMB, until the neutral gas is
eventually ionized during the epoch of reionization, leaving no detectable
signal. The evolution of these absorption and emission features in the early IGM
will be imprinted in the all-sky radio spectrum since redshift maps to frequency
for the 21 cm line. This research will use observations from the EDGES dual-band
all-sky radio spectrometer. EDGES operates in the frequency range between 50 and
200 MHz, spanning redshifts 30 &gt; z &gt; 6. The goal of the research is to
constrain plausible astrophysical model parameters for star formation, heating,
and ionization in the early Universe. Theoretical models from 21CMFAST and other
simulation codes will be fit to the observations. Collaborators will incorporate
additional physics into their codes to investigate any contributions from non-
standard physics to the data. This project will provide support for one
postdoctoral research and the final year of Ph.D. thesis research for one
graduate student. It will provide opportunities for undergraduate students to
engage in astrophysical research, with special efforts to make sure that all
interested students at the host institution are encouraged to pursue these
opportunities, including students from underrepresented populations and non-
traditional backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.