* 1813949
* CSR:Small: High Data Density Short Range Wireless Telemetry for Next Generation IoT Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Nasim Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2022
* USD 466,416.00

High Data Density Short Range Wireless Telemetry for Next Generation Internet-
of-Things (IoT) Applications (SWiT-IoT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal
of this SWiT-IoT project is to establish a transformative and multidisciplinary
research and innovation on high data-density short-range wireless telemetry and
energy-efficient computational platform integrated with custom analog radio-
frequency (analog-RF) circuit and system architectures for Internet-of-Things
(IoT) applications. Proliferation of wireless sensors and sensor network has
enabled widespread deployment of multi-sensors for IoT applications. With the
increase of wireless sensors, the cumulative data volume from a large group of
sensors is creating bottleneck for real-time data processing and data
transmission through a limited wireless spectrum. To alleviate these problems,
the SWiT-IoT research project is going to investigate a two-phase approach. On
the first phase, the project will investigate a local processing or
computational unit for in-situ low-level signal processing, data reduction, and
enable high volume of data communication within the specified bandwidth. On the
second phase, the project will investigate a novel pulse encoding scheme using
orthogonal pulses to compress the data volume further. This two-fold data
reduction (local processing and pulse encoding) enables high data-rate support
within the specified bandwidth. The compressed data stream will then be fed to
an injection-locked power oscillator to drive the antenna for wireless
transmission. The proposed transformative large volume wireless data acquisition
scheme will influence various sensor related applications and decision-making
processes, such as transportation, public health, cortical mapping, smart homes,
etc. The education goal is to integrate the artistic skills of underrepresented
K-12 students to motivate, engage and help learning STEM materials through a fun
loving environment and get them prepared for future STEM careers. The project
will continue training undergraduate and graduate students, conduct summer
camps, and promote outreach programs through "It's Electric", "C3-STEM" and UAB
CORD program, to increase the number of underrepresented and minorities towards
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursue of the research objectives in
the SWiT-IoT project, mainly three research goals are targeted: (i) Energy-
Efficient Local Processing for Data Reduction, (ii) An energy-efficient analog-
RF chip level implementation of multi-order orthogonal pulse generator, and
(iii) Spectral efficient orthogonal pulse based analog pulse-sequence encoding.
First, a local processing unit will be investigated by employing oscillatory
neural network (ONN) and improved spike detector algorithms. By utilizing ultra-
low-power self-oscillating nodes, the ONN will perform class-associative pattern
recognition task by synchrony or desynchrony among the nodes, and only relay the
values of the recognition indicators frequency of synchronization and
convergence time, instead of the raw data. A modified nonlinear energy operator
based energy-efficient spike detector algorithm will be investigated for
detecting signal events e.g. impact loading, action potentials, abrupt changes,
etc. and relay the event stamp to reduce the data volume. Second, the SWiT-IoT
project will investigate a Modified Hermite Polynomial based multi-order
orthogonal pulse generation scheme. An innovative neuro-inspired architecture
will be utilized with reduced system complexity, better energy-efficiency, and
integrated circuit level implementation with smaller form factor. Third, a novel
combinatorial pulse-sequence encoding will allow simultaneous multichannel
wireless telemetry with superb spectrum-efficient data density and data
security. In this scheme, n distinct multi-order orthogonal pulses will be used
to create pulse-sequence for each channel. The use of (n-1) redundant orthogonal
pulses for each channel will enable supporting a large number (= n!) of channels
and (n-1)!-times of data rate improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.