* 1813048
* Building Sustainable Networked Instructional Leadership in Elementary Mathematics through a University Partnership with a Large Urban District
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Caroline Ebby, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,993,280.00

Mathematics is an important discipline that provides access to students to the
other STEM disciplines. Early competence with mathematics has proven to be an
important predictor of later achievement in school across socioeconomic
backgrounds (cf., National Mathematics Advisory Panel, 2008). It is difficult
for schools and districts to maintain a sustained focus on improving math
instruction in the elementary years, particularly in low-income and
underperforming contexts where these goals are often overshadowed by more
pressing needs and issues. Instructional leadership development holds promise
for increasing the ability of school-based leaders to understand and support
evidence-base practices, improve the quality of instruction, and ultimately
improve student achievement (Ingersoll, Sirinides, &amp; Doherty, 2017). The
goal of this project is to build instructional leadership capacity in teachers
and school-based leaders in a network of underperforming elementary schools with
limited resources. Through design-based improvement research, the project is
designed to enhance the knowledge, skills, and competencies of elementary
teacher leaders and principals to develop a shared vision and provide ongoing
support of high-quality math instruction. During the first 3 years of this
project, cohorts of 2-4 schools will be added each year for mentored mathematics
lead teachers (MLTs) coaching development and strategic school-based leadership
support. Each cohort will begin with a year of instructional leadership
mentorship, where a university-based consultant with expertise in mathematics
instruction works side-by-side with the MLT as they co-participate in coaching
activities. The second year of participation will involve a launch phase where
MLTs will have the opportunity for monthly check-ins with the mentor while
working with more independence with a new set of focal teachers and continuing
to participate in the network-wide professional development. By the third year
of participation, schools will be expected to assume ownership of the
instructional leadership and strategic planning efforts while continuing to
participate in network-wide professional community. Concurrently, the project
team will offer professional development to MLTs and school-based leaders across
all 13 schools, building up an ongoing networked community with different levels
of expertise. The multi-year design of the project allows for studying the
development of a group of teachers as they transition from mentored novices to
more experienced and independent instructional leaders over time. This project
is funded by the Discovery Research PreK-12 Program, which funds research and
development on STEM innovations and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building
on two years of prior work and relationship building, the project aims to build
coherence from the district to school to classroom level, leveraging the
resources of the university to help translate the district vision for
instructional improvement into classroom practice. In particular, the project
focuses on developing shared understanding of high quality math instruction at
the network level, strategic planning for math instructional leadership at the
school level, and mentorship for lead teachers to provide effective
instructional coaching at the classroom level. Development goals include:
building math leadership capacity within the network, developing and refining a
set of tools and routines to support instructional improvement at the classroom,
school, network, and district levels, and building a networked community of
schools, teachers, and leaders. The overarching problem that this project seeks
to address is: How can instructional leadership expertise be developed in newly
appointed math lead teachers within a large urban school district? The project
will collect data including coaching artifacts such as observation and
debriefing forms; mentor logs; interviews with teachers, MLTs, principals, and
university-based mentors; and video recordings of coaching cycles. The focus of
the data analysis will be to determine coherence and evidence of growth at
different levels of the system to continually improve the intervention through a
variety of qualitative data analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.