* 1813308
* Emergent Properties of Biological Interaction Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2018
* David Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2018
* USD 0.00

Biologists have been successful in revealing many of the molecular components
involved in cell biology. Attention is now moving from identification of
components to understanding the emergent, or system, behavior of the connected
components. It has been hoped that general principles would emerge via the study
of mathematical models of specific systems, but to date this form of study has
not generally proven effective at discovering the hidden principles of biology.
How the complex networks found in biological systems produce their emergent
properties and behaviors remains elusive. Theoretical mathematics offers a
possible route forward, and one which could, in time, have a profound influence
on biology. This research project aims to cut through the complexity of
biological models to elucidate the general principles of cell biology.
Additionally, the project aims to develop new computational methods that can
address currently infeasible problems. There is high demand for well-trained
mathematical scientists with the interest and expertise necessary to contribute
to the solution of questions arising in biology; this project will provide
fertile training ground for graduate students.

Discrete-space, continuous-time Markov chain models are commonly used to model
biological interaction networks, including gene regulatory networks, viral
infections, signaling systems, neuronal networks, etc. These models can be
depicted via a reaction graph, which is a graphical representation of the
interactions between the constituent molecules of the model. Interaction
networks can be extraordinarily complex; for example, there are over 20,000
genes in the human genome and the proteins they encode may be modified in myriad
ways. Further, cellular systems often have different sub-systems that operate on
multiple different scales (both temporally and in terms of copy numbers), with
the species operating at one scale greatly influencing those at a different
scale. The reaction networks currently studied in the literature are typically
so complex that numerical simulation is often considered the only way to analyze
them. However, hidden within the complexity there are often underlying
structures that, if properly quantified, give great insight into the dynamical
or stationary behavior of the system. This project aims to develop mathematical
theory that relates the emergent properties of these systems to easily-checked
properties of the associated reaction graphs. A second aspect of the project is
development and analysis of computational methods for stochastic models of
biochemical interaction networks. The primary tools and methods utilized will be
from probability theory, stochastic analysis, dynamical systems theory, chemical
reaction network theory, and computational mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.