* 1813135
* AF: SMALL : Algorithmic and Game Theoretic Problems Arising in Modern Matching Markets
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Anna Karlin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 399,513.00

Modern matching markets include healthcare markets, energy markets, online
marketplaces, markets associated with the sharing/gig economy, markets for
matching schools/universities with students, cloud computing markets, online
advertising markets, etc. This project will consist of designing and analyzing
new pricing mechanisms and matching algorithms with the objective of greatly
increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of such marketplaces. Significant
online resources will be developed to showcase training advice and insight for a
diverse workforce that the Computing Research Association's Committee on the
Status of Women in Computing has been providing for several years in its in-
person workshops. These resources will address issues such as networking,
communication skills, choosing between academia and industry, leadership skills,
negotiating, etc. Developing these online resources will ensure that this
mentoring will reach more students and especially members of underrepresented
groups, thereby increasing their success and participation in computing research
and education at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maximum weight matching is a
cornerstone problem in combinatorial optimization. It is a showcase for
algorithmic gems and beautiful algorithmic techniques, and, most importantly, is
of immense practical importance, with new applications and important variants
arising every day. The primary objective of the project is to solve algorithmic
and game-theoretic problems motivated by modern matching markets. The matching
problems that arise in these settings require handling strategic agents,
designing new mechanisms, making pricing decisions, deciding what and how much
information to disseminate to the participating agents, solving online problems,
and analyzing complex dynamics and queueing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.