* 1813401
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Secure Cloud Storage Verification Methods
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With the continuously decreasing costs of cloud services, many organizations
including government agencies, healthcare providers, financial institutions,
universities, and enterprises outsource large data repositories to cloud service
providers (CSPs). Doing this relieves organizations from the financial burden of
deploying and maintaining in-house data infrastructures. However, storing data
with third parties exposes organizations to legal and financial liabilities
should the data leak, become unavailable, or be lost. To reduce these risks,
CSPs employ reliable storage technologies which are outlined in service level
agreements (SLAs) negotiated with their clients. An SLA states data
availability/reliability guarantees against misconfigurations, attacks, and any
other disruption. Current SLAs, however, do not specify mechanisms for verifying
that the CSP is adhering to the SLA terms. Accidental misconfigurations or
attacks can lead to irrecoverable data loss that is detected only long after it
has occurred. Moreover, economically motivated CSPs may choose to circumvent the
SLA to reduce their operational costs. This project aims to design and test
auditing mechanisms for provably and efficiently verifying adherence to SLA
terms. The effort is well-aligned with national priorities on critical
infrastructure security and resilience. It will result in cloud architectures,
storage algorithms, and network and security protocols that strengthen the
security, privacy, and usability of cloud storage systems, advancing the state-
of-the-art on reliable and secure data storage. The project team will also use
the work to inform the development of related courses and a cybersecurity
certificate program, as well as supporting outreach efforts to middle and high
school students and to groups traditionally underrepresented in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda is organized around two major
activities. The first activity investigates storage verification methods that
not only prove the existence of the outsourced data but also verify the storage
of redundant information for recovering from attacks and failures. Achieving
such high levels of assurance is challenging because redundant information can
be easily regenerated on-the-fly whenever the CSP is challenged to prove its
existence. Effective auditing mechanisms require the joint design of the
verification, coding, and data recovery processes to optimize the security-
reliability-resource-efficiency tradeoffs while preserving data privacy and
supporting data updatability. The second activity explores the physical storage
verification at multiple storage nodes within a data center and/or between data
centers. The team approaches the physical storage and geodiversity verification
problems from the realistic standpoint of utilizing bounds on the physical
resources such as network delay (which can be set conservatively). This allows
technology-agnostic storage verification methods that are future-proof. A core
project goal is the integration of logical and physical storage verification
methods under a single suite of protocols. This integration is jointly
considered with practical operational aspects of cloud systems, including data
maintenance, dynamic data update, and privacy
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.