* 1813176
* Collaborative Research: Physics and Progenitors of Cosmic Explosions with a Sub-day Cadence Supernova Search
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stefano Valenti, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2022
* USD 339,550.00

Supernovae are an essential ingredient for understanding the chemical and star
formation history of the Universe. Basic questions about supernovae continue to
perplex scientists This proposal seeks to answer the question: What are the
progenitor star systems of supernovae, and how do they explode? In the immediate
few hours after a supernova explosion, observations can provide clues as to what
type of star exploded, and how. This research will carry out a 3-year, sub-day
cadence supernova search of very nearby galaxies, within 12 hours of explosion.
This will be followed immediately in the hours and days after by observations
using Gemini, Swift, and other facilities. This will help determine which types
of stars explode into particular types of supernovae and their explosion
mechanism. The research team will also participate in public tours at Kitt Peak
National Observatory, which are attended by 15,000 daytime guests annually, and
will update the docent training program in STEM in the description of the
science accomplished at this site. Further, the STEM abilities of students
transitioning from high school to college will be improved by a module based on
this research entitled ?Introduction to Astronomy? for presentation at the
California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use two small telescopes, one
in Chile and one in Australia, to look at the same ~500 nearby galaxies every 12
hours. With a totally automated supernovae detection system, they will find very
young supernovae in nearly real time, with very tight limits on when the
explosion occurred. Once a supernova is discovered, it will be immediately
announced to the astronomical community. The best possible data set on each
explosion will be obtained. It is expected that about 10 type Ia supernovae and
about 20 core collapse supernovae will be discovered within 1 day of explosion.
For type Ia supernovae, study of the early light curve signatures will reveal
the distribution of 56Ni and of shocking between the supernova ejecta and any
non-degenerate companion star. The research will also hunt for the carbon
material most likely associated with a companion progenitor white dwarf. For
core collapse supernovae, the research will study the shock breakout from the
surface of the progenitor star, and the subsequent cooling in the initial hours
to days afterwards, which allows for a measurement of the progenitor star's
radius and circumstellar material composition. The results will be used to
constrain the progenitor and explosion mechanism of each
supernova&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.