* 1813993
* SHF: Small: MaPaMaP: Massively Parallel Solving of Math Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Scott Aaronson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2020
* USD 400,000.00

State-of-the-art automated theorem proving tools have been making progress on,
and in some cases resolve, longstanding unsolved problems of mathematics like:
can the positive integers be sorted into two buckets, so that neither bucket
contains a Pythagorean triple (a solution to a^2+b^2=c^2), or can the points on
the plane be colored 5 colors, so that every two points at distance 1 apart are
colored differently? The same techniques are also crucial in industry to verify
hardware and software. A key aspect of recent and future successes in mechanized
mathematics is the use of massively parallel computation. Handling these
computing resources carefully is vital to exploit their great potential.
Sophisticated splitting heuristics and encodings are required to partition a
given problem into many sub-problems that can be efficiently solved in parallel.
Unfortunately, today the development of such heuristics depends predominantly on
expert knowledge about this problem and on sensible manual
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research offers advances towards
automated construction of sophisticated heuristics, as well as improved
encodings of commonly used mathematical operations. Apart from solving long-
standing open problems automatically, the research intents to extract
information from the solutions to acquire useful mathematical insights. Famous
mathematical challenges like the Collatz conjecture and the Hadwiger-Nelson
problem are motivating examples that are driving this work and they could help
making this technology go mainstream. The investigators will involve both
graduate and undergraduate students in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.