* 1813016
* Lighting Up the Cosmic Web: Probing Galaxy Formation and the Surrounding Gas Reservoir Using Giant Lyman-alpha Nebulae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Moire Prescott, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,989.00

Understanding how galaxies and black holes grow out of and impact the larger
cosmic environment is the underlying goal of much of extragalactic astronomy.
The aim of this proposed project is to use giant gaseous nebulae as a window
into the galaxy formation process, building an efficient method for finding
these systems and then studying both the forming galaxy properties and the
physical conditions in the surrounding intergalactic gas. In doing so, the
program will leverage both the power of the Big Data era as well as the latest
astronomical instruments to provide a synthesized view of galaxy formation and
black hole growth in action during the first few billion years of cosmic time.
The project will provide research experiences for two undergraduates per year at
a Hispanic serving institution. It will also develop training packages that will
help inspire underrepresented students to realize their potential in the
sciences. These packages will be used in the classroom as well as in public
outreach. The EPSCoR program is helping to fund this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use existing and future big data
sets of broad band imaging to identify giant Ly-alpha emitting clouds that are
associated with galaxy forming regions. Using existing high-resolution images
and catalogs, the project will then take a census of the galaxy population
around these clouds. The team will apply for telescope time to obtain spatially
resolved spectroscopy of the clouds to map out the kinematics and physical
conditions within the diffuse gas clouds. The project will support graduate
students and undergraduate students from a Hispanic serving institution. It will
also develop "growth mindset training packages" for use in introductory
astronomy courses (impacting over 500 students over three years) and in public
observing events (reaching over 3000 people over three years). The project is
being co-funded by the EPSCoR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.