* 1813729
* NeTS: Small: Tools for Large-Scale Network Testbed Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Violet Syrotiuk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 548,000.00

Over the last decade, the use of wireless Internet-connected devices has nearly
doubled in the U.S., with users fueling new socially useful applications.
Despite being expected to behave predictably under a wide set of circumstances,
these engineered networks have complex behaviors, exhibiting characteristics not
easily studied using traditional techniques. Experimentation is one way to
improve our understanding. Among the many parameters of the network, the
devices, and the environment, a necessary first step in experimentation is
screening to select those that significantly impact performance for follow-on
study. This project contributes to the national interest by developing tools
integrated with test-beds to address grand challenges in wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The minimum requirements for screening in this
setting are captured in a locating array (LA). LAs exhibit logarithmic growth in
the number of parameters, making practical the consideration of an order of
magnitude more parameters in experimentation. The structure of the LA and the
analysis to recover the significant parameters and two-way interactions
impacting the measured performance are tightly coupled. While the basic
requirements of screening are known, the basic requirements of recovery are not
well understood. If balance is required, then the Rao bound applies, and the
array size must grow polynomially in the number of parameters and two-way
interactions. Approaches include either making the recovery algorithm work with
the lack of balance in the LA, or making the LA more suitable for recovery.
Practical networking applications motivate new structure on the LA that in turn
impacts recovery. The goals of this project are to produce tools integrated with
testbeds (1) to generate and validate screening designs for large-scale test-bed
experimentation, and (2) for their subsequent analysis. This project advances
research in two primary areas: (1) Understanding the requirements for recovery,
and the trade-offs in array structure and recovery, thus helping to build a
bridge between novel LAs and traditional screening designs. (2) The effective
use of screening designs requires the deployment of tools to support them. Novel
open source tools to construct, verify, and analyze LAs will be developed and
integrated in a wireless network test-bed. The tools will be made available in a
community wide repository, equipped with documentation and training materials,
including steps to integrate them with a variety of test-
beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.