* 1813127
* Translating a Video-based Model of Teacher Professional Development to an Online Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gillian Roehrig, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,766,905.00

Improving the quality of teaching is essential to improving student outcomes.
But what are the most effective ways to support teachers' professional
development? BSCS Science Learning and the University of Minnesota STEM
Education Program Area explore this question by adapting an effective teacher
professional development model -- that meets face-to-face in real-time -- to an
online approach. A defining feature of the Science Teachers Learning from Lesson
Analysis (STeLLA) Professional Development program is its use of videos of
classroom instruction and examples of student work to promote teacher learning.
Skilled facilitators guide teachers' analysis and discussion of other teachers'
work; then, teachers begin to apply the analytical techniques they have learned
to their own teaching. Adapting the STeLLA program to an online learning model
is important because it can reach a broader and more diverse audience such as
teachers working in rural school districts and underserved communities. To
further promote the reach of STeLLA, the online version of STeLLA will engage
and prepare teacher leaders to support their peers' engagement and
understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools
(RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. Guided by theories of
situated cognition and cognitive apprenticeship this project focuses on two
questions: How can the STeLLA professional development model be adapted to an
online environment? and Does participation in the online model show meaningful
teacher and student outcomes related to science teaching and learning?
Challenges related to adaptation include understanding the duration and
intensity of teacher engagement, the quality of their science content learning
experiences, and how teacher learning is scaffolded across the online and
traditional model. The project will unfold in two phases. Phase 1 uses a design-
based research approach to rapidly enact, test, and revise online program
components while remaining true to the design principles underlying the
traditional STeLLA PD program. Phase 2 uses a quasi-experimental approach to
test STeLLA Online's influence on teacher content knowledge, pedagogical content
knowledge, practice and on upper elementary student science achievement.
Comparisons will be made between STeLLA Online, face-to-face STeLLA, and a
traditional professional development program that emphasizes deepening content
knowledge only. This comparison leverages data from a previously-completed
cluster randomized trial of STeLLA funded by the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.