* 1813490
* RI: Small: Adaptive Metareasoning for Bounded Rational Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 404,722.00

Metareasoning is the process by which an intelligent agent monitors and controls
its own thought processes so as to produce effective action in a timely manner.
Just as people must decide when to stop thinking and take action, AI systems
also need to be able to interrupt their decision-making process and commit to an
action or plan. While people often use heuristic methods to determine the
interruption time, this project offers metareasoning techniques that optimize
the value of computation and stop planning when the urgency to take action
outweighs the anticipated benefit of continued computation. The project
transforms the ability of researchers and practitioners to create responsive
planning systems by offering easy-to-use, off-the-shelf adaptive metareasoning
techniques to control them. Additional areas of broader impact include mentoring
of student researchers with special attention to underrepresented groups, a
range of outreach activities to local schools, targeted activities to increase
diversity in computer science, and industrial
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach uses planning algorithms that
can be interrupted at any time, offering a tradeoff between runtime and quality
of results. To take advantage of this tradeoff, novel metareasoning techniques
are developed that overcome the drawbacks of existing methods. The key idea is
to replace the reliance on extensive offline experiments by creating new ways to
predict performance and adapt the prediction quickly to the specific problem
instance at hand. The project answers fundamental questions about the
feasibility, efficiency, and scalability of optimizing meta-level control with
minimal computational overhead. The main contributions are: (1) online
performance prediction methods for efficient meta-level control of anytime
algorithms that outperform state-of-the-art methods; (2) a novel approach to
create and adapt meta-level control policies online using reinforcement learning
techniques; (3) extensions of the above methods to control a portfolio of
anytime algorithms, allowing transitions from one algorithm to another using
shared intermediate solution representations; and (4) extensions of the above
methods to control the internal operation of adjustable anytime algorithms. The
team evaluates the new metareasoning techniques on complex computational tasks
using a range of anytime algorithms based on different programming paradigms and
demonstrates ease of use and significant performance gains relative to existing
metareasoning techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.