* 1813173
* SHF: Small: GPU-dedicated Graph Transformations for Accelerating Iterative Graph Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Rajiv Gupta, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,987.00

Graph analytics yields deeper knowledge in many scientific domains by mining
large volumes of highly connected data, such as social networks, airline
networks, biological networks, and internet topology. Due to its compute and
data-intensive nature, GPUs with massive parallelism hold great potential in
accelerating graph analytics. However, existing solutions exhibit low
utilization of GPU resources caused by the mismatch between GPU's design for
regular computations and the highly irregular nature of real-world graphs.
Moreover, GPUs often fail to handle relatively large graphs due to their limited
on-device memory. The goal of this research is to dramatically improve the GPU
resource utilization and boost the scalability of graph analytics by
transforming the graphs in ways that make the data and workloads better fit in
the GPU computing. The results of this research include software products that
can be readily deployed on existing large-scale high-performance systems
equipped with GPUs for executing real-world graph applications. More broadly,
this research helps accelerate new discoveries in scientific fields like
bioinformatics, social science, and public security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research develops a series of GPU-
oriented graph transformations that together address the challenges of
irregularity, scalability, and load imbalance at the input graph level. These
include: (1) graph transformations for regularity which transform the irregular
graph structures into more regular ones to address the low GPU efficiency; (2)
graph transformations for scalability which transform a large graph into a mix
of acyclic and cyclic small graphs, with each of them fitting into the GPU
global memory. By maximally migrating computation from the acyclic graphs to the
cyclic ones, the transformations can greatly reduce the data movement between
GPU memory and host memory; and (3) graph transformations for multi-GPU systems
which address the GPU load imbalance caused by the variation of active nodes in
iterative graph analytics. This is achieved by generating small yet overlapped
graphs and selectively processing the overlapped regions. Finally, this research
integrates the above transformations to maximize the overall benefits by
tailoring the design of the transformations to the properties of input graphs
and GPU platforms. The evaluation includes large graph data sets from KONNECT
and SNAP repositories. The implementations of graph analysis algorithms are
packaged into easy-to-use programming interfaces and released over the course of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.