* 1813069
* US-Israel Collab: Are parasites in complex communities more evolvable? Bridging ecology and evolution with computational modeling and rodent-bacteria evolution experiments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Luis Zaman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,640,665.00

There is a growing appreciation that evolution plays a central role in the
emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases. However, our understanding of
why some pathogens and parasites rapidly adapt to novel environments, while
others don't, remains incomplete. This ability of some parasites to evolve
rapidly (i.e., evolvability) allows them to "jump" into infecting new host
species. This project will examine whether and how some natural communities of
interacting animals and microbes generate conditions that favor the evolution of
evolvability. Understanding why variation in evolvability arises can help to
identify potential emerging diseases and inform management strategies that
reduce their ability to spread. It makes intuitive sense that greater
evolvability is beneficial for the parasite, but evolvability does not directly
increase the parasite's reproduction or survivorship. Thus, it is less clear how
it arises or is maintained in populations. Results from computer simulations
suggest that evolvability is advantageous in unpredictable and constantly
changing environments. The project uses computer simulations of host-parasite
coevolution as well as field and laboratory experiments using a natural
bacteria-rodent system to identify specific aspects of parasite ecology that
promote or hinder the evolution of evolvability. This project is a collaboration
with Israeli scientists. It will develop new computational tools for the
scientific community, materials for undergraduate and secondary school
classrooms, as well as teacher training and research experience for teachers in
Michigan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasite populations typically evolve in complex
communities, where multiple host species have overlapping ranges, and multiple
infections occur within a single host. This project will address four central
aims: 1) quantifying the effect of host heterogeneity on parasite evolvability
and diversity; 2) measuring how host heterogeneity influences the prevalence and
intensity of coinfection by multiple parasite species; 3) identifying the effect
of parasite coinfection on evolvability and diversity; and 4) quantifying the
combined effects of host heterogeneity and parasite coinfection on evolvability
and diversity. Experiments using Avida, a computational platform where digital
hosts and parasites evolve in an open-ended fashion, will be complemented by a
combination of field-site sampling and laboratory evolution experiments using
Bartonella parasites and their wild rodent hosts in the Israeli Negev
Dunes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.