* 1813123
* SHF:Small:A Domain-Specific Language for Designing Cognitive-Science Experiments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Matthew Flatt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 423,575.00

When a cognitive scientist designs an experiment, the design typically specifies
factors of interest, the way that multiple factors are combined, and constraints
that avoid combinations that are not interesting or that balance the frequency
of combinations. Computers have enabled more sophisticated experimental designs,
since a program can generate the steps for an experiment, but writing a program
that correctly handles an experiment's constraints can be difficult. Worse,
subtle mistakes in the program can bias the generated stimuli and invalidate the
experiment's results. The project's novelties are a programming language that
lets a scientist describe an experiment's design in higher level terms --- that
is, higher than a general-purpose language's loops and conditionals --- and an
execution engine to generate an experiment's stimuli from its description. The
project's impacts are to make experiment design faster, to provide a better way
for scientists to communicate their experiment designs, and to improve the
reproducibility of experiments by ensuring statistical properties of the
experiment's stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to good statistical
properties for generated stimuli is to uniformly sample the space of solutions
to the experiment's constraints. In a simple experiment where all factors are
crossed and combinations are weighted equally, random selection is unbiased and
easy to implement. The programming problem is considerably more difficult when
constraints are imposed on the combinations, such as having twice as many of one
kind of stimuli in a row, versus having some other kind of stimuli in a row.
State-of-the-art tools, such as UNIGEN, can sample from a constrained space, but
the space must be expressed as a SAT formula, which is far from the way that
cognitive scientists think about their designs. The project will combine this
sampling technology with tools for hosting and compiling domain-specific
languages, allowing an experimenter to work in domain terms while bridging the
gap between the experimenter's view and the implementation
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.