* 1813492
* New Approaches to Inverse Scattering  for Inhomogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Fioralba Cakoni, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 211,928.00

In many areas of national importance, such as the design and manufacturing of
exotic materials, public safety, medical imaging, and underground exploration,
it is essential to be able to image and perform nondestructive testing of
materials using electromagnetic, sound, or elastic waves. Unfortunately,
effective methods for testing complicated materials for structural defects or
for identifying unknown targets in an efficient way with little a priori
information are still in a state of infancy. In this project, the investigator
and her graduate students will develop new techniques in inverse scattering
theory to obtain reliable target signatures or usable information about objects
being examined in computationally efficient ways. The goal is to minimize
dependence on a priori information describing the physics and/or geometry of
unknown targets as well as of the complications arising from complexity of the
hosting background. This study will combine practical applications with the
mathematical elegance of new direct imaging techniques. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research is a multifaceted effort to investigate some open
questions associated with the qualitative methods (otherwise referred to as non-
iterative methods) for solving inverse scattering problems for inhomogeneous
media. The central theme is the development of the generalized linear sampling
method for a variety of inverse problems. This is a new qualitative approach to
inverse scattering that is rigorously justified for noisy data. There are three
main projects: 1) Eigenvalues in inverse scattering theory for inhomogeneous
media: Motivated by the theory of the transmission eigenvalue problem, this
project proposes to develop a general framework for modifying the scattering
operator in order to provide new eigenvalue problems associated with the
scattering by an inhomogeneity. Particularly important are the issues of
determining these (real or complex) eigenvalues from the scattering data,
together with their relation to material properties of the inhomogeneity. The
ultimate goal of this effort is to use such eigenvalues for the imaging of
anisotropic (possibly absorbing and dispersive) media. 2) Qualitative methods
for time domain problems: The use of time dependent data is proposed to address
the issue of the need for large amount of spatial data in the use of qualitative
reconstruction methods. The time domain interior transmission problem is the
fundamental mathematical ingredient to develop qualitative methods for the wave
equation and its solvability is a long lasting open problem. This project
suggests an approach to solving this problem, hence opening the way to study
time domain qualitative methods. 3) Inverse scattering for periodic media: The
main consideration of this project is to investigate the far field behavior due
to scattering by a highly oscillating periodic media of bounded support with
application to imaging of macro/micro structure of the media. In addition, the
project will develop a new qualitative method for reconstructing local
perturbations inside periodic media without needing to compute the scattered
field due to the periodic background nor to recover the background. The PI will
undertake a systematic investigation of new qualitative methods in inverse
scattering theory for complex inhomogeneous media as well as in the time domain
which, if successful, can lead to progress outside the field of mathematics,
such as nondestructive testing and target identification. In addition to
progress outside the field of mathematics, the new eigenvalue problems that
appear in this study, such as the transmission eigenvalue problem or the Steklov
eigenvalue problem for absorbing media, have attracted considerable attention in
the area of non-selfadjoint eigenvalue problems for partial differential
equations. The analysis of scattering problems for periodic media touches some
of the most active contemporary topics in PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.