* 1813940
* AF: Small: RUI: Competitive Search, Evacuation and Reconfiguration with Coordinated Mobile Agents
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sunil Shende, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 237,473.00

In recent years, innovations in special-purpose sensor hardware and machine-
learning algorithms have led to rapid advances in robotics and autonomous
vehicle technology. This project aims to develop and analyze algorithms for an
ensemble of mobile agents working in parallel to achieve coordinated, goal-
directed motion in simple geometric spaces that are abstractions of complex
terrains. The agents cooperate among themselves to efficiently search, explore,
synchronize and reconfigure into patterns using distributed algorithms with
limited memory, sensing and communication capabilities. The research will
contribute to a deeper understanding of coordination protocols to complete
navigational tasks, even when some of the agents may be faulty. Results from the
research will provide critical insights that can be used in robot-assisted
applications such as search-and-rescue in hostile or unknown terrains, or
surface exploration needed to develop and maintain future colonies and human
outposts on other planets. The study of reconfiguration problems will also
provide ideas that can shed light on previously unexplained aspects of flocking
phenomena in birds, such as murmurations. The project will involve undergraduate
students in theoretical research and will train them to develop and maintain an
open-source repository of distributed algorithms for robot coordination problems
and their animations. In addition, results from the project will be archived as
a permanent online resource for the parallel and distributed computing community
at large. Two specific annual initiatives for outreach will be a part of the
project: firstly, participation by the investigator and undergraduate research
students in the Rutgers Future Scholars program, and secondly, conducting
workshops for K-12 teachers to teach basic computational and algorithm design
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental theoretical
problems of efficient, coordinated exploration and reconfiguration by a team of
mobile agents as they work together to accomplish a computational task in simple
geometric spaces. Three basic problem settings are considered: (a) the search
problem, where an unknown target location, which can only be sensed when
reached, has to be found by at least one robot in the team, (b) the evacuation
problem, that requires some subset of the robots to reach an unknown exit
location in the region after it has been found, and (c) the reconfiguration
problem, where the robots must rearrange themselves in a certain desired
configuration based on either a given arrangement or on local rules. Within each
problem setting, the goal is to develop an algorithm for the robots so that they
can attain the desired configuration or complete the task defined by the problem
with the minimum amount of resource usage possible, e.g. total distance traveled
or time taken. Many interesting variants of the problems will also be studied,
such as the peculiarities of the region's geometry, constraints on the
communication capabilities of the robots, and handling faulty robots that may be
benign or malicious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.