* 1813635
* Geometric Numerical Integration of Plasma Physics and General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Melvin Leok, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 237,632.00

The accurate and efficient numerical simulation of complex mathematical models
is critical to the design and analysis of contemporary engineering, scientific,
and medical systems. Mathematical models of drones, computer vision and
graphics, medical imaging, fluid dynamics of plasmas, and gravitational waves
are posed on curved spaces, which possess geometric properties that have to be
respected by the numerical simulations in order to obtain accurate, robust, and
reliable predictions. The two main motivating applications for this project are
to plasma physics and gravitational waves. Plasmas are highly ionized gases;
theyarise in nuclear fusion devices, propulsion systems for space exploration,
and during the formation of galaxies. Gravitational waves are ripples in
spacetime that were predicted by Einstein, and they arise from the collision of
massive astrophysical bodies like black holes and neutron stars. The
construction of numerical methods for such problems enables scientists to design
more stable and efficient nuclear fusion systems, and to more accurately
determine the astrophysical events that correspond to gravitational waves that
are detected. In addition, the investigator develops optimization and
sensitivity analysis techniques that improve the efficiency of optimization
algorithms that underlie deep learning and other machine learning techniques in
data science. Graduate students participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines theoretical and
computational tools arising from discrete Dirac mechanics and geometry,
variational integrators, the relationship between symmetric spaces and the
generalized polar decomposition, and embeddings of noncanonical Hamiltonian
systems as well as nonvariational equations and their adjoints into degenerate
Lagrangian systems. This provides a systematic method for constructing and
analyzing geometric structure-preserving discretizations of degenerate
noncanonical Hamiltonian systems, nonvariational equations and their adjoints,
and problems that evolve on symmetric spaces. The resulting methods have
implications for plasma physics, which is described by noncanonical Hamiltonian
systems, as well as general relativity, which is a degenerate higher-order gauge
field theory on a symmetric space. In addition, adjoint equations arise in many
important applications, including optimal control, optimal design, optimal
estimation, uncertainty quantification, and sensitivity analysis. A deeper
understanding of the hidden geometric structure underlying an arbitrary system
of differential equations and their associated adjoint equations, and
variational discretizations that respect that geometric structure, would have
profound implications on the broad range of analytical and numerical techniques
that rely critically on the solution of adjoint equations. Graduate students
participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.