* 1813823
* RI: Small: Cache transition systems for sentence understanding and generation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniel Gildea, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,998.00

Graph-based semantic representations allow computers to store and process
information in natural language text. Such graphs contain nodes representing
events and entities, and edges between nodes representing relations. This
project will develop algorithms that operate directly on graphs, and will allow
statistical natural processing techniques to better represent semantic
structures. These advances can improve systems that extract information from
text, translate between human languages such as English and Chinese, and
interact with humans in natural language dialog. Improved language understanding
can help in accessing the enormous amount of information available in
unstructured text on the web as well as in databases of newspapers and scanned
books. Improved translation between languages increases opportunities for trade
as well as for dissemination of information generally between nations and
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graph-based representations of the meaning of
natural language sentences are being used to an increasing degree for reasoning
tasks including question answering, merging information from disparate sources,
and generating responses in dialog systems. However, automatic interpretation of
sentences into such structures remains a very difficult task, despite recent
progress in syntactic parsing. This project will develop algorithms for parsing
into and generating text from semantic graphs, focusing on Abstract Meaning
Representation or AMR, although the techniques generalize to other
representations. Existing statistical systems for the AMR parsing task generally
use ad-hoc algorithmic approaches; fundamentally new algorithms are necessary to
advance the state of the art. This project is based on a new transition system,
called a cache transition system, tailored to the task of parsing into graph
structures. Preliminary experiments show that the system is a good match to real
datasets of semantic graphs, in that it is able to produce the vast majority of
graphs observed while at the same time simplifying the machine learning problem
of predicting the next transition at each step. This project aims to advance the
state of the art in semantic parsing and generation by developing and training a
neural version of the transition system to predict semantic graphs from input
strings. In its final year, the project will apply the parsing and generation
methods to the task of machine translation, providing semantic graphs along with
source language strings to a neural machine translation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.