* 1813858
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Detecting Social Engineering Attacks Using Semantic Language Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ian Harris, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,218.00

A critical threat to information security is social engineering, the
psychological manipulation of people in order to gain access to a system for
which the attacker is not authorized. Cyberattackers target the weakest link,
and people are often more vulnerable than a hardened computer system. Phishing
emails, which fraudulently request private information, are a common version of
the attack, but social engineering comes in many more complex conversational
forms designed to exploit psychological weaknesses of the target. This project
will confront the problem of social engineering by developing automated
approaches to detect social engineering attacks in real time and alert the
victim before harm can occur. The approach will leverage question answering and
natural language understanding techniques to identify conversational statements
that have malicious intent across multiple communication media including email,
text messages, and text recognized from verbal speech. As part of evaluating
these techniques, the project will also develop a large corpus of non-phishing
social engineering attacks in the form of audio recordings and written
transcripts and make it widely available to support the community of researchers
studying these attacks, addressing a key problem around lack of data for
research around social engineering. The project will also support the
development of several short course modules on social engineering attacks,
designed to be easily integrated into existing high school and undergraduate
courses in the general space of cybersecurity and human behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main goals of the project are to develop
approaches to detect social engineering attacks, and develop a social
engineering attack corpus. Social engineering attacks will be identified by the
fact that the attacker must always perform one of two dialog actions, either
asking a question whose answer is private, or issuing a command to perform a
forbidden operation. Research in detection will involve two corresponding tasks,
question evaluation, to detect malicious questions, and command evaluation, to
detect malicious commands. Question evaluation will advance research in
question-answering systems to determine the privacy status of the answers to
questions posed by the attacker. Because only privacy status and not actual
answers are required, the approach developed will tolerate imprecision inherent
to current question-answering approaches while still achieving high precision
with respect to privacy status. Command evaluation will be performed by
summarizing the meaning of a request as a combination of the main verb and the
object(s) of that verb in the sentence. Each verb-object pair will be compared
to a blacklist of verb-object pairs which are known to describe forbidden
operations. Reducing the meaning of a command to the verb-object pair is
beneficial as a method to normalize the description of sentences with different
syntaxes but identical meaning. In addition to developing detection approaches,
a social engineering attack corpus will be developed and will be made publicly
available. The most important property of a social engineering attack is that it
successfully achieves the goal of either gathering private information or
coercing the target to perform an inappropriate operation. In order to ensure
that the attacks in the corpus have this property, a validation experiment will
be performed with human subjects. Each attack will be applied against several
subjects to determine the rate of success of the attack. The realism of the
attacks in the corpus will be estimated by evaluating the frequency with which
the attack is successful when applied against subjects in our
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.