* 1813476
* Understanding the Role of Simulations in K-12 Science and Mathematics Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Michael Hynes, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,895.00

The recent emergence of updated learning standards in science and mathematics,
coupled with increasingly diverse school students across the nation, has
highlighted the importance of updating professional learning opportunities for
science and mathematics teachers. One promising approach that has emerged is the
use of simulations to engage teachers in approximations of practice where the
focus is on helping them learn how to engage in ambitious content teaching. In
particular, recent technological advances have supported the emergence of new
kinds of digital simulations and have brought increased attention to simulations
as a tool to enhance teacher learning. This project will develop and implement a
working conference for scholars and practitioners to articulate current use
cases and theories of action regarding the use of simulations in PreK-12 science
and mathematics teacher education. The conference will be structured to provide
opportunities for attendees to share their current research, theoretical models,
conceptual views, and use cases focused on the design and use of digital and
non-digital simulations for building and assessing K-12 science and mathematics
teacher competencies. This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
the use of simulations in teacher education is neither new nor limited to
digital simulation, emerging technological capabilities have enabled digital
simulations to become practical in ways not formerly available. The current
literature base, however, is dated and the field lacks clear theoretic models or
articulated theories of action regarding what teachers could or should learn via
simulations, and the essential components of effective learning trajectories.
This working conference will be structured to provide opportunities for
attending, teacher educators, researchers, professional development
facilitators, policy makers, preservice and inservice teachers, and school
district leaders to share their current research, theoretical models, conceptual
views, and use cases regarding the role of simulations in K-12 science and
mathematics teacher education. The conference will be organized around four
major goals, including: (1) Define how simulations (digital and non-digital) are
conceptualized, operationalized, and utilized in K-12 science and mathematics
teacher education; (2) Document and determine the challenges and affordances of
the varied contexts, audiences, and purposes for which simulations are used in
K-12 science and mathematics teacher education and the variety of investigation
methods and research questions employed to investigate the use of simulations in
these settings; (3) Make explicit the theories of action and conceptual views
undergirding the various simulation models being used in K-12 science and
mathematics teacher education; and (4) Determine implications of the current
research and development work in this space and establish an agenda for studying
the use of simulations in K-12 science and mathematics teacher education. The
project will produce a white paper that presents the research and development
agenda developed by the working conference, describes a series of use cases
describing current and emergent practice, and identifies promising directions
for future research and development in this area. Conference outcomes are
expected to advance understanding of the varied ways in which digital and non-
digital simulations can be used to foster and assess K-12 science and
mathematics teacher competencies and initiate a research and development agenda
for examining the role of simulations in K-12 science and mathematics teacher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.