* 1813538
* Collaborative Research: Extending and Investigating the Impact of the High School Model-Based Educational Resource
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Christopher Wilson, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,589,080.00

This project builds on a line of work that has developed and studied the Model
Based Educational Resource (MBER), a year-long curriculum for high school
biology. In classrooms using MBER, modeling serves as an anchoring practice that
keeps the inquiry tied to the goal of making sense of the world, helping
teachers to engage their students in a range of cognitive and social activities
that lead to deep understanding of scientific ideas. This project will generate
rigorous causal evidence on how this approach to biology teaching and learning
can support student learning, and foundational information on how to support
high school teachers in improving their teaching. This funding will also provide
resources to expand and update MBER to reflect the changing high school science
landscape by integrating Earth Science standards into the year long sequence.
The study will address the general research question: What is the impact of the
Model Based Educational Resource (MBER) on high school students' science
achievement, and what factors influence that impact? In addition to generating
important research findings, the materials revised and studied in this project
will be open-source and freely available to teachers and schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of instructional innovations. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects. This study addresses a significant gap in the research on
next generation curriculum materials. While there is emerging agreement about
the importance of instructional materials in supporting teachers in effectively
engaging students in the practices of science, there is very little empirical
evidence to support such claims. The goal of this project is to study the impact
of the MBER program through a cluster randomized trial and expand the promise of
efficacy and feasibility established in previous work. This study will be able
to make causal claims by using an experimental design in which 32 high school
teachers serve as their own controls, and by using multi-level modeling in the
analysis. This study will advance the field's knowledge about the impact of
innovative materials on student learning, measured by both project-level
assessments and the state science test. Exploratory research questions will
examine a) how using the MBER program develops teachers' vision of the Next
Generation Science Standards, b) how student learning is mediated by the
fidelity of implementation of the materials, c) how teachers interact with
materials designed to be modified for their classroom context, and d) to what
extent the MBER materials provide equitable opportunities to learn and close
achievement gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.