* 1813617
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Design and Provisioning for Inter-Datacenter Multigranular Flexible Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 307,795.00

There is an ever-increasing demand for cloud computing services, and large-scale
datacenters are constantly evolving to meet this demand. As the need for data
and data analytics grows, providers are turning to geo-distributed datacenters
to provide customers very low latency access to information and computational
capability. This results in high capacity, highly-varying inter-datacenter
network traffic that must be reliably and cost-effectively accommodated by fiber
optic networks. Recent advances in agile and flexible optical networking have
made Flexible Optical Networks (FONs) a promising candidate for meeting these
dynamic and heterogeneous connection demands. The goal of this project is to
develop network design and provisioning strategies for inter-datacenter FONs
that can support a wide range of data traffic flow. To address the continued
exponential growth in network capacity, the project includes consideration of a
novel, flexible, cost-effective optical technology, which introduces a way of
bundling large traffic demands together as they get routed through the network.
The results of the project will inject leading-edge research into education, and
enable more efficient and cost-effective distribution of information between
datacenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project addresses challenging
problems in the design and operation of multigranular flexible optical networks.
The challenges demand the development of new strategies to maximize the
utilization of precious network resources. Novel algorithms for network design
and resource provisioning will be developed, and will be accompanied by
sophisticated mathematical models and bound analysis for performance
quantification. The specific research objectives of this project are to:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Explore the multigranular FONs design space and evaluate
performance and complexity trade-offs, balancing performance against complexity
or cost.&lt;br/&gt;2. Design algorithms for provisioning bandwidth requests in
multigranular FONs.&lt;br/&gt;3. Design scalable and flexible algorithms on
provisioning virtual network (VN) requests by jointly allocating compute and
communication resources in inter-datacenter networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.