* 1813246
* From Deterministic Dynamics to Thermodynamic Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yao Li, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 144,192.00

Statistical mechanics attempts to explain the thermodynamic behavior of large
systems and to bridge the gap between the microscopic and macroscopic worlds.
Equilibrium statistical mechanics is relatively well-developed, but many
problems in non-equilibrium (i.e., irreversible) statistical mechanics have not
been well answered yet. In particular, the derivation of macroscopic transport
laws from microscopic deterministic dynamics is a century-old challenge (for
example, Fourier's law of heat conduction from microscopic heat conduction). In
this project, the investigator studies the derivation of thermodynamic
properties of a gas that is not at thermal equilibrium, starting from a
microscopic particle description of the gas. The microscopic heat conduction
problem under study is representative of numerous physical systems that are
intrinsically high-dimensional, multiscale, noisy, and non-equilibrium.
Mathematical advances on this problem will be of value for other areas of
science where non-equilibrium dynamics is an important feature, including
materials science, neuroscience, molecular dynamics, fluid dynamics, and bio-
chemical networks. The project includes research experience opportunities for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator
studies how thermodynamic properties are derived from non-equilibrium
microscopic heat conduction models. The aim is to develop a series of results
that connect microscopic deterministic particle systems, mesoscopic stochastic
differential equations, and macroscopic thermodynamic laws. Starting from a
deterministic kinetic particle system that models the heat conduction among gas
particles in a tube with different temperatures at two ends, the project looks
numerically for a mathematically tractable stochastic energy exchange process
that preserves the main dynamical features of the deterministic problem,
examines its stochastic stability and the mesoscopic limit problem when the
scale of local dynamics increases, and derives macroscopic thermodynamic
properties related to thermal conductivity, long-range correlation, the local
thermodynamic equilibrium, and the fluctuation
theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.