* 1813752
* RUI: Variational and Topological Approaches to Complex Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Chad Topaz, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 202,524.00

This research studies two pattern-forming systems in the natural world, aiming
to create mathematical frameworks that capture natural laws and to characterize
the behavior of the systems. The first system is vegetation in semi-arid
environments, which often grow in large-scale, swirling striped patterns visible
in satellite imagery. The investigator and his collaborators will create a class
of models that are grounded in fundamental ecological principles and are
informed by geographic information systems (GIS) observations. They will analyze
these models and compare them to data. This work will provide insight into the
working of our natural world in the area of vegetation ecology. The second
system involves collective behaviors, like those that arise when particles,
objects, or agents interact, ranging from nanoparticle assembly to pedestrian
crowds to insect swarms. The behavior of these groups can be vexing to
characterize as they are neither highly organized nor totally random. The
investigator and his collaborators will study collective behavior through the
lens of a mathematical area called computational topology, which examines the
shape of data obtained from simulations of or experiments on these groups. This
work will aid the development of strategies that help humanity understand
complex data. Other features of this proposal include: extensive undergraduate
student involvement; creation of a network of collaborators across four
institutions; a pipeline from research to the classroom; enhancement of
computational infrastructure; a focus on the participation of underrepresented
groups; efforts to join the applied dynamics and topology mathematical
communities; and a study of one-of-a-kind, unpublished mathematical manuscripts
of John von Neumann.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his collaborators
study two pattern-forming systems: (1) Semi-arid vegetation patterns are
commonly modeled as reaction-diffusion PDE that incorporate some subset of
geophysical and ecological ingredients selected by the modeler. The investigator
proposes a new paradigm for modeling vegetation patterns that is based on the
fundamental ecological principle of energy balance and is both motivated by and
validated with GIS data. The primary mathematical contribution is the analysis
of a class of optimization problems with nonlocal constraints. The primary
applied contribution is a unified framework for vegetation pattern modeling. (2)
The collective behaviors of groups of agents can be complex. Traditionally,
investigators diagnose these behaviors by studying time series of order
parameters chosen a priori to be of possible interest. Taking a different view,
the Pl develops a topological theory of collective behavior, building the
mathematical machinery to pass from models of collective behavior to simpler
descriptions capturing their on-average topological behavior. The primary
mathematical contribution is a simpler characterization of the complex
collective dynamics that is framed in terms of the evolving Betti numbers of the
system. The primary applied contribution is a framework for understanding
collective behavior models that does not require an a priori choice of order
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.