* 1813263
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: CPS ACTS: Orchestrating CPS with Action Blocks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Christine Julien, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2020
* USD 80,948.00

The integration of computation, communication and sensing technologies into our
transportation, power grid, healthcare, and manufacturing systems presents
unprecedented challenges in ensuring the security and safety of these systems.
Cyber attacks on such systems cross from the cyber realm into the physical
world, and we must deal with new attack trends that may cause vehicles to veer
off the road, manipulate devices responsible for power generation, distribution
and consumption, and exploit robotic/drone systems for malicious activities.
This project develops methodologies that ensure the resiliency of such systems
through developing defense strategies in response to the attack strategies
available to the adversary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the resiliency of
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) against cyber attacks, this project explores the
use of a game-theoretic framework to orchestrate the CPS with the proper
combination and configuration of action blocks. This project posits that action
blocks can be used to ensure the integrity of a system's control and measurement
signals by checking the signals' values and manipulating these values in manners
devised to detect attacks. This exploratory effort will develop initial game
theoretic models and accompanying reinforcement learning techniques to
investigate possible defense strategies that rely on mixtures of action blocks,
focusing on the generalizability, implementability, and scalability of the
approach. This project lays the ground work for a more extensive open library of
action blocks in which CPS developers may not only contribute blocks but also
invoke the resulting methods to assemble potent defense strategies for their
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.