* 1813819
* Mechanisms and Functions of Intermittent Synchronization in Neural and Other Living Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Leonid Rubchinsky, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,999.00

Living nature is cyclic: The heart contracts and expands, sleep and wakefulness
replace each other, populations of wild animals increase and decrease, and
neural cells in our brains exchange oscillatory electrical signals as we think
and move. Whenever biological oscillators interact, they mutually adjust their
rhythms, that is, they synchronize. This synchronization needs to be fine-tuned.
For example, too much of synchronization between neural cells is associated with
motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease, too little is associated with impaired
cognition. This research project will investigate the mechanisms of how
biological oscillators go in and out of synch in time, an important problem that
has not been extensively studied. Biological systems are very adaptable to the
changes in the environment, and this research will explore associations between
adaptability and dynamics of synchrony. The study will utilize mathematical and
computational models of neural and other biological oscillators, complemented by
the analysis of available experimental data. The project aims to clarify the
mechanisms of synchronization in neural and other living systems. Importantly,
this will not only assist in understanding of healthy normal functioning of
biological oscillators, but will also advance understanding of mechanisms of
pathologies -- much-needed knowledge for the treatments of several brain
disorders (e.g., Parkinson's disease, addiction, and schizophrenia) and other
pathological conditions. In addition, young scholars will be engaged in this
research and will get critical experience in biomathematics, contributing to the
preparation of a modern workforce able to tackle life sciences questions with
mathematical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms,
oscillations and synchrony are recognized as important mechanisms underlying
many physiological phenomena, in particular neural ones. Excessively strong or
weak synchrony is associated with several neurological and neuropsychiatric
dysfunctions. Neural synchrony frequently varies in time. Few long-
desynchronized dynamics intervals may be functionally different from many short
desynchronizations, although the average synchrony may be the same. Recent
studies of different neural systems reported the strong prevalence of short
desynchronizations. This research will explore the nature and function of these
short desynchronizations in neural systems and analyze temporal patterning of
synchrony in other living systems. Several questions will be answered: What are
the mechanisms of short desynchronizations in neural systems? What function do
they serve? What changes in the patterning of synchrony may lead to what
dysfunctions? What are the differences in the temporal patterning of synchrony
in neural and non-neural living systems? Mathematical techniques will explain
how the patterning of synchrony contributes to the adaptability and efficiency
of living systems. From a mathematical standpoint, the project will advance
understanding of how some experimentally-relevant universal dynamics may emerge
in a class of moderately-coupled neural-like
oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.