* 1813598
* SHF: SMALL: Streamlining Fork-Based Software Development
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Christian Kastner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 530,019.00

Collaboration is essential for software development at scale, in both industrial
and open-source projects. Inadequate models of collaboration can stifle
innovation and severely hurt open-source sustainability. This research
investigates how developers collaborate in distributed settings with forks.
Forks are public copies of repositories (source code, books, musical
composition, lectures, and so forth) in which developers can make changes,
including extensions and bug fixes. Developers may, but do not have to,
contribute these changes back to the original project. Specifically, this
project is concerned with inefficiencies in developer activities, such as lost
contributions, redundant development, and fragmented communities. Such
inefficiencies are not only wasteful with regard to the scarce developer time,
but also often demotivating for new developers. This research will identify
which practices are efficient in which contexts and will provide guidance for
developers and team leads. This way, this research will support sustainability
of software projects, allowing them to draw on more contributions and motivating
more developers to contribute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining theory building,
empirical data-driven research, and tool building, the research will discover
and evaluate existing interventions and develop new ones that steer
collaborative development with forks toward better practices, such as better
coordination among otherwise independent developers. Using empirical mixed-
methods research, from exploratory studies building hypotheses to statistical
evaluations on logs of development activities at scale, the research will
identify and validate measures of inefficiencies and interventions developers
use in practice to improve collaborative development, identifying what is
effective in which contexts. In addition, this research will design, develop,
evaluate, and deploy new interventions in terms of light-weight transparency and
awareness mechanisms that foster collaboration and integration and reduce
redundancies, thus reducing inefficiencies within forked
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.