* 1813844
* Collaborative Research: Integrating tectonics, climate, and mammal diversity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Saad Haq, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2023
* USD 235,418.00

The researchers seek to understand how movement of tectonic plates, which
produced major mountain barriers and influenced regional climate, controlled the
evolution and geographic distribution of mammals in western North America. The
EarthScope Transportable Array, a network of seismic stations, has produced data
that allow an unprecedented view of the Earth's structure in the western United
States, providing a unique starting point from which to consider how it came to
have the 3-D structure that is imaged by seismic methods. This, combined with a
rich published record of structures that record changes in plate tectonics and
deformation history over the past 36 Ma, allows us to estimate crustal thickness
and topography throughout the western US over this important interval in mammal
evolution. The researchers propose to use 3D models to understand the collapse
of topography in the western US, which led to marked changes in mammal
diversification that coincide with changes in the strain rates recorded in the
fault movement record. The research will be accomplished through collaboration
of teams that will 1) Improve dating of the sedimentary record that contains the
mammalian record, as well as focused sampling of fossils from under-represented
areas and time intervals, 2) produce 3D models for lithosphere modification that
account for changes in heat flux and boundary conditions, 3) model regional
climate that builds on topographic constraints, 4) analyze mammal speciation and
diversification and its links over time with topography and climatic gradients,
and 5) synthesize all of the results into a 4D model for change through the past
36 Ma. The ultimate goal is to produce a more fundamental understanding of the
factors responsible for crustal and topographic changes and how these influence
mammal speciation and diversification. The quantitative analysis of crust and
mantle dynamics provides an important framework for advancing knowledge in
fields linked to the economic geology (mineral belts) of the southwestern US.
The research will provide valuable technical training to high school,
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral researchers. The collaborative team
will develop several outreach products, including an informational video for the
general public, materials for museum presentations and exhibits at the
University of Michigan Museum of Natural History, the departmental Museum
Display at Stony Brook, and materials for talks and presentations to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated topography model shows a Nevadaplano
of ~4.36 +/- 0.4 km (1-sigma) average elevation in central, eastern, and
southern Nevada, western Utah, parts of easternmost California, and central
portions of westernmost Arizona at 36 Ma. Our model shows that highlands of the
Nevadaplano connected to a continuous mountain chain through southeastern
Arizona and into northern Mexico. This topography results from the long history
of crustal shortening from Sevier - Laramide orogenies. The topography of this
massive range collapsed from 36 Ma to the present, leading to as much as 200%
extension, the present-day Basin and Range, and exhumation of metamorphic core
complexes along the belt of thickened crust. Distributions of lithospheric body
forces continue to drive this collapse today. Differences in gravitational
potential energy are known to drive extensional deformation, particularly in
regions of extreme topography. Yet the reasons for the timing of the collapse,
along with the magnitudes and distributions of deviatoric stresses responsible
for the collapse, remain enigmatic. The changing topography associated with
extensional collapse dramatically altered the climate and mammal diversity
dynamics of the western Cordillera. Our research targets three topics within the
Integrated Earth System: (1) The topography, distribution, and 3-D deviatoric
stresses responsible for the collapse history, (2) The climatic response to the
collapse and generation of climate gradients, and (3) The response of mammal
lineages and faunas to changing topographic and climate gradients and removal of
topographic barriers. No previous study of climate gradients and their impact on
mammal diversity has ever been integrated with quantitative kinematic and
dynamic reconstructions of continental deformation. The intellectual merit of
this study involves the power of combining these fields, while incorporating
formal uncertainties in models at all stages of
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.