* 1813283
* Construction and Physicality of Compressible Euler Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Helge Jenssen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 320,000.00

This project aims at narrowing the gap between practical applications of fluid
dynamics and its theoretical underpinnings through a better understanding of the
range of validity of the theoretical models. It is particularly concerned with
compressible flows far from equilibrium, a regime of relevance in many
applications such as high-speed flight, combustion, implosions, and inertial
confinement fusion. Even for standard models little is known rigorously about
their range of validity. This effort highlights the critical role of theoretical
insights in hydrodynamics. Such understanding goes hand in hand with the
computational effort to solve the equations of gas dynamics. One such line of
research studies imploding spherical shock waves, now induced and controlled via
powerful lasers. Analytic results are important for both aspects: they can
provide estimates for non-observable quantities and provide exact solutions that
can be used to benchmark numerical codes. This project focuses on methods that
provide information beyond abstract mathematical results, thereby helping to
evaluate the relevance and limits of models routinely used in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental, long standing
open problems for nonlinear equations describing compressible fluid flow. The
overarching goals are to establish existence of possibly singular flows far from
equilibrium, and to use such solutions to delimit the range of validity of the
standard compressible Euler equations. The focus is on methods with predictive
power beyond abstract existence results. The project seeks results that will
extend the current near-equilibrium theory in one space dimension, and apply
also to radial solutions with collapsing shocks and cavities. The project is
primarily motivated by the compressible Euler system, for which many fundamental
questions remain open. The methods utilized should give a description of local
and global solution behavior, such as local wave interactions and asymptotic
behavior, and provide useful insights for the design of reliable computational
tools. Emphasis is placed on understanding the role of zero-pressure regions,
due either to vanishing temperatures or to vanishing densities (vacuums). The
issues considered appear to be essential road blocks that must be overcome to
gain a proper understanding of non-linear phenomena in compressible
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.