* 1813237
* Collaborative Research: Banded Together: Modern water-microbe-mineral feedbacks in the deep Archean lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Jill McDermott, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,714.00

Microbial life is in constant contact with humans and our environment.
Interactions between microbial life, humans, and our environment influence
essentially every aspect of daily modern life, from the treatment of medical
conditions to agricultural innovations. These interactions show how successful
microbial life can be under a wide variety of conditions, on short time scales,
and at the Earth's surface. However, scientists also have evidence that
microbial life is important over long time scales and deep underground. In this
project we will investigate the strategies that microbial life uses to survive
under difficult circumstances while living deep underground. In particular, we
are interested in understanding whether microbial waste products can create new
space for growth, new neighborhoods for microbial life, or condemn them to
inevitable death. From our scientific observations, we will create models that
will help us understand how microbial life works underground. Our results could
be useful in understanding how microbial life will affect energy extraction
processes, such as hydrologic fracturing ('fracking'), and underground waste
disposal for some of our worst waste streams, such as nuclear materials. As part
of our project, we will form a partnership with Community and Tribal Colleges of
the Great Lakes Region. This partnership will focus on engaging underrepresented
groups in the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields.
Rural Community and Tribal Colleges are primary conduits for post-secondary
training and often serve as stepping stones to higher education in Native
American communities of the region. We will develop and implement a hands-on
summer workshop, 'The Life-Earth Connection', to be offered by our team during
two consecutive summers at our field site. The workshops will provide an
experiential learning opportunity that highlights the interactions of life,
earth, and water through field and laboratory activities. Participants will also
interact with peers and scientists in formal and informal settings to build
career awareness and a professional network.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through this
research project, we seek to discover the mechanisms by which microorganisms
interact with physical and geochemical components of the deep subsurface. We are
specifically interested in understanding the potential feedbacks that microbial
metabolism has on the habitability of fractured-rock aquifer systems. Our
overall approach is to conduct a hypothesis-driven study with integrated field-,
laboratory-, and modeling components. Our project leverages the experience of a
collaborative scientific team that draws broadly on Earth Science disciplines:
specifically, geology, hydrogeology, geochemistry, and microbiology. With a
field study centered on legacy boreholes and archived cores, we will investigate
Neoarchean fractured-rock aquifers of the Canadian Shield. Through this work, we
will define: (1) subsurface hydrogeological and geochemical factors that support
or inhibit microbial growth; (2) microbial adaptation to limiting factors
through community interactions and metabolic innovation; and (3) the positive or
negative feedbacks of microbial activity on the geogenic milieu and
habitability. Field and laboratory data streams will be integrated, and
hypotheses tested, through the development and use of a fracture-scale reactive-
transport model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.