* 1813439
* Investigating Impact of Different Types of Professional Development on What Aspects Mathematics Teachers Take Up And Use in Their Classroom
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Karen Koellner, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,980,285.00

Professional development is a critical way in which teachers who are currently
in classrooms learn about changes in mathematics teaching and learning and
improve their practice. Little is known about what types of professional
development (PD) support teachers' improved practice and student learning.
However, federal, state, and local governments spend resources on helping
teachers improve their teaching practice and students' learning. PD programs
vary in their intent and can fall on a continuum from highly adaptive, with
great latitude in the implementation, to highly specified, with little ability
to adapt the program during implementation. The project will study the design
and development of PD that supports teacher development and student learning,
and provide accumulation of evidence to inform teacher educators,
administrators, teachers, and policymakers of factors associated with successful
PD experiences and variation across teachers and types of PDs. The impact study
will expand on the evidence of promise from four 2015 National Science
Foundation (NSF)-funded projects - two adaptive, two specified - to provide
evidence of the impact of the projects on teachers' instructional practice over
time. Although the four projects are different in terms of structure and design
elements, they all share the goal to support challenging mathematics content,
practice standards, and differentiation techniques to support culturally and
linguistically diverse, underrepresented populations. Understanding the nature
of the professional development including structure and design elements, and
unpacking what teachers take up and use in their instructional practice
potentially has widespread use to support student learning in diverse contexts,
especially those serving disadvantaged and underrepresented student populations.
This project is funded by the Discovery Research PreK-12 Program, which funds
research and development on STEM innovations and approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine teachers' uptake of mathematics
content, pedagogy and materials from different types of professional development
in order to understand and unpack the factors that are associated with what
teachers take up and use two-three years beyond their original PD experience:
Two specified 1) An Efficacy Study of the Learning and Teaching Geometry PD
Materials: Examining Impact and Context-Based Adaptations (Jennifer Jacobs,
Karen Koellner &amp; Nanette Seago), 2) Visual Access to Mathematics:
Professional Development for Teachers of English Learners (Mark Driscoll,
Johanna Nikula, &amp; Pamela Buffington), two adaptive: 3) Refining a Model with
Tools to Develop Math PD Leaders: An Implementation Study (Hilda Borko &amp;
Janet Carlson), 4), TRUmath and Lesson Study: Supporting Fundamental and
Sustainable Improvement in High School Mathematics Teaching (Suzanne Donovan,
Phil Tucher, &amp; Catherine Lewis). The project will utilize a multi-case
method which centers on a common focus of what content, pedagogy and materials
teachers take up from PD experiences. Using a specified sampling procedure, the
project will select 8 teachers from each of the four PD projects to serve as
case study teachers. Subsequently, the project will conduct a cross case
analysis focusing on variation among and between teachers and different types of
PD. The research questions that guide the project's impact study are: RQ1: What
is the nature of what teachers take up and use after participating in
professional development workshops? RQ2: What factors influence what teachers
take up and use and in what ways? RQ3: How does a professional development's
position on the specified-adaptive continuum affect what teachers take up and
use?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.