* 1813177
* Mathematical Challenges in Many-Body Physics and Quantum Information: CRM Thematic Program.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Bruno Nachtergaele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 21,000.00

The Centre de Recherches Mathématiques (CRM, Montreal, Canada) is organizing a
Thematic Semester on "Mathematical Challenges in Many-Body Physics and Quantum
Information" during September-December 2018
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/Quantum2018/index.php/). The purpose of this
project is to support the participation of junior researchers from US
institutions in the first two workshops of the program: 1) Many-Body Quantum
Mechanics (September 10-14, 2018) and 2) Entanglement, Integrability and
Topology in Many-Body Systems (September 17-21, 2018). Participants to the
workshops will also have the opportunity to interact with the approximately 20
junior and senior researchers who will be in residence at the CRM for an
extended period during the program. The goal is to accelerate progress in the
mathematical foundations and techniques of the emerging new directions in
quantum science and technology and to attract young talent to this exciting
endeavor as well as to better equip them for successful research in this area.
In this way, the project will contribute to realizing "The Quantum Leap: Leading
the Next Quantum Revolution," one of the NSF's 10 Big Ideas.

The first workshop is on the general topic of many-body quantum mechanics.
Researchers working on different questions related to many-body quantum
mechanics will discuss recent developments, exchange ideas and propose new
challenges and research directions such as: i) the derivation of effective
equations, ii) disordered many body systems, iii) open quantum systems in and
out of equilibrium, and iv) quantum spin systems. The second workshop is devoted
to entanglement, integrability, and topology in many body systems. Its main
motivation is the exploration of concepts related to entanglement that have
emerged as an important theoretical tool in tackling one of the central goals of
condensed matter physics: the understanding and characterization of phase
transitions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.