* 1813370
* SHF: Small: Energy-Efficient and Reliable Communication with Silicon Photonics for Terascale Datacenters-on-Chip
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Sudeep Pasricha, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Electronic processing chips are at the heart of the digital intelligence that
has been the driving force for groundbreaking technological advances across the
medical, consumer, industrial, networking, aerospace, automotive, and defense
application domains. In recent years, there has been a growing trend in these
application domains of massive data generation and consumption, which puts
immense pressure on the networks at the chip-scale that must now transfer very
high volumes of data in much shorter durations of time than ever before.
Traditional electrical networks at the chip-scale are breaking down under this
pressure, which is catastrophic as it prevents the development of the next
generation of high-performance digital intelligence that can transform society
and improve lives. Fortunately, silicon photonics has emerged as an exciting
technological panacea that can replace slow electrical links with much faster
light-speed transfers. While communication over long optical fibers (e.g.,
several miles) is quite common today, the nano-integration of silicon photonics
technology with electronic chips is a new paradigm and presents enormous
challenges that have yet to be addressed. This project will involve
transformative research to overcome these fundamental challenges, and pave the
way for realizing future photonics-based electronic chips that are miniature in
size, but with the same computing power as a large datacenter computing facility
today. Close collaborations with industrial partners at HP Enterprise and
Lumerical will aid in the rapid adoption of the outcomes. Moreover, by exposing
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students to the diverse aspects of emerging
technologies, devices, circuits, architectures, and algorithms, the project will
contribute to an agile high-tech workforce that will maintain continued US
leadership in technological innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
contribution of this project will be a new framework that will push the
boundaries of achieving ultra-low energy and high reliability data transfers
with silicon photonics at the chip-scale. This framework consists of three major
thrusts that are closely related and will be addressed in a highly integrated
manner: (1) Characterize behavior of silicon photonics devices and explore new
device configurations based on device fabrication at Applied NanoTools Inc., to
enable the selection of energy-efficient and low-cost devices; (2) Design new
circuits with silicon photonics devices to overcome noise, increase bandwidth,
and reduce power dissipation during communication; and (3) Create new silicon
photonics-based network architectures and tools for their optimization, to
realize ultra-low energy and fault-resilience solutions for transferring data
between processing cores at the chip-scale. Beyond these three thrusts, the
framework will exploit cross-layer insights across the device, circuit, and
architecture layers, and devise optimizations that span across two or more of
these layers. The innovations at the individual layers together with
optimizations across layers will achieve more aggressive energy savings and
higher reliability chip-scale communication than what is possible today. This
outcome will usher in a new era of ultra-high performance computing where light
speed data transfers within electronic chips can work together with optics-based
data transfers external to the chip, to overcome communication energy and
performance bottlenecks at all levels. Such a development will enable lower-cost
supercomputing and cloud datacenters, making computing more affordable for
scientists and more ubiquitous in everyday life, to transform our lives in
innumerable ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.