* 1813537
* RI:Small:Robust Performance Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lars Kotthoff, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 476,952.00

Algorithms are ubiquitous in modern society and integral to the economy. Whether
finding optimal assignments of packages and operators to planes, trucks, and
ships, or translating between different languages, the problems solved become
larger and more challenging every day. Crucially enabling such developments are
advances in artificial intelligence. There are often different approaches for
solving the same type of problem, and they are often synergistic -- where one
fails, another performs well. AI techniques in this project allow the best
approach for a given problem to be chosen automatically. This research will
allow for such choices to be made more robustly even in difficult circumstances,
resulting in improved performance and reduced effort to deploy AI in practical
systems. Ultimately, the project will make it easier for humans to develop high-
performance AI systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithm selection is the process
of automatically matching synergistic algorithmic choices to the specific
properties of a problem in order to achieve optimal performance. Current methods
for making such choices over available algorithms are often limited in
applicability by the hardware on which the algorithms were benchmarked, the
resource limits imposed on runs, and subject to bias caused by performance
fluctuations in randomized algorithms. In many cases, these issues are caused by
reliance on brittle performance measures, limiting practical application in
academia and industry. This project aims to address these limitations in three
ways. First, it will define a notion of robustness to guide algorithm selection,
and identify properties of algorithms, experimental setups, and computational
environments that affect robustness. Second, it will develop specific
performance measures informed by this definition of robustness, and which are
portable across different hardware platforms. Third, it will mitigate the impact
of brittle performance measures through new approaches to building performance
models based on machine learning. The project will result in the dissemination
of shared data and benchmarks to the broader AI community, for example through
the Algorithm Selection Library (ASlib).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.