* 1813299
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Extreme Starbursts and Outflows: The Formation of Massive Compact Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Aleksandar Diamond-Stanic, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2022
* USD 104,108.00

Galaxies often eject large amounts of gas and dust in outflowing galactic winds,
which are a crucial element in how galaxies evolve with cosmic time. These
galactic outflows explain why galaxies form relatively few stars, compared to
the amount of potential fuel available for star formation. They are required by
theoretical models to correctly match the observed distributions of masses and
star formation rates in galaxies, yet they remain poorly understood. This
project will test the extent to which stars can create such winds. Investigators
will determine the physical properties of outflows in galaxies that are
undergoing a burst of star formation. This project will determine the physical
characteristics of both the stars in the galaxies and the outflows they are
driving. These galaxies likely represent a crucial phase in the creation of
massive galaxies as they consume gas and shut down the future formation of
stars. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students in research
and implement outreach activities that will connect K-12 classrooms across the
country with professional astronomers through in-class video discussions and
follow-up reflection and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feedback in the form
of outflowing gas and dust is a crucial aspect of galaxy evolution, explaining
why galaxies form relatively few stars, compared to the baryon budget of the
Universe. Galactic outflows are prevalent in star-forming galaxies and likely
regulate and eventually shut off star formation. Despite the critical importance
of feedback to the galaxy evolution process, its physical mechanisms remain
poorly understood. This project will test the limits of stellar feedback by
characterizing the physical properties and determining the space density of
compact starburst galaxies that exhibit the fastest outflows (&gt;1000 km/s) and
highest star formation rate surface densities known. This project will determine
physical characteristics of both the dusty starburst cores of these galaxies as
well as the multi-phase outflowing gas. These results will constrain the
physical drivers of these extreme outflows, as well as their impact on their
host galaxies. This project aims to fully characterize the nature of the
outflows, test a time sequence for the shutdown of star formation and the
development of feedback, and place these galaxies in the broader context of
massive galaxy formation. This project will also support the research efforts of
multiple undergraduate students, as well as two graduate students, and will
support outreach efforts to connect K-12 students with research by bringing
professional astronomers into classrooms via in-class video discussions and
follow-up reflection and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.