* 1813388
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Techniques for Software Model Checking of Hyperproperties
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Borzoo Bonakdarpour, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 11/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

Most manufacturers and companies employ a set of security and privacy policies
that specify how the data produced by their products can be accessed and
propagated. Violation of such policies may result in catastrophic consequences
such as breach of public services and safety or compromising highly sensitive
data and privacy of citizens. Frequent reports of security exploits and loss of
information privacy have unfortunately become everyday occurrences. In the
context of confidentiality, one specific technique to obtain assurance is
analyzing software source code to identify security flaws, in particular, to
detect bad flow of information among users with different security privileges.
This project aims at developing algorithms and tools that automatically detect
bugs that result in violation of confidentiality through bad flow of
information. The results of this project will improve public confidence in the
ability of complex systems to operate safely and maintain information
confidentiality. The research aims to bring about a paradigm shift in reasoning
about security and privacy at software source code
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops push-button software model
checking techniques for verification of a rich class of information flow
policies. The specification language is based on hyperproperties, a set-
theoretic framework to describe security and privacy policies. The project uses
HyperLTL, a temporal logic that allows explicit quantification over traces, to
formally express hyperproperties. The main objective is to make software model
checking possible for hyperproperties. The investigators investigate new
theories that allows code-level verification of hyperproperties, as the current
semantics of HyperLTL does not allow asynchronous progress among traces. The
project develops efficient model checking techniques that cannot be trivially
generalized to deal with HyperLTL: partial-order reduction,
abstraction/refinement, and bounded model checking. The investigators develop
tools that realize these algorithms and will conduct rigorous case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.