* 1813076
* Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education (CADRE)
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Catherine McCulloch, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 01/31/2022
* USD 1,647,057.00

This project from the Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education
(CADRE) will provide assistance to Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) projects in
national dissemination of the R&amp;D contributions of the DRK-12 program. This
project will strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and amplify the
impact of DRK-12 projects and researchers working in the assessment, learning,
and teaching strands. Through this effort, CADRE will advance the goals of the
DRK-12 program in preK-12 formal STEM education by responding to the continuing
need for communication, collaboration, and innovations among DRK-12 awardees and
between awardees and the education system. The DRK-12 program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CADRE's goals to
strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and amplify the influence of over
300 active DRK-12 projects and associated researchers are designed to contribute
to improvements in preK-12 STEM education. During this project, CADRE will
continue its work in three main areas: (1) supporting the DRK-12 community, (2)
connecting awardees in support of knowledge generation, and (3) connecting to
the larger community of education research, policy, and practice. CADRE seeks to
bring together (virtually and in-person) diverse audiences to contribute to and
benefit from the work of DRK-12 projects, thereby further increasing engagement
in evidence-based education in the STEM disciplines. CADRE will work to ensure
that the knowledge and products produced by and with DRK-12 projects are broadly
accessible to a varied group of stakeholders. CADRE will disseminate the
research, models, resources, and technologies--both within the program and
outside--to the broader education practitioner, research, and policymaking
communities. In addition, the CADRE Fellows program will support next generation
of scholars and increase the capacity of a diverse group of researchers to
participate in and contribute to improving education in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.