* 1813871
* Looking Out for the Little Guy: A Comprehensive Study of Star Formation in Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Alyson Brooks, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2022
* USD 285,295.00

In 2010, the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) was named the top-ranked
ground-based astronomy project for the coming decade. The telescope will begin
gathering light in 2019, and begin a full survey of the visible sky two years
later. The survey will discover billions of new astronomical objects, including
hundreds of new galaxies nearby to our own Milky Way galaxy. The new galaxies
that we will discover are so faint that they could not be found by previous
telescopes. These tiny galaxies are also ideal places to test fundamental
questions about the origin of galaxies in our Universe. This research focuses on
the fact that these tiny galaxies are very sensitive to the first stars that
formed in our Universe. This fact has not been sufficiently explored in previous
research. To prepare astronomers to understand what these galaxies tell us about
the origins of our Universe, this research focuses on three key areas. First,
they will predict the number of faint galaxies that the National Science
Foundation's LSST should discover. Second, they will predict how far away from
the Milky Way the LSST might find the faint galaxies. Third, they will predict
whether any of these galaxies is still forming stars today, or whether they all
stopped forming stars billions of years ago. The research advances the
scientific leadership of the United States and help to safeguard the United
States' investment in LSST. The project focuses on training students who are
first-generation college students, with the goal of diversifying the US
technical workforce. An expanded and diversified scientific workforce helps to
ensure that the US remains a leader in innovation and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSST will revolutionize our knowledge of dwarf
galaxies, especially in the ultra-faint regime. However, simulators have barely
begun to extend their successful models to stellar masses below 1 million solar
masses. Now is the critical time to understand whether our current simulations
can continue to explain galaxy formation down into the ultra-faint range, or
whether a new understanding of star formation in low mass dark matter halos will
be required. The goal of this work is to gain substantial knowledge about the
processes that control early star formation in dwarf galaxies and subsequent
quenching. The number of observed galaxies with stellar masses below 10 thousand
solar masses depends strongly on the density of gas from which the first stars
could form in the early Universe. The proposed work will generate hundreds of
simulated dwarf galaxies, with stellar masses ranging from one billion solar
masses (roughly 1/10 the mass of the Milky Way) down to 1000 solar masses in the
range of ultra-faint dwarf galaxies. This work utilizes the simulations to (1)
pinpoint the role of star formation density threshold on the number of galaxies
that form, and the resulting stellar mass function; (2) make predictions for the
number of ultra-faint dwarf galaxies as function of radius from the Milky Way;
(3) study the processes that quench dwarf galaxies as function of mass and
environment, and make predictions for the quenched fraction in the field that
can be observed by future facilities. This work also establishes a program to
support and mentor first-generation college students (many of whom are likely to
also be from groups historically underrepresented in STEM) as they transition to
being undergraduates. The program will (1) develop a mentoring relationship
between students and members of the Rutgers Physics &amp; Astronomy department,
(2) utilize cohort building activities to develop the students into a peer
support network for each other, (3) introduce the students to basic research
tools and get them involved in original research. These three goals have been
shown to increase the retention of underrepresented students in science. The
overall aim is to improve the demographic diversity of both the Rutgers Physics
&amp; Astronomy undergraduate majors, but also of the Physics and Astronomy
community. This program will also train graduate students to teach and mentor
the first-year students, and educate the graduate student mentors on issues of
equity and barriers to education that first-year/underrepresented students
face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.