* 1813148
* RAPID:  Microbial signatures of tropical trees across human land use gradients before and  after hurricane disturbance: implications for the disruption of coexistence mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Barbara Roy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 195,400.00

This is a Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project to address the impacts of
Hurricanes Maria and Irma in Puerto Rico. The overall goal is to understand how
natural disturbances such as hurricanes impact plant biodiversity in tropical
forests on the Island. Experiments and surveys before and after the hurricanes
will be used to determine whether or not the hurricanes disrupted the process
thought to be responsible for maintaining the incredible diversity of plant life
there. Tropical rain forests are one of the most diverse ecosystems on Earth,
and provide habitats for more than half of all plant and animal species, but we
still do not fully understand how such immense diversity is maintained or how
human and natural disturbances affect it. One well-known hypothesis predicts
that species-specific natural enemies (disease-causing microbes) reduce the
competitive ability of some trees, thereby allowing other trees to grow and
survive, but detailed tests of this hypothesis are few. This project will test
the hypothesis in various ways, by examining whether tree and soil microorganism
distribution patterns are in sync with one another, and whether such
interactions were altered by massive inputs and mixtures of leaf litter from
recent hurricanes Irma and Maria. The studies will take place through the
auspices of the Luquillo Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) site in El Yunque.
The intellectual and technical capacity building for students and researchers in
Puerto Rico and Oregon will directly benefit goals of improving the
competitiveness of the United States in research, as well a broadening
participation in science.

The Janzen-Connell hypothesis is one of the main hypotheses evoked to explain
how tree diversity in tropical forests is maintained. To explicitly test the
underlying assumption that trees have unique microbial signatures in the soils
surrounding them, the DNA of fungi and bacteria will be sequenced from soils
sampled at 0-10m within the bases of nine target trees before and after the
hurricane in the 16-ha Luquillo Forest Dynamics Plot, which has a gradient of
human land use. To determine whether or not the strength of Janzen-Connell
effects was altered, and how land use legacies interact with these processes,
seedling transplant experiments will be conducted, and pathogens and mycorrhizal
fungi will be isolated and used for further experiments. In combination with
this team's extensive pre-hurricane data, the following hypotheses will be
tested: H1: Sudden inputs of mixed leaf litter and debris from hurricane-force
winds attenuate microbial signatures of canopy trees, which weakens Janzen-
Connell effects due to diluted species-specific pathogen loads near canopy
trees; H2: Mycorrhizal fungal colonization, richness, and diversity decrease
following hurricane disturbance due to a lack of photosynthetic input from
defoliated trees, making seedlings more vulnerable to generalized pathogen
attack and nutrient limitation; H3: Recent human land use interacts with
hurricane disturbance to further impede microbially-mediated coexistence
processes. Since human disturbance is pervasive in all tropical forests, and
hurricane disturbance is increasing in intensity across a wide range of tropical
areas from the Caribbean to the Asian tropics, results of this study will have
generalizable implications for predicting tropical forest dynamics, and may
provide insight into some of the unexplained variation observed in studies of
forest recovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.