* 1813281
* CHS: Small: Enhancing Data Analysis Strategies with Mixed-Initiative Visual Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Alexander Endert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 491,371.00

People make important decisions based on data every day, from simple choices
such as which restaurant to dine at when visiting a city, to important and
complex decisions in healthcare about which course of treatment to pursue, and
even decisions that impact national security and policy. Visual analytic systems
play a critical role in these decision-making processes. They allow people to
interact with their data and analytic models to view different perspectives of
data and gain insights. This interactive data analysis process consists of
people incrementally guiding analytic models to produce alternate views of the
data in support of their tasks. In most cases, such human-in-the-loop processes
have successful, insightful outcomes. However, the cognitive sciences tell us
that people can exhibit innate biased behavior. As a result, their data analysis
behaviors and strategies may suffer. Ultimately, this could lead to decisions
made from incomplete information and limited perspectives on how the data can be
interpreted. Biased analysis processes can lead to biased results and
misinformation. This project will perform fundamental research to discover how
to detect such potential bias and develop visual analytic systems that mitigate
it. It will also produce educational impacts for graduate and undergraduate
students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields, in part through outreach
workshops with instructors from minority-serving institutions and historically
black colleges and universities to help them integrate visual analytics and
general data literacy learning objectives into course curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed multi-disciplinary research will develop
techniques that enhance mixed-initiative visual analytic analysis processes by
intervening and providing guidance when necessary. To accomplish this goal,
three primary lines of research are proposed. First, the team will develop and
evaluate computational metrics to detect poor and potentially biased analysis
strategies from user interaction patterns and system parameters. These metrics
consist of probabilistic computational models that take into consideration
metrics such as data coverage over the duration of the data exploration. Second,
the team will develop and study different visual analytic system designs to
guide and improve people's analysis processes. Each prototype will give people
guidance using the metrics, but display information to users via different
interface designs (e.g., dialog boxes, visual overlays of coverage, etc.) They
will be developed, evaluated, and made available via publications and open-
source code. Third, the studies proposed will generate empirical results and
design guidelines for future mixed-initiative visual analytic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.