* 1813487
* CSR: NeTS: Small: In-Network Resource Management for Rack-Scale Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Vladimir Braverman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2022
* USD 499,998.00

Datacenters are a critical infrastructure to support modern Internet services
like search, social networking and e-commerce. Rack-scale computers are emerging
to fundamentally change how datacenters are designed, built and managed. Rack-
scale computers disaggregate resources in each rack of servers into separate
pools and organize them at the rack level. Such resource disaggregation can
enable fine-grained resource allocation and increase resource utilization.
Resource management is essential for rack-scale computers to realize fully these
benefits. Yet, the densely-packed resources and the rise of millisecond-scale
and microsecond-scale tasks pose unprecedented requirements on the throughput
and latency for the resource manager. Today's server-based solutions fall short
to meet these requirements. This project investigates a new architecture that
leverages the power and flexibility of new-generation programmable switches for
resource management in rack-scale computers. This project explores the boundary
of in-network computing. While networks are traditionally designed for packet
forwarding, this project exploits the capability of new-generation programmable
switches to realize application-level functionalities that go beyond traditional
packet processing. This project uses in-network resource management to exemplify
how networks and systems can be deeply integrated and co-designed for next-
generation rack-scale computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will not
only improve resource management for rack-scale computers in practice, but also
provide new architectural and theoretical insights on computer system designs
and principles. While the new architecture directly benefits from switch
hardware for high performance, the core challenge is to realize generic resource
management policies with limited switch functionalities and resources. To
address this challenge, this project will exploit compact data structures to
efficiently store resource consumption and utilization information with minimal
switch resources, and leverage randomized and approximation algorithms to design
light-weight mechanisms for the switch data plane to make near-optimal resource
management decisions. A prototype system will be implemented with commodity
servers and switches and evaluated with microbenchmarks and end-to-end system
experiments under a wide range of workloads. This project will provide extensive
research, training and educational opportunities for both undergraduate and
graduate students, and actively engage women and minorities, with research
projects and new course materials. This project will release open-source
software for other researchers to leverage and reproduce the results and for the
industry to adopt the solutions in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.