* 1813165
* AF: Small : Collaborative Research : A Theory of High Dimensional Property Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* C. Seshadhri, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 229,999.00

The advent of massive data sets requires the design and analysis of algorithms
accessing only a tiny portion of input data. This proposal aims to further the
mathematical study of these algorithms in the context of sublinear algorithms
and property testing within theoretical computer science. Specifically, the
focus is an in-depth understanding of data represented as high dimensional
functions, a paradigm prevalent in many optimization problems, and how useful
properties of these can be quickly ascertained using small samples. An
understanding of these issues foreseeably will lead to better, faster, and more
robust algorithms for data analysis. The proposal involves training and
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students at the investigators' respective
institutions with special attention given to women and minority students. The
findings of this proposal will be made accessible to public not only via
technical reports but also via blogs and videos accessible to everyone. The
investigators have a track record of converting theoretical understandings to
practical algorithms, and this proposal will continue this effort.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Discrete, high dimensional functions are ubiquitous in science, and
it is imperative to understand and exploit properties of these functions. Many
fundamental properties such as monotonicity, Lipschitz continuity, convexity and
submodularity are defined by bounds on the first, second, or higher derivatives
of these functions. This proposal aims to understand the theory behind
derivative-bounded property testing, and in particular discover the fastest
algorithms that determine whether a function (approximately) satisfies a
property from this class. In particular, the proposal aims to achieve the
following goals: (1) Obtain a fast tester of submodularity and discrete
convexity, building on previous work of the investigators on first derivative
testers. (2) Transfer results from discrete settings to continuous settings, and
obtain testers for properties like convexity. (3) Uncover more connections
between geometric concepts like duality and isoperimetry with derivative testing
algorithms, as has been suggested by previous work of the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.