* 1813611
* Further Studies of Dynamics for El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diversity and Complexity
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Fei-Fei Jin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 01/31/2023
* USD 608,703.00

Results from this renewal project will improve the ability of climate models in
predictions of El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), its impacts and in
projections of future changes in ENSO activity. It is anticipated that the
theoretical and methodological techniques that are developed by the Principal
Investigator (PI) through this effort will have broad applicability in the
climate science community. Dissemination of the scientific results will occur
through publications, presentations at conferences and professional meetings,
channels of the University of Hawaii, and outreach to the local and broader
communities. A graduate student and two early-career scientists will be trained
through this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;El Nino/La Nina events that occur
every few years are characterized by massive warming/cooling over the eastern
tropical Pacific Ocean together with weakening/strengthening of trade winds.
This strong inter-annual fluctuation of the global climate system is referred to
as the ENSO phenomenon. It accompanies by systematic changes in atmospheric and
oceanic circulations, affecting global weather and climate systems, marine and
terrestrial ecosystems, and fisheries, and thereby having a great impact on
economics of well-being and people's life. The ENSO phenomenon exhibits rich
diversity in its strength, duration and patterns of warming/cooling and in its
global impacts. Fundamental issues concerning ENSO remain to be better
addressed. For example, whether there exist roughly two groups of ENSO typical
patterns, namely the so-called Central Pacific and Eastern Pacific El Nino is an
active research topic in the scientific community. Furthermore, how influences
of ENSO in the tropic Pacific are spread into the highly complex global climate
system and ecosystem, remains a question to be better understood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will conduct systematic theoretical, diagnostic,
and numerical modeling investigations to achieve the following three objectives:
(1) further advancing linear and nonlinear theories for the origins of the ENSO
pattern diversity; (2) better understanding of the mechanisms causing ENSO
complex temporal evolution and their impacts (3) further investigating the
sensitivity of ENSO patterns and temporal characteristics to biases and future
changes in tropical climate mean state and in parameters of key physical
processes of the climate models. New theoretical approaches will be developed
and a model hierarchy ranging from simple to fully coupled Global Climate Models
will be adopted to address the outstanding questions and to achieve the three
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.