* 1813004
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Enhanced Security and Reliability for Embedded Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Frank Mueller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Today, embedded devices are ubiquitous. These devices are inherently networked,
which exposes them to malware attacks. Windows devices remain the most prominent
targets of malware attacks to date. But this playing field is quickly changing,
as demonstrated with firmware attacks to private access points or closed-circuit
television cameras. Other intrusions to industrial and governmental
infrastructure have been reported in the power grid, for industrial control and
automotive systems, even in small devices in private homes that are networked,
often referred to as the Internet-of-Things. As our daily lives increasingly
rely on such devices, malware attacks pose a severe risk. Yet, limited
computational capabilities constrain embedded security measures. Even worse,
execution of malware code in control systems may result in a time lag of control
actions. Such delays may result in property damage, catastrophic failures and
even lost lives. Hence, the effect of malware on not just system functionality
but also timings is critical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reshape the
landscape of protection for networked control devices as novel timing-based
protection mechanisms across the entire software stack will complement
traditional cybersecurity methods to significantly enhance safety and
reliability. The investigator will promote participation of students from under-
represented groups, with emphasis on educating and training PhD students from
these groups. The investigator will also work with long-term industry partners
to turn these efforts into practical impact through transfer of techniques and
other means of outreach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this work
is to significantly increase cyber security across embedded and networked
computing devices by developing real-time monitoring techniques that defeat
cyber-attacks. The project hypothesizes that these devices can be enhanced by a
novel class of malware detection approaches that rely on fine-grained timing
information of such devices. The premise is that embedded devices are subject to
control systems with soft or even hard real-time constraints. The execution path
of such control code on embedded devices thus follows a stringent and
predictable behavior, which can be characterized by timing analysis. Once upper
bounds on timings along execution paths are established, this information not
only aids in the verification of timing constraints, but it can also be
exploited to detect deviations from the certified timing behavior. Timing-based
malware detection thus provides a means for non-stop system integrity. What is
more, it can be used to trigger transitions into a safe operating mode at an
early intrusion detection point to prevent anomalous behavior from
escalating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.