* 1813645
* Collaborative Research: Nonlocal Interfaces in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* James von Brecht, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2021
* USD 61,646.00

This award supports the development of mathematical tools for understanding
phenomena caused by the interactions among biological interfaces. An interface
is a transition between regions in a system, each exhibiting different
biological properties. The natural world displays a vast gallery of organized
systems characterized by complex interface dynamics, including the edges of
growing tumors or bacterial colonies, the surface of a growing, hollow embryo,
or the transition region between high and low electrical activity in a beating
heart. This project will investigate biological systems that involve interfaces
with interactions on long length-scales; the behaviors of these interfaces have
properties which cannot be predicted by purely local dynamics, as when a bubble
popping far away allows other bubbles to grow. The new tools developed will be
validated through experimentation with bacterial biofilms and human organoids.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the research at both
California State University-Long Beach and Montana State University, and Native
American students will be recruited using collaborative outreach programs in
existence at Montana State University.

The investigation will focus on studying complex systems characterized by a
collection of mutually interacting curves or surfaces. These nonlocal mutual
interactions can produce a variety of pattern forming behaviors that typically
do not occur in classical interfacial models. For example, nonlocal interfacial
models exhibit arrested fronts, which are stationary, dynamically stable
interfaces between quasi-homogeneous regions in a complex system. The
interactions between certain strains of bacteria provide a concrete instance of
such fronts. The evolution of genetically identical sibling colonies lead to
competition between these colonies, and this competition produces a collection
of mutually interacting interfaces (i.e. the boundary of each colony) that
eventually arrest in regions of sibling-sibling competition. The project will
introduce a first-principle modeling framework for nonlocal interfaces that
offers reduced model complexity from both an analytical and computational
perspective. Despite the relative simplicity of this framework, its specific
instances still capture the essential pattern forming mechanisms in a variety of
biological systems. As a consequence, research under the award will focus on
validating this overall approach via experimental predictions in several
biological systems. This approach to understanding nonlocal pattern formation
appears new at the level of generality introduced in the project, and it opens
the door to numerous explorations of the mathematical behavior of the framework
and of its applications for different experimental systems. The major aim is to
provide researchers with a comparatively flexible, minimalistic framework to
study arrested fronts and other interfacial phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.