* 1813017
* NSF INCLUDES Symposium for ADVANCING STEM Latinas in Academic Careers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ala Qubbaj, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,992.00

In light of the vast underrepresentation of Latinas in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) academic careers at a time when Latinas
represent one of the fastest growing populations in the U.S. workforce, this NSF
INCLUDES symposium provides a national platform to discuss and address the
issues that affect the pathways/pipelines, recruitment, retention, and
advancement of Latinas in STEM academic careers. The symposium brings together
various NSF-funded broadening participation projects (such as NSF INCLUDES
Pilots and NSF ADVANCE projects), Hispanic-Serving Institutions, as well as
national professional organizations that have a focus on enhancing the
participation, inclusion and success of Latinas (and other traditionally
underrepresented minority groups) in STEM careers. Therefore, the symposium
provides a platform for the sharing of ideas, strategies, and best practices to
broaden the participation, inclusion, and success of Latinas in academic STEM
careers. This work is important for society because if Latinas continue to be
underrepresented, and hence underutilized in the STEM workforce, the U.S. will
likely lose ground in terms of its scientific and other workforce competitive
advantages. Increasing Latina representation among STEM faculty also provides
the needed role models for Latina/o students to enter into STEM careers,
transition to graduate programs and ultimately progress to the professoriate.
Moreover, diversifying the STEM professoriate promotes innovation and
creativity, and expands the range of perspectives and experiences to which
students in STEM fields are exposed. Therefore, it serves to offset preconceived
notions and stereotypes some students might have about women and
underrepresented ethnic minority populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
INCLUDES Symposium advances the knowledge and understanding of how work-life
issues, policies/practices, mentoring, and climate surrounding equity and
inclusiveness affect the recruitment, retention, and advancement, including into
leadership positions, of Latinas in STEM academic careers. The symposium
incorporates presentations by scholars engaged in emerging research on Latinas
(including intersectionality issues), individual perspectives from STEM Latina
faculty/professionals as well as perspectives from institutions of higher
education (especially Hispanic-Serving Institutions) and national diversity-
serving professional organizations such as the Latina Researchers Network. It
also highlights the lessons learned from other NSF-funded broadening
participation projects such as NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilots
and NSF ADVANCE projects. These types of interactions/discussions allow for the
development of shared goals, common metrics, and mutually reinforcing activities
that lead to forming new collaborations and the expansion of the NSF INCLUDES
National Network. The lessons learned from the symposium, including all
presentations and panel discussions, are to be compiled and published in an
edited volume, and disseminated to serve as a resource for the broader STEM
community and academia at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.