* 1813575
* Integrating Formative Assessment of Computational Thinking with Self-Regulated Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Thomas O'Connell, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2022
* USD 449,642.00

This is a two-year exploratory project submitted to the assessment strand of the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) Program, also responsive to NSF 17-149 Dear
Colleague Letter: Discovery Research PreK-12: Advancing STEM+Computing. It is
aimed at developing, refining, testing, and validating a prototype to illustrate
the synergy among formative assessment (FA), computational thinking (CT), and
self-regulated learning (SRL) within the discipline of computer science (CS)
with teachers (n=10) and students (n=160) in 9th-12th grades. The project will
focus on FA, also known as assessment for learning, which generates information
that is used for feedback to modify teaching and learning activities. By
explicitly eliciting student SRL learning during problem-solving, assessment
tasks will illustrate the synergy between FA and SRL. Students will be prompted
to analyze a CT task before attempting to solve it, explicitly setting goals,
and reflecting on teacher feedback to direct their behaviors towards achieving
these goals in subsequent attempts. To elicit SRL behavior, CT task design will
follow a three-phase model. Phase 1 will focus on goal setting and task
analysis. Phase 2 will focus on self-monitoring during task performance, while
Phase 3 will center on reflection. Each task will have two performance
iterations, allowing students and teachers to put feedback about prior
performance into use. Tasks' content will be drawn from the CS curricula used in
secondary school classrooms. They will be validated in authentic classroom
contexts in a public school system with a diverse student population. This
effort plans to achieve the following outcomes: (1) creation of four prototype
CT assessment tasks; (2) development of reliability and validity arguments for
the tasks; (3) research into impacts on student CT performance of process-
oriented teacher feedback and explicit use of SRL; and (4) development of
teacher expertise in FA of CT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address
two key research questions: (1) Does teacher feedback positively affect student
performance when it provides goal-specific feedback on SRL processes, as well as
performance outcomes?; and (2) Do students who engage in SRL cycles improve
performance on CT tasks, as compared to students who complete tasks without
explicit prompts to engage in SRL? To answer these questions, the project will
conduct two research studies. The first study will investigate the extent to
which teacher feedback on both SRL processes and task performance positively
affects student CT achievement, more than outcome-based feedback only. This
study will use a quasi-experimental, pre- post-test design with comparison
group. Students in the treatment condition will receive feedback on SRL
processes and CT task performance. Students in the control condition will
receive feedback on performance outcomes only. The second study will investigate
the extent to which students who engage in SRL through explicit prompting
improve performance on CT tasks, as compared to students without SRL prompts.
This study will employ an experimental mixed-model design to examine differences
between experimental groups and changes in students' performance over three
repeated measurement cycles. The main outcome of this effort will be a prototype
illustrating the potential synergies among CT, FA, and SRL which will be used in
the future to further research on the intersections among these domains. The
tasks developed under this project will be made available online at no cost to
the public through multiple practitioner networks. An advisory board and
external evaluator will provide feedback and recommendations in regard to the
progress and quality of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.