* 1813914
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course:  Frontiers and Techniques in Plant Science
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2023
* USD 331,543.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course on Frontiers and Techniques in Plant
Science provides opportunities for a diverse group of early career scientists to
learn about the latest developments and methods in plant research. This three-
week immersion course provides training in the cutting-edge techniques used in
modern research on model and crop plants. The course has a long tradition of
exposing students to new ways of thinking about plant research and to new
approaches in plant research. Students who complete this course will be prepared
to join the next generation of innovative scientists in the plant research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frontiers and Techniques in Plant Science is a
well-established course on current research and techniques in plant biology.
This course consists of a rigorous lecture series, hands-on laboratory
experiences and informal workshops. The course provides training in plant
genetics and molecular biology, genomics and synthetic techniques, as well as
analytical, computational and interdisciplinary approaches to plant research.
The course instructors are chosen based on their expertise and substantial
contributions to plant research. The participants are a diverse group of early
career scientists who benefit from the intensive laboratory-based coursework and
substantial opportunities for networking with leaders in the field of plant
research. Past participants have reported a high satisfaction with the course,
and long-term follow-up studies indicate that the course has a long-lasting
impact on the careers and research directions of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.