* 1813470
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Building Subjective Knowledge Bases by Modeling Viewpoints
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Bamman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 266,000.00

This project will develop and empirically evaluate methods for creating
subjective knowledge bases: databases of opinions and viewpoints as they are
asserted by individuals in books, web forums, and social media. While most
knowledge base research seeks to extract real-world truth from text, many
factual assertions are either about inherently subjective propositions (such as
"apples are delicious") or are non-subjective assertions that happen to
contradict other belief holders or even consensus reality (such as "the Earth is
flat"). This project pioneers new methods to automatically extract expressions
of opinions and viewpoints from a textual corpus and use those assertions to
build a subjective knowledge base that can accommodate contradictory and
conflicting statements from different authors. Such a subjective knowledge base
will help researchers answer a range of questions: What contradictory claims are
being made in historical books, or contemporary social media? What propositions
does a particular ideological community hold, and are they compatible with, or
contradictory to, those held by other communities? This project lays the
foundation for understanding a broad range of phenomena that can be seen as
conflicts between coherent viewpoints. The resulting computational models will
lay the groundwork for intelligent systems that are robust with respect to the
way in which propositions are used in the real world; as applications in
artificial intelligence are being deployed more and more in social contexts,
this research will inform these methods with more nuanced information about the
diversity of human viewpoints. This work will also include a substantial
educational component, incorporating human context into algorithm design in
undergraduate STEM education and broadening the use of natural language
processing and machine learning across a range of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous work has focused on the primary
task of identifying degrees of certainty (belief, viewpoints) in text, the
primary contribution of this project will be modeling the structure of
individual extracted viewpoints through the variables of the viewpoint holders
and the viewpoint communities to which they belong. Models for building
subjective knowledge bases accept subjective claims as fully semantic relational
propositions, like recent research in open information extraction. However,
instead of relying on the typical assumption of cross-document consensus, these
models will embrace the simultaneous presence of contradictory claims across
different author groups or even within the writings of the same individual.
Major project components include: developing and refining broad-domain part-of-
speech and syntactic parsing to be effective across both social media and
historical books; using these tools to support author-centric latent-variable
models of structured knowledge, which infers latent positions for both
propositions and their viewpoint-holders; and improving the model with
linguistic analysis of factuality and viewpoint (belief)
commitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.