* 1813224
* Computing in Elementary School: An Exploration of Computational Thinking Approaches and Concepts Across Disciplines
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Victor Fay-Wolfe, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,383.00

The powerful innovation and application of computing in the science, technology,
engineering, mathematics (STEM) disciplines has increased the need for real-
world, interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the
early grades through high school. Such interdisciplinary teaching and learning
must be developed with the understanding of the needs and capacity of elementary
school teachers and their students, and appropriate grade-specific integration
in the elementary curriculum. This exploratory research will study the landscape
of K-5 elementary teachers and how they engage students in computational
thinking, and apply concepts associated with computing and computational
thinking in their teaching of STEM content so implementation efforts are viable.
By better understanding how computational thinking concepts and approaches
integrate authentically into math, science and other subjects, policymakers and
district leaders will be informed of how to intentionally support teachers and
students to develop their core skills that will provide a strong foundation for
computing applications in STEM teaching and learning. Outcomes of the research
will include a better understanding of computational thinking concepts and
approaches across the K-5 curriculum to inform future implementation efforts;
increased awareness of computational thinking definitions for K-5 teachers so
teachers are more prepared to apply computing in their practice; and inform the
professional development needs of K-5 teachers. Findings will support
computational integration in STEM education in elementary school built on
evidence and best practices. This project was submitted to the DRK12-STEM+C DCL
(17-149) and is supported by the STEM+C Program that focuses on research and
development of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the
integration of computing within science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and
informal settings. STEM+C supports research on how students learn to think
computationally to solve interdisciplinary problems in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a convergent parallel mixed methods design,
survey data will be collected concurrently with Design-Based Implementation
Research (DBIR) activity artifacts and merged (1) to provide a holistic picture
of how computational thinking (CT) concepts and approaches are currently being
addressed in elementary classrooms and (2) to identify how new CT concepts and
approaches in computing programs relate to those already applied in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM). Practitioners will engage in the
process of research and will help to steer the exploratory study through a
series of value mapping activities. Multiple correlation coefficient (R) and HLM
statistical analysis of teacher survey data will explain where and when CT
concepts and approaches are present in the current elementary classroom. By
including educators and researchers from across the STEM+C fields, as well as
including schools from urban, rural, and suburban areas, the project will
explore what works and for whom. As the project is concerned with supporting and
sustaining systemic change, the project's long-term sustainability goals will
benefit from the infrastructure developed through an NSF Local Systemic Change
grant that has matured over the past 20 years. The relationships between the
University and 12 local school districts, as well as mechanisms for
communication will be a key factor in the sustainability of the project. The
research and activities will result in the dissemination of a multimedia model
for interdisciplinary computing. The model will inform further research on the
development and implementation of teaching computing as an integral, embedded
component of STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.