* 1813047
* Teacher Professional Learning to Support Student Motivational Competencies During Science Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,301,058.00

Science teachers identify fostering student motivation to learn as a pressing
need, yet teacher professional learning programs rarely devote time to helping
teachers understand and apply motivational principles in their instruction. This
project will bring together a multi-disciplinary team of researchers and science
teachers to identify a set of practices that science teachers can readily
incorporate into their planning and instruction. The project will design,
develop, and test a research-based professional learning approach to help middle
school science teachers effectively support and sustain student motivational
competencies during science instruction. The approach will include use of
materials addressing student motivational processes and how to support them,
evaluation tools to measure student motivational competencies, lesson planning
tools, and instruments for teacher self-evaluation. The translation to practice
will include recognition of student diversity and consider ways to facilitate
context-specific integration of disciplinary and motivational knowledge in
practice. The project will focus on middle school science classrooms because
this period is an important motivational bridge between elementary and secondary
science learning. This project will enhance understanding of teacher pedagogical
content knowledge (PCK) in that it frames knowledge about supporting
motivational competencies in science as PCK rather than general pedagogical
knowledge. This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
early stage design and development project will iteratively develop and study a
model of teacher professional learning that will help middle school science
teachers create, modify, and implement instruction that integrates support for
students' motivational competencies with the science practices, crosscutting
concepts, and disciplinary core ideas specified in science curriculum standards.
A design-based research approach will be used to develop and test four resources
teachers will use to explicitly include attention to student motivational
competencies in their lesson planning efforts. The resources will include: 1)
educational materials about students' motivational processes with concrete
examples of how to support them; 2) easy-to-implement student evaluation tools
for teachers to gauge students' motivational competencies; 3) planning tools to
incorporate motivational practices into science lesson planning; and 4)
instruments for teacher self-evaluation. A collaborative group of educational
researchers will partner with science teachers from multiple school districts
having diverse student populations to jointly develop the professional learning
approach and resources. This project will contribute to systemic change by
moving motivational processes from an implicit element of educating students, to
an explicit and intentional set of strategies teachers can enact. Research
questions will focus on how teachers respond to the newly developed professional
learning model, and how students respond to instruction developed through
implementing the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.