* 1813078
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: On the Fundamental Nature of the Age of Updates
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Anthony Ephremides, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 241,283.00

The Age of Information (AoI) has emerged as a novel concept, metric, and tool in
the broad area of Information Sciences. AoI is clearly connected to many aspects
of Information Theory, Signal Processing, and multiple applications. However,
the fundamental nature of this concept has been elusive so far. This project
will investigate all three aspects of the AoI, namely its significance as a
performance metric, its usefulness as a tool, and, more importantly, its
potential to explore profound aspects of, and fundamental interconnections
among, the theories that underlie our understanding of information structure,
causal information processing, and the context (or semanteme) of information.
Especially in the latter, the context of the communication process is emerging
as a well-defined and useful extension of the Shannon doctrine of communication.
Namely, communication needs not be just reproducing at point B a message
selected at point A. Rather, it is important to consider whether communication
occurs for a purpose, such as for computation, prediction, or monitoring.
Educational efforts will include course development at both undergraduate and
graduate levels. The investigators will also strengthen the strong programs of
their Institutions in recruiting women and under-represented minorities, as well
as the involvement of undergraduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims at using the new concept
of Age of Information to discover the relationships between Information Theory
and Signal Processing, which are two of the main pillars of Information Science.
Its foundational core is the context of communication, namely on the purposes
and goals of signal transmission. This research will be carried out around three
thrust areas: (i) the project will explore how the transmission and the age of
received updates relate to the information structure of a signal, and understand
how information ages over time; (ii) the project will use an innovative approach
to the traditional problems of signal processing by relating Nyquist's theory to
causal signal reconstruction; (iii) the project will use AoI as a tool in
handling the problem of caching and network control in volatile environments
(e.g., internet of things and sensor networks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.