* 1813698
* Structural Spectra and Applications to Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Lipton, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 305,531.00

Advancements in technology benefit from improvements in understanding
heterogeneous materials and their ability to control electromagnetic, elastic,
and acoustic phenomena. In this project the investigator and his collaborators
develop three research areas that support these improvements by introducing and
applying novel spectral problems associated with the geometry of material
heterogeneity. In the first set of projects the theory of periodic and quasi
periodic electrostatic spectra is developed for structured geometries enabling
control of wave propagation in photonic, phononic, and metamaterial crystals.
This theory will be applied to the systematic design of pass bands and band gaps
for devices used in communication and energy transmission. In the second set of
projects a novel spectral theory is developed for restriction operators acting
on electromagnetic fields inside heterogeneous materials and applied to provide
new efficient approaches to the fast numerical solution of multiscale problems
for dielectric and magnetic media. A final research project develops a spectral
formulation for energy concentration in heterogeneous media and applies it to
identify the worst case loads for structures made from composite and
polycrystalline media. This will give us a better understanding of why metallic
and composite joints fail in infrastructure and aviation. These research
projects are in line with the research interests of the the Materials and
Manufacturing Directorate at Wright Patterson Air Force Base and a continuation
of interaction between the PI and the labs initiated in the previous NSF award.
It is anticipated that the graduate student supported by this award will benefit
from the interaction with scientists at the Materials and Manufacturing
Directorate at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier
work on the theory of band gaps addresses the asymptotic theory of band gaps at
infinite contrast. In this project the investigator will exploit new structural
spectra associated with inclusion geometry and lattice parameters to develop new
techniques for complex operator valued functions which deliver explicit formulas
for band gaps at finite contrast. The approach proposed here is distinct from
earlier ones and will provide new explicit formulas for the size of band gaps
and pass bands given in terms of contrast, shape and configuration of scatters,
and lattice parameters. In a second thrust of the project, the investigator and
his collaborators will develop new spectral methods related to the restriction
operator for the vector wave equation to deliver new and faster methods for the
numerical solution of multiscale problems of electromagnetic wave propagation in
heterogeneous media. A novel spectral formulation for energy concentration will
be developed and applied to identify worst case loads for structures made from
composite and polycrystalline media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.