* 1813203
* Amphiphilic Morphology: Lipids, Proteins, and Entropy
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,886.00

This project develops new mathematical models of the interactions of
multicomponent lipid membranes with oils and proteins. Lipid membranes are
fundamental building blocks of cellular structure forming the separating walls,
the plumbing, and the assembly points for many proteins. The work will be
conducted by an interdisciplinary team of mathematicians and plant biologists
and will focus on validating experimental observations of lipid droplets against
predictions of the multicomponent lipid models. Lipid droplets are of
significance to public health for their role as a signal of the onset of
metabolic syndrome, which has a correlation with the development of small fatty
inclusions (lipid droplets) within the liver. Lipid droplets are being pursed in
oil seeds and algae as energy storage compartments to improve the energy content
of the biomass. The mathematical elements of the proposal identify key
bottlenecks within the rearrangement of lipid structures with the creation and
destruction of minimal energy pathways within a higher dimensional system, these
pathways correspond to optimal packings of lipids and oil that contribute to the
observed self-assembled structures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project presents
a detailed analysis of the structure of the free energy governing the low energy
connections that represent amphiphilic morphologies and high energy barriers
that are the minimal cost of reorganization. The PI and his collaborators
investigate the central thesis that the dominant manifestation of the entropy of
packing of amphiphilic molecules lies in the structure of this connection
problem. Packing-based energy landscapes are strongly nonlinear, and
fundamentally distinct from the more weakly nonlinear mixture-based models built
upon the Cahn Hilliard framework. The packing-based energy will be validated
against in-vitro experiments on lipid droplets, the prototypical example of a
two-fluid amphiphilic system driven by interfacial competition, and are compared
with entropic descriptions derived from short- chain limits of self-consistent
mean field theory models. Specifically, the proposal uses spatial dynamics and
singular perturbation techniques to develop robust pearling inhibition that
stabilizes the pearling modes of connections, and tunes the existence and
persistence of connections and barriers within factored Melnikov structure via
piecewise defined and singularly perturbed dynamical system approaches. The two
fluid model of lipid droplet formation will be used to investigate pinch-off and
merging events while one fluid models address phase separation (rafting) and
localized pearling. The models will be validated by comparison to entropic
effects extracted from self-consistent mean field models of amphiphilic blends,
to in-vitro experimental morphology of lipid droplets, and to the bifurcation
diagram for castings of synthetic amphiphilic
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.