* 1813427
* Reengineering flatworm regeneration: didactic and informatic resources for teaching and discovery
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Jonathan Marchant, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2020
* USD 491,127.00

Flatworms (planaria) have a remarkable ability to regenerate their bodily
structures; for example, when a worm is cut in two, the tail half will grow a
new head, and similarly the half with the head will regenerate a new tail. The
drug praziquantel (or PZQ) has a surprising effect on the regenerating worm; it
results in a two-headed animal. The goal of this project is to understand how,
in this organism, stem cells can be re-programmed to regenerate a head rather
than a tail. This project will generate for the community both scientific
resources (for example databases of DNA and protein sequences) and educational
resources, including kits that can be used by both schools and universities as
aids to teaching stem cell biology. The researchers will organize courses for
high school teachers, and provide interdisciplinary research opportunities in
stem cell biology and bioinformatics for both graduate students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis to be tested in this project
is that in the regenerating planarian Dugesia japonica the drug praziquantel
(PZQ) activates a neuronal Ca2+ channel (Cav1A) to alter neurotransmitter levels
within the excitable cell niche and thereby miscue stem cell differentiation.
Two opposing neurotransmitter pathways are proposed that control head versus
tail polarity by differentially impacting muscle biology where known planarian
polarity cues (e.g. Wnts) reside. This hypothesis will be tested using both
unbiased (systems-level) and targeted (candidate gene) approaches to gain
insight into the target of action of PZQ and the pathways that control stem cell
differentiation in the anterior-posterior axis.