* 1813444
* RI: Small: Statistically Sound and Computationally Efficient Data Analysis Through Algorithmic Applications of Rademacher Averages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Eli Upfal, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 466,000.00

Machine learning and data mining are among the most influential contributions of
computer science in the last decade. Given sufficiently large datasets and
computational power one can discover patterns and make reasonably accurate
predictions. While there has been tremendous progress in designing efficient
algorithms for analyzing massive datasets, there has been less progress in
providing rigorous measures of statistical significance or robustness of the
analysis. As we analyze large and noisy datasets to model complex relationships
in data, it is critical to develop formally proven methods with clear
performance guarantees. This project advocates a responsible approach to data
analysis, based on well-founded mathematical and statistical concepts. Such an
approach enhances the effectiveness and reliability of evidence- based decision
making in medicine, policy and other social applications of big data analysis.
Capacity-building activities of this project include: (1) Creation and
dissemination of algorithms and software that implement rigorous, interpretable,
and usable computational and statistical approaches to big data analysis; and
(2) Educational initiatives at the graduate and undergraduate level to build a
bigger and more diverse workforce of data scientists with the appropriate
foundational skills both to apply analytical tools to existing datasets and to
develop new approaches to future datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is developing practical data analysis algorithmic applications based on
the theoretical machine learning concept of Rademacher complexity. This project
is motivated by preliminary results that have shown that the analytical
properties of the Rademacher complexity, combined with its efficient sampling
properties, provide a unique opportunity to develop general tools to begin
bridging the gap between theory and practice in large scale data analysis. In
particular, the project is focused on the following aims: improve the efficiency
of rigorous data analysis algorithms through better sample complexity bounds;
improve multi-comparisons and overfitting control through Rademacher
generalization bounds; develop theory and practical applications of Cartesian
and Chaos Rademacher Complexities; develop efficient algorithms for estimating
the empirical Rademacher complexity; and explore new rigorous data analysis
algorithms through the application of Rademacher
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.