* 1813637
* CIF: Small: Contagion Processes in Multi-layer and Multiplex Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Osman Yagan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Online social networks are increasingly serving as a primary source of real time
news for billions of people. In addition, online social networks often act as a
medium to initiate and facilitate collective action. This project advances our
understanding of contagion processes such as the spread of information and
influence in online social networks. Unlike much of the current literature
focusing on single and isolated networks, the project considers contagions
taking place over multiple networks. By a combination of approaches involving
mathematical modeling and analysis as well as real-life data sets, this project
seeks a better understanding of i) how the participation of multiple networks
affects the speed and extent that information propagates; ii) why different
topics have different spreading characteristics over the same population; and
iii) the ways misinformation spreads in social networks and how this might be
countered by efficiently injecting correct information. The project will engage
students from underrepresented groups and will include outreach activities to
high-schools to encourage them to pursue a STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance the state-of-the art in
modeling and analysis of two major classes of contagion processes over multi-
layer and multiplex networks: i) Information propagation (i.e., simple
contagion), and ii) Influence propagation (i.e., complex contagion). Advanced
tools from random graph theory and percolation theory are leveraged to derive
fundamental relations between network parameters (e.g., degree distribution,
size, clustering, degree correlations, coupling strength, and transmissibility)
and the threshold, probability, and expected size of information cascades. The
analysis of contagion is extended to a wide range of network models including
real-world topologies. The modeling of complex contagion is extended from
binary-state dynamics to multi-stage dynamics and this will be utilized in
studying the spread of misinformation. On a broader level, this project
contributes to a largely unexplored field of analyzing random graph models
formed by the union of two or more random graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.