* 1813406
* III: Small: Algorithms and Practical Applications for Team Formation and Change
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Evimaria Terzi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

For decades, researchers in sociology, psychology, organizational behavior, and
other social sciences have been conducting quantitative data-analysis studies in
order to understand and model how individuals form teams and how different
factors (like diversity or homogeneity) affect team performance. Recently, the
proliferation of online platforms for education, outsourcing, collaborative
learning, software development and problem solving has also motivated computer
scientists to work on the development of algorithms for team formation. This
work closes the loop between the theory and practice of team-formation research.
This is done by integrating social-science findings in the development of new
computational problems and the design of new algorithms for team engineering,
which is a term used to encompass the formation of teams and the modification of
existing teams. Moreover, this work develops the necessary computational
concepts as well as the software that enables the application of the team-
recommendation algorithms to a variety of educational scenarios including
hackathons, student entrepreneurship teams, as well as team formation in
curricular and extracurricular project-based learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have strong algorithmic,
experimental and engineering components and will consist of the following
research thrusts. Motivated by research in social sciences, in the first thrust
the project will develop computational concepts enabling the formation of teams
with low faultline potential. In the second thrust the project will focus on
algorithms that modify existing teams in order to improve their functionality;
in this thrust concepts that exist in social science research will again be
used, viewed through computational lenses. In the final thrust the project will
also consider the online team engineering problem where teams are formed on
demand and consist both of core members and non-members that are temporarily
hired in order to help with a particular task; in this scenario, the focus will
be on algorithmic questions related to cost-optimizing strategies. In addition
to these problems, the project will also consider problems arising in
educational settings (e.g., hackathons, student entrepreneurship teams) and the
development of a software platform to implement team-formation algorithms in
such practical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.