* 1813008
* Development and Validation of a Mobile, Web-based Coaching Tool to Improve Pre-K Classroom Practices to Enhance Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Caroline Christopher, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 01/31/2024
* USD 2,786,484.00

Children from low-income families often enter kindergarten academically behind
their more economically affluent peers. Advancing pre-kindergarten (pre-K)
teachers' ability to provide all students with high-quality early math learning
experiences has potential to minimize this gap in school readiness. This project
will promote pre-K teachers' use of specific teaching strategies, such as
spending more time on math content and listening to children during
instructional activities, that have been shown to enhance young children's
learning and social skills. To enhance teachers' use of these practices, the
project takes a novel approach--a mobile website that helps instructional
coaches who work with pre-K teachers. The Classroom Quality Real-time
Empirically-based Feedback tool (CQ-REF) will guide coaches' ability to observe
specific teacher practices in their classrooms and then provide feedback to help
teachers evaluate their practices and set goals for improvement. Practically,
the CQ-REF addresses the need for accessible, real-time feedback on high quality
pre-K classroom teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in
STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. Consistent with
this aim, this project focuses on developing a new practitioner-friendly version
of the CQ-REF, originally designed as a research tool for evaluating the quality
of classroom teaching, for use by coaches and teachers. At the beginning of the
four-year project, the team will collect examples of high-quality classroom
teaching and coaching strategies. These will be used to create a library of
video and other materials that teachers and coaches can use to establish a
shared definition of what effective pre-K teaching looks like. In year three of
the project, the team will pilot the CQ-REF with a diverse range of pre-K
teachers and their coaches to determine the tool's usability and relevance. In
this validation study coaches will be randomly assigned to either use the CQ-REF
tool or coach in their usual manner. After one year, the CQ-REF's impact on
teacher practices and student outcomes will be assessed. Outcomes of interest
include teacher and student classroom behavior and children's executive function
and ability in mathematics, literacy and science. Concurrently, an external
evaluation team will examine how the coaching is being conducted and used, and
participants' impressions of the coaching process. In the fourth and final year,
the team will focus on refining the tool based on results from prior work and on
disseminating the findings to research and practitioner
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.