* 1813117
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Safety Guard: A Formal Approach to Safety Enforcement in Embedded Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Chao Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Ensuring the safety of embedded control systems, such as the ones used in cars,
is remarkably difficult as shown by the many recalled cars in recent years,
causing tens of billions of financial loss each year. This project aims to
improve the safety of critical components in embedded control systems by
developing safety guards, a reactive component generated automatically from
safety requirements and attached to the original system, to ensure the combined
system is safe even if the original system violates the safety requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the set of
methods and tools to be developed for synthesizing safety guards of black-box
systems. Specifically, this project consists of three research tasks: (a)
building a benchmark suite of critical components and their safety requirements;
(b) developing synthesis algorithms for constructing the finite-state machines
(FSMs) of the safety guards; and (c) developing software synthesis tools for
automatically generating software code that implements these FSMs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will benefit a wide range of
application domains, including automotive and avionics, which will be
investigated through collaborations with industry. It will help improve the
safety of critical components, including those based on machine learning and
artificial intelligence techniques. It will simplify certification since the
relatively simple safety guard can be certified against safety requirements in
place of the detailed model of a critical component. And last but not the least,
it will simplify the development process by allowing people to focus on
functionality and performance without worrying about safety violations at the
same time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting software tools, together with
evaluation benchmarks and experimental data, will be made available to the
public. To facilitate dissemination and sharing, the project will maintain
online documentations, tutorials, slides, and source code of the tool and
benchmark repositories. Besides the research websites of participants at
Virginia Tech and University of Southern California, the following website will
be dedicated to disseminate the project results broadly: http://chaowang-
vt.github.io/safetyguard/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.