* 1813189
* An Integrated Approach to Early Elementary Earth and Space Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Kristin Bass, Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 12/31/2020
* USD 431,401.00

State science standards increasingly emphasize the importance of engaging K-12
students directly in natural phenomena and providing opportunities to construct
explanations grounded in evidence. Moreover, these state science standards
introduce earth and space science content in the early elementary grades. This
creates a critical need for new pedagogies, materials, and resources for science
teachers in all grades, but the need is particularly urgent in grades K-3 where
teachers have had little preparation to teach science, let alone astronomy.
There is also growing consensus that when learning opportunities in formal and
informal settings are closely aligned, children's science literacy is developed
in ways greater than either setting can achieve alone. The investigators will
study if, how, and under what circumstances an integration of literacy
strategies, hands-on inquiry-based investigations, and planetarium experiences
supports the development of science practices (noticing, recognizing change,
making predictions, and constructing explanations) in early elementary level
students. This project will generate knowledge about how astronomy-focused
storybooks, hands-on investigations, and planetarium experiences can be
integrated to develop age-appropriate science practices in very young children
(noticing, recognizing change, making predictions, and constructing
explanations). This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of STEM
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergent research on the development of
children's science thinking indicates that when young children are engaged with
science-focused storybooks and activities that each highlight the same
phenomenon, children notice and gather evidence, make predictions and claims
based on evidence, and provide explanations grounded in the experiences provided
to them. This project has two phases. In Phase 1, first and third grade teachers
will be recruited. They will help identify specific learner needs as these
relate to the earth and space science standards in their grade band, assist in
the development and pilot testing of a prototype instructional sequence and
supporting activities taking place within their classrooms and at a local
planetarium. In Phase 2, the revised learning sequence and research protocol
will be implemented with the same teachers and a new cohort of children. The
mixed method research design includes video observations, teacher interviews,
and teacher and student surveys. Data analysis will focus on science practices,
connections across contexts (e.g., school and planetarium), and instructional
adaptations. The project involves a research-practice collaboration between the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Rockman &amp; Associates, the Lawrence Hall
of Science [University of California, Berkeley], and West Chester
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.