* 1813814
* AF: Small: Toward Applications and Verification of Early Quantum Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Childs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 508,000.00

Quantum computers have the potential to solve certain problems much faster than
ordinary classical computers, offering the prospect of efficient solutions to
problems that would otherwise be intractable. There has recently been
significant progress toward the experimental realization of quantum computers,
suggesting that devices with tens of well-controlled qubits may be available in
the next decade. Therefore, now is a crucial time to investigate how to best
take advantage of the limited capabilities of early devices, and to develop
methods for verifying that they behave correctly in a regime where they are
difficult to simulate classically. A major potential application of quantum
computers is the task of simulating quantum physics. Since it is close to the
native behavior of quantum computers, quantum simulation has relatively low
overhead, so it is likely to be an early practical application. This project
will investigate how to best apply quantum simulation using near-term devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop the theory of quantum
simulation algorithms more generally, and will explore using quantum simulation
to solve other computational problems, studying challenges including quantum
state preparation and solutions of differential equations. A significant
challenge for early quantum computers is the difficulty of ensuring that they
work correctly. This project will investigate methods for certifying the
correctness of quantum computations. Since many quantum computations may not
have efficiently checkable proofs, the researchers will consider the more
general framework of interactive verification, where a classical verifier seeks
to establish the correctness of an efficient quantum prover through an exchange
of messages. Building on recent progress toward interactive verification under
computational assumptions, the project team will investigate the number of
rounds of communication needed to perform such verification, explore the power
of circuit obfuscation as a tool for interactive verification, and study the
impact of varying the power of the prover and verifier (and the interaction
between them) on their ability to ensure correctness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.