* 1813438
* AF: Small: Analysis, Geometry, and Hardness of Approximation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Subhash Khot, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Algorithms are systematic procedures to solve computational problems. There are
a class of problems called "NP-hard" problems which are believed to be
computationally infeasible or "hard", and without any efficient algorithms. A
well-known representative problem in this class is the Travelling Salesperson
(TSP) problem: given a large number of cities and pairwise distances among them,
what is the minimum length tour that visits all the cities? NP-hard problems,
though computationally hard, do arise in practice and do need to be "solved"
somehow. A natural approach is to design efficient algorithms that compute
approximate solutions along with a guarantee on the quality of approximation. In
the case of TSP, there is an efficient algorithm that computes a tour that is
guaranteed to be at most 1% longer than the minimum length tour (which might be
good enough in practice). A huge amount of research has been devoted to
designing good approximation algorithms for numerous NP-hard problems. However,
it is also of interest to investigate whether there are limitations on the
quality of approximation that can be achieved by an efficient algorithm. Indeed,
it turns out that for several NP-hard problems, computing an approximation
better than a specific threshold is as hard as computing the exact solution (and
hence infeasible). These latter kind of results, called "hardness of
approximation" results, are the focus of this project. The project aims at
studying analytic and geometric questions that are motivated by their
applications to theoretical computer science (TCS) and primarily to hardness of
approximation. The research goals of the proposal will be integrated with
teaching, mentoring, and dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardness
of approximation has been a highly influential topic of research starting with
the Probabilistically Checkable Proofs (PCP) Theorem in early 1990s. While there
have been major successes towards characterizing precise approximation
thresholds for basic NP-hard problems, this quest remains largely open. The
investigator for this project proposed the Unique Games Conjecture (UGC) in 2002
to make further progress, which turned out to be quite successful, and led to
many novel research directions. This project focuses on (1) the analytic and
geometric questions that arise from the investigator's recent work towards
proving the UGC; (2) understanding the phenomenon of approximation resistance of
predicates (which would certainly lead to challenging analytic questions and
would likely be related to the recently resolved Dichotomy Conjecture); (3)
analytic questions that are not necessarily related to hardness of
approximation, but are among long-term goals in this area at the interface of
analysis, geometry, and hardness of approximation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.