* 1813603
* Fundamental Questions in Hyperbolic Balance Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ronghua Pan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 279,233.00

Hyperbolic balance laws are important nonlinear systems of equations utilized in
the description of the motion of fluids, gases, plasma, and waves. This project
focuses on several fundamental and challenging questions concerning the validity
and effectiveness of different fluid flow models, the dynamical stability of
fluids and the behavior of large amplitude solutions, and the modeling of strong
waves in one or multiple spatial dimensions, which often appear in realistic
situations. This research aims to provide fresh insights and develop new tools
to characterize complicated but interesting behavior driven by nonlinearity and
resonances. Increased understanding of the behavior of solutions to these
modeling equations will find important applications to the dynamics of
compressible fluids, the mechanics of elastic materials, traffic control
systems, porous medium flows, and geophysical dynamics. The project also
involves international collaborations and training of graduate students and
young researchers in this challenging field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project focuses on four goals: (1) To provide a clear picture of the global
existence and finite-time blow-up for compressible Euler equations in one
dimension with large initial data, and to find sharp density lower bound
estimates for generic large solutions; (2) To establish a reasonable
justification of the isentropic approximation in compressible fluids when
initial entropy tends to a constant, for both inviscid and viscous fluids; (3)
To investigate nonlinear Rayleigh-Taylor type instabilities in compressible
fluids, including the compressible Navier-Stokes-Fourier system; (4) To study
the large-time asymptotic behavior of compressible full Euler equations with
frictional damping in three dimensions to justify Darcy's law, and to undertake
the modeling and analysis of interactions between short waves and long waves in
compressible fluids under the influence of magnetic fields. These research
activities aim to provide a solid mathematical foundation to bridge gaps between
existing results and for future studies. It is anticipated that the results will
significantly advance basic understanding of nonlinear hyperbolic balance
laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.