* 1813785
* RI: Small: Sparse Predictive Coding for Energy Efficient Visual Navigation in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey Krichmar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This project develops efficient machine vision algorithms inspired by the
architecture and energetic efficiency of the primate visual system for motion
processing. Navigating through a rich cluttered natural environment, while both
the observer and the objects in the scene are moving, is a difficult problem in
machine vision, particularly for real-time processing under power constraints.
However, humans and other animals perform these tasks with ease. The nervous
system is under tight metabolic constraints and this leads to incredibly
efficient representations of important environmental features, such as the
observer's heading, the depth of objects, and the motion of objects. In
addition, these efficient machine vision algorithms can be applied to robotics,
the IoT, and edge processing. The algorithms can be applied to a wide range of
applications, including augmented reality, assistive robotics, autonomous
vehicles, and the Internet of Things (IoT) Thus, they could have a
transformative economic and societal impact by creating applications that can
operate autonomously over long periods in remote
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by ability of the nervous system to
efficiently encode and appropriately respond to the visual features that make up
a dynamic scene, the algorithm uses sparse predictive coding techniques to
process data streams from cameras. Because the algorithms can be realized in
spiking neural networks, where the artificial neurons only send signals when an
event occurs, they can run efficiently on low powered neuromorphic systems;
computers that support such representations. By employing an architecture
inspired by the brain, where op-down signals from the frontal cortex and
parietal cortex predict where objects will be in the future, the system will
have better object tracking and overcome difficulties when objects become hidden
from view. These representations are sparse and reduced, leading to energy
efficient processing, less computation, and thus low power consumption. In
summary, the machine vision algorithms: (1) increase our understanding of how
the brain encodes behaviorally relevant signals in the world, (2) lead to
computationally efficient handling of large data streams, and (3) realize power
efficient processing for a wide range of embedded
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.