* 1813649
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical Studies of the Atmospheres of Highly Magnetized Neutron Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Alice Harding, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2023
* USD 327,400.00

A magnetar is a neutron star, or extremely dense star, which possesses an
extraordinarily large magnetic field. Magnetars, of which around 30 have been
discovered, are some of the most intriguing compact objects in the Universe. A
research program, which is a collaboration between William Marsh Rice
University, Hope College and NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, will lead to
the development of state of the art theoretical models for the atmospheric
emission of magnetars. The prime objective is to deliver a suite of observable
signal predictions to enhance interpretation of data from X-ray telescopes,
leading to a better understanding of neutron stars, magnetism and fundamental
quantum physics. Computer simulations will be developed for the propagation of
X-rays through magnetar atmospheres with arbitrary magnetic field orientations,
including all locations on the neutron star surface, from magnetic pole to
equator. The research includes significant graduate and undergraduate training.
A PhD student at Rice University will be integral to the work, with the results
leading to a doctoral thesis. Several undergraduates will work on self-contained
portions of the research and present their discoveries to senior scientists and
peers. The investigators will elucidate aspects of this work, and highlights of
the exciting field of neutron stars, to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetars present a unique forum for testing
fundamental physics that is not presently accessible in terrestrial
laboratories. Better understanding of magnetars is central to using them as a
proxy quantum electrodynamics (QED) physics laboratory. The researchers will
help enable this by developing a comprehensive theoretical study of the emission
from magnetar atmospheres, computing expectations for the polarization-
dependent and angle-dependent emissivities at any position on the surface. The
generation of polarization signatures will allow discrimination between the
geometrical source information and the signatures of strong-field QED physics,
like birefringent vacuum polarization. The work will feature upgrades of
photospheric cyclotron absorption line physics and photon propagation, providing
new tools for astrophysicists to employ in other neutron star problems. The
results of this program will enhance potential science yields from polarimetric
telescopes in the X-ray band. Four outstanding questions pertaining to magnetars
will be significantly impacted by the research. These are (i) are magnetars
inherently different from normal pulsars?, (ii) does the magnetic inclination
angle of the rotator evolve with magnetar age, and can we measure it so as to
more precisely calibrate the stellar field strength?, (iii) where, relative to
the magnetic pole, is the site of heating in the surface that seeds quasi-
thermal radiation in magnetars?, and (iv) can we use general relativity to
determine the mass-to-radius ratio for magnetars, and thereby probe their
equations of state?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.