* 1813485
* CSR: Small: Decoupling File System from Volatile Main Memory: A First Step towards a Single-Level Persistent Store
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tao Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 336,873.00

A file system is a computer software module, which is in charge of how files are
named, stored, and retrieved. Existing memory systems are based on dynamic
random-access memory (DRAM), which is reaching its density and power ceiling.
Emerging persistent memory technologies like phase change memory (PCM) not only
provide a denser energy-efficient alternative to DRAM, but also allow file
systems to be built atop them. This project will contribute to memory and
storage technologies by developing a new single-level persistent memory
architecture and a new file system dedicated to it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new architecture will turn a small-size DRAM-based main memory system to a
large-capacity persistent memory system that can access files in-place. This
project will proceed along two thrusts. First, it will bridge the technology gap
in building high-performance persistent memory systems with an in-depth
investigation. Second, it will develop the first file system devoted to a
single-level persistent store to efficiently managing data, which is
increasingly demanded by data-intensive applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will benefit society by developing high-performance memory systems that
will significantly improve the performance and energy-efficiency of future big
data applications, which are revolutionizing all aspects of human lives ranging
from enterprises to consumers, from science to government. In the long term,
techniques developed in this project will be transferable to servers/clusters
and even to large-scale distributed storage systems for big data applications,
where performance requirements are more stringent. This project will also
promote teaching, learning, and training by exposing students to technological
and scientific underpinnings in the field of big data storage systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes including papers published, technical
reports, presentations, course modules, and a repository of the software code
will be made available for free download at the address http://taoxie.sdsu.edu/,
where they will be kept for ten years. The source code of the new persistent
file system will also be posted on GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.