* 1813462
* Using "BlueBRD" Galaxies to Quantify Quenching
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sarah Tuttle, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 660,538.00

Understanding the interactions between gas and star formation are central in
understanding how galaxies evolve. According to current models, galaxies grow in
dark matter halos. At early times a galaxy's baryonic growth tracks its dark
matter growth, and galaxies grow from the inside-out. In this model, one expects
bulges of galaxies to be old and red, while the disk is young and blue,
especially during galaxy growth. The investigators have discovered a population
of galaxies that should not exist within this framework. These galaxies, named
BlueBRD galaxies, appear to be centrally forming stars in their bulge while star
formation in the disk has ceased. The investigators will combine observations
and simulated galaxy data to understand the nature of these galaxies. This
project will also pilot University-wide mentorship for postdoctoral researchers
and faculty members to develop departments that are inclusive and welcoming, and
grounded in respect and equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current models of
galaxy evolution posit that at early times a galaxy's baryonic growth tracks its
dark matter growth and that galaxies grow from the inside-out. The investigators
have identified a population of galaxies that should not exist within this
framework. These galaxies appear to be centrally forming stars while star
formation in the disk has ceased. The investigators will combine observations
and simulated galaxy data to clarify the nature of these galaxies. The galaxies
are currently being observed with optical integral field spectroscopy to
spatially resolve star formation throughout the galaxy. These observations will
be combined with molecular gas observations and HI neutral gas observations from
ongoing surveys to identify the location of gas reserves. If star formation has
been quenched throughout the disk, it is expected that the gas reservoirs will
be depleted or absent. This understanding will help to identify galaxies where
star formation might be influenced by the galaxy environment. This project will
also pilot a mentorship project across the University for postdoctoral
researchers and faculty members to develop departments that are inclusive and
welcoming. As recent studies have shown, department climate sets the tone and
often creates and protects harassers. This project will build a community
committed to mentoring grounded in respect and equality. The project will focus
on the effects of conscious and unconscious bias, and it will develop individual
and departmental actions that will promote an equitable academic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.