* 1813166
* SHF: Small: Programming Languages Foundations for 3D-Printing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Zachary Tatlock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

3D printing is poised to make the creation and dissemination of custom real-
world objects available to millions of people. Soon users will be able to create
and share personalized objects that previously required Computer-Aided Design
(CAD) expertise and manufacturing facilities. Unfortunately, the vibrant
communities of early adopters, often referred to as "makers," are not well-
served by currently available software tools. Users today must compose
idiosyncratic sequences of tools which are typically repurposed variants of
proprietary software designed for expert specialists. This project develops
fundamental programming-language techniques to bring improved rigor, reduced
complexity, and new functionality to the CAD software ecosystem for applications
like 3D-printing, starting from the perspective that solid geometry is a
programming language (PL). The project's novelties are developing theoretical PL
foundations for CAD and related languages in the 3D printing ecosystem. The
project's impacts are applying these PL foundations to build a new generation of
tools that enable end-users to effectively use 3D printing, including the first
'reverse compiler' to convert widely-shared but difficult-to-edit polygonal mesh
design files to easier-to-edit CAD designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
adapts and extends traditional PL techniques for compositionality, denotational
semantics, compiler correctness, and program synthesis to the 3D printing
domain. For a common platform, the project develops a purely functional language
called LambdaCAD and a suite of compilers that target a series of intermediate
representations (IRs) including core CAD constructs, polygon surface-meshes, and
G-code toolpaths. Each level of the project defines denotational semantics from
the IR to 3D solids and proves semantic preservation for the corresponding
compiler stage. For the reverse compilation from CAD to mesh, the project
exploits classical semantics techniques based on evaluation contexts to guide
synthesis and captures the interaction between sub-meshes during
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.