* 1813713
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Teachers in Responsive Instruction for Developing Expertise in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,638,285.00

Many teachers want to adapt their instruction to meet student learning needs,
yet lack the time to regularly assess and analyze students' developing
understandings. The Supporting Teachers in Responsive Instruction for Developing
Expertise in Science (STRIDES) project takes advantage of advanced technologies
to support science teachers to rapidly respond to diverse student ideas in their
classrooms. In this project students will use web-based curriculum units to
engage with models, simulations, and virtual experiments to write multiple
explanations for standards-based science topics. Advanced technologies
(including natural language processing) will be used to assess students' written
responses and summaries their science understanding in real-time. The project
will also design planning tools for teachers that will make suggestions relevant
research-proven instructional strategies based on the real-time analysis of
student responses. Research will examine how teachers make use of the feedback
and suggestions to customize their instruction. Further we will study how these
instructional changes help students develop coherent understanding of complex
science topics and ability to make sense of models and graphs. The findings will
be used to refine the tools that analyze the student essays and generate the
summaries; improve the research-based instructional suggestions in the planning
tool; and strengthen the online interface for teachers. The tools will be
incorporated into open-source, freely available online curriculum units. STRIDES
will directly benefit up to 30 teachers and 24,000 students from diverse school
settings over four years. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of instructional innovations. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging advances in natural language
processing methods, the project will analyze student written explanations to
provide fine-grained summaries to teachers about strengths and weaknesses in
student work. Based on the linguistic analysis and logs of student navigation,
the project will then provide instructional customizations based on learning
science research, and study how teachers use them to improve student progress.
Researchers will annually conduct at least 10 design or comparison studies, each
involving up to 6 teachers and 300-600 students per year. Insights from this
research will be captured in automated scoring algorithms, empirically tested
and refined customization activities, and data logging techniques that can be
used by other research and curriculum design programs to enable teacher
customization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.