* 1813392
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Adaptive and Efficient Wireless Computing Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Lei Ying, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Today's mobile devices are not merely smart, they are becoming intelligent as
artificial intelligence applications such as Facebook Caffe2 and Google Tensor-
Flow Lite are being pushed into mobile devices and as mobiles devices are being
integrated into the cloud-fog-mobile architecture. This calls for efficient and
adaptive computing/communication co-design of wireless networks to optimize
application-level latency (including both communication latency and computing
times) and to achieve energy efficiency (considering energy consumed by both
communications and computing). This project develops fundamental theories and
novel architectures of low-latency, energy-efficient, and computing-centric
wireless networks to support emerging mobile intelligence applications. Theories
and algorithms developed by the PIs are constantly integrated into the
undergraduate and graduate courses taught at the two universities. This project
also provides hand-on experiences to undergraduate and high school students with
state-of-the-art wireless technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing/communication co-design, while new for wireless
networks, is a central topic in data center networks. However, the proposed
solutions, while inspiring, are not directly applicable to wireless computing
networks because of the unique features of wireless networks such as wireless
interference, channel fading and limited energy. This project focuses on
provably optimal mechanisms that dynamically and adaptively schedule computing
tasks and data transmissions to meet application-level performance requirements,
and consists of three interdependent thrusts: (i) Optimal
computing/communication co-design. This thrust develops mathematical models and
theoretical limits of wireless computing networks, (ii) Robust
computing/communication co-design. This thrust focuses on robust computing and
communication co-design that achieves desired performance with imperfect state
information and under unavoidable short-term system overload and (iii) Learning-
aided adaptive computing/communication co-design. This thrust further improves
the performance of wireless computing networks by leveraging both historical
data and predictable user behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.