* 1813938
* Collaborative Research: Improving Multi-dimensional Assessment and Instruction: Building and Sustaining Elementary Science Teachers? Capacity Through Learning Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Deborah Leslie, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,346,339.00

This is an Early-Stage Design and Development collaborative effort submitted to
the assessment strand of the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) Program. Its
main goal is to better understand how to build and sustain the capacity of
elementary science teachers in grades 3-5 to instruct and formatively assess
students in ways that are aligned with contemporary science education frameworks
and standards. To achieve this goal, the project will use classroom-based
science assessment as a focus around which to build teacher capacity in science
instruction and three-dimensional learning in science. The three dimensions will
include disciplinary core ideas, science and engineering practices, and
crosscutting concepts. These dimensions are described in the Framework for K-12
Science Education (National Research Council; NRC, 2012), and the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS; NGSS Lead States, 2013). The project will
work closely with teachers to co-develop usable assessments and rubrics and help
them to learn about three-dimensional assessment and instruction. Also, the
project will work with teachers to test the developed assessments in diverse
settings, and to create an active, online community of practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two research questions will be: (1) How well do these
assessments function with respect to aspects of validity for classroom use,
particularly in terms of indicators of student proficiency, and tools to support
teacher instructional practice?; and (2) In what ways do providing these
assessment tasks and rubrics, and supporting teachers in their use, advance
teachers' formative assessment practices to support multi-dimensional science
instruction? The research and development components of this project will
produce assessments and rubrics, which can directly impact students and teachers
in the districts and states that have adopted the NGSS, as well as those that
have embraced the vision of science teaching and learning embodied in the NRC
Framework. The project will consist of five major tasks. First, the effort will
iteratively develop assessments and rubrics for formative use, using an
evidence-centered design approach. Second, it will collect data from evidence-
based revision and redesign of the assessments from teachers piloting the
assessments and rubrics, project cognitive laboratory studies with students, and
an external review of the assessments design products. Third, it will study
teachers' classroom use of assessments to understand and document how they blend
assessment and instruction. The project will use pre/post questionnaires, video
recordings, observation field notes, and pre/post interviews. Fourth, the study
will build the capacity of participating teachers. Teacher Collaborators (n=9)
will engage in participatory design of the assessment tasks and act as technical
assistants to the overall implementation process. Teacher Implementers (n=15)
will use the assessments formatively as part of their instructional practice.
Finally, the work will develop a community of learners through the development
of a technical assistance infrastructure, and leveraging teacher expertise to
formatively assess students' work, using the assessments designed to be
diagnostic and instructionally informative. External reviewers and an advisory
board will provide formative feedback on the project's processes and summative
evaluation of the project's results. The main outcomes of this endeavor will be
prototypes of elementary science multi-dimensional assessments and new knowledge
for the field on the underlying theory for developing teachers' capacity for
engaging in multi-dimensional science instruction, learning, and
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DRK-12 Program seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.