* 1813160
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Algorithms for Interactive Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Sanjoy Dasgupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Machine learning classifiers are core components of many of the technologies we
use routinely: search engines, speech recognition engines, language translators,
assisted driving systems, and so on. These classifiers are typically built by a
process of 'supervised learning', in which a computer is given a collection of
(input, output) pairs that illustrate a desired behavior (e.g. if the input is
this English sentence, the output should be this Spanish sentence) and is told
to produce a function that replicates such behavior. This is a rigid form of
learning that is known to suffer from a variety of fundamental hurdles; for
instance, there are classes of concepts that cannot efficiently be learned in
this way. This project will study how such hurdles can be overcome by moving to
a more natural learning setup, in which the learning machine is allowed to
interact with a human while learning, and receives feedback that is richer than
just output values. This research has the potential to influence the way in
which machine learning is performed and to broaden its scope of applicability.
It is inherently multidisciplinary, and thus part of the project includes
community-building activities that will bring together different groups of
relevant researchers. There is also an educational component to the project,
centered on bringing knowledge of algorithms and machine learning to various
student groups that have traditionally been under-represented in STEM
disciplines. Interactive learning is a field with great promise in which most of
the work to date has consisted of one-off systems geared towards specific
applications. This project will aim to bring rigor, formalism, and algorithms
with provable guarantees to parts of this field that are currently lacking
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to formalize forms of human
feedback (to a learning machine) than are richer than those traditionally
studied, such as: simple explanations (e.g. this bird is not a canary because it
has the wrong type of beak); attention-focusing; and similarity judgments. The
investigators will design algorithms that are able to use these kinds of
feedback and have rigorous guarantees, both on correctness and on statistical
rates of convergence. The project is particularly focused on overcoming
fundamental hardness barriers in learning: learning concept classes that would
be intractable to learn in the usual supervised framework; learning with
dramatically fewer examples than would normally be needed; adapting to
situations in which the distribution of the data is constantly shifting; and
improving the results of unsupervised learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.