* 1813071
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Two Cell Polarity Processes Using Uncertainty Quantification to Analyze Complex Models and Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Dongbin Xiu, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

The goal of this project, jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences Mathematical Biology Program and Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Cellular Dynamics and Function Program, is to obtain a more detailed
understanding of how cells "polarize" to generate different shapes.
Specifically, how do cells rearrange themselves to go from a symmetric object
like a round egg cell into an asymmetric object like a nerve cell? Experiments
will be performed on budding yeast which can switch from a sphere to an
asymmetric projection shape by localizing components to one end, a process
termed cell polarization. Examples of polarization include immune cell
activation, tumor cell metastasis, and yeast infections in which yeast cells
invade human tissue by polarized cell growth. Fungal infections are increasing
in prevalence in the U.S. Insights can help researchers discover treatments to
halt the invasive growth of yeast infections. The research will investigate the
spatial distribution of cellular proteins during polarization using a
combination of mathematical modeling and microscopy imaging. Experimental data
can be compared to computer simulation data to confirm the models and adjust the
model parameters. An important methodological advance will be replacing the
model, which can take significant time to run, with a simpler polynomial
surrogate model which can be calculated very quickly resulting in a dramatic
computational speed-up. Through this process one obtains models that can
reproduce and predict the behavior of polarizing cells. In addition, the
research will be integrated with outreach activities training graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students on how to perform quantitative
microscopy experiments and simulate mathematical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell polarity and morphology define the form and
function of individual and groups of cells. A systems biology approach will
delve into this subject at a more quantitative level moving beyond arrow
diagrams to characterize the spatial dynamics of cell polarity. The
investigation will take advantage of the experimental tractability of budding
yeast to characterize two classic cell polarity morphologies: the bud and the
mating projection. More specifically, the investigation will use microscopy to
visualize the spatial dynamics of polarization proteins and process the images
into quantitative data. In parallel, a collection of mathematical models of
budding and mating projection growth will be constructed based on biological
hypotheses. Methodologically, one of the grand challenges of systems biology is
to estimate the models/parameters using large datasets. Bayesian inference will
be used to select the best models and estimate the parameters based on the
experimental data. A central concept in this proposal will be applying
techniques from uncertainty quantification (UQ) that replace model evaluations
in the Monte Carlo method with a surrogate polynomial function, resulting in a
dramatic speed-up of the uncertainty analysis. The combined result will be a
systematic investigation of cell polarity leading to model predictions that will
be tested by experiments converting one cellular morphology into the other. In
addition, the proposed study of improved surrogate model calculation will
further accelerate the uncertainty analysis of complex
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.