* 1813982
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Systems for Assisting in Emotion Regulation in the Wild
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Katherine Isbister, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2021
* USD 70,353.00

Emotion regulation (ER) is an essential skill in the workplace and everyday
life. Failure to manage the type, intensity, and duration of emotions can result
in not just misunderstandings, but also damage to people, relationships, and
organizations. Repeated ER failures can lead to the development of mental health
disorders such as anxiety or depression. ER skills can be successfully taught
with clinician-led training, but this is an ongoing, labor-intensive process
that is currently expensive and not easily scaled. This project follows another
direction: it examines foundational issues in the design of systems, based
around a wearable affordance, that use technology to assist a person in ER when
and where the person needs it (in the wild).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
technology to assist people in regulating their emotions in the wild is a
complex and multidisciplinary problem: it requires understanding in psychology
(for understanding of emotion regulation), human computer interaction, and
systems with humans in the loop. Our overarching goal in this EAGER project is
to build a basis for such an understanding and applying it to a prototype
affordance and system. We will use a multidisciplinary approach. In particular,
we will: (1) Develop design guidelines for affordances supporting ER in the wild
that are based on haptic breath pacing. We will develop these guidelines in
consultation with clinical ER practitioners, and will apply them to existing ER
systems, such as the Breathe app on the Apple Watch, Spire, and EmotionCheck.
(2) Explore the use of haptics for involving in-the-wild users in a breathing
intervention known to result in effective ER in laboratory settings. (3) Study
the utility of haptic-based biofeedback interventions in breath-based ER in the
wild. (4) Explore systems consequences of including others (for example,
clinicians, family members, coworkers) in the process of assisting ER. This
project will advance knowledge and understanding of the development of systems
that provide ER support in the wild, with strong potential benefit for workplace
productivity, as well as improved individual mental
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.