* 1814285
* NeTS: Small: Data Driven Mobile Web Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Theophilus Benson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,996.00

The world is growing increasingly dependent on web services; they are now a
vital part of business, personal and social aspects of daily life.
Unfortunately, users continue to be plagued by a myriad of performance problems,
e.g., videos that stall while buffering, slow web page load times, and web pages
that crash. These performance problems occur for multiple reasons, the principal
one being a lack of correctly configured and adequately tuned networking
protocols and algorithms that can deliver the desired quality of service.
Moreover, as the set of web services and technologies continues to grow and
broaden, the performance implications of these poorly configured networks are
likely to become more widespread and apparent. The project vision is to develop
an alternative approach to managing and configuring web servers that can meet
end user's performance expectations: a method which improves performance by
tailoring the web server's configurations to match the specifics of each
application and end user's technology. If successful, this proposal will
fundamentally impact widely accepted principles for managing services and will
enable a broad range of users to benefit from efficient operation of the growing
set of essential web services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes an
ambitious research agenda based on a data-driven specialization of the web
serving stacks, wherein the stack learns the optimal protocol optimizations and
parameters for each user and, in turn, uses this information to specialize or
tune the web stack to improve the end user's experience. The proposed research
has five thrusts: First, the project will conduct a large-scale systematic study
on the interactions between protocol configuration options, e.g., optimizations,
device profiles, web complexity, and network conditions and develop tools to
analyze and interpret the implications of these interactions. Second, it will
develop a new architecture for managing web servers that provides a flexible and
uniform interface for collecting telemetry data and configuring protocol
parameters and optimizations. Third, the researchers will develop a dynamic
learning framework that scalably and accurately learns and predicts the optimal
configuration for each user. Fourth, the project proposes to develop a novel
programming interface that enables end-users and their devices to participate in
the learning process by providing feedback and meta-data that is only available
on the client side. Finally, the researchers will consider a number of design
and implementation challenges necessary to realize this new approach, including
adjusting to drastic changes in network conditions, tackling complex
relationships between configuration parameters and user experience, making real-
time predictions, etc. This project will actively undertake tasks to realize
broader impact through educational outreach across all levels of education, with
a focus on undergraduate and high school students, and under-represented
minorities in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.