* 1814430
* CSR: Small: Repurposing Spatial Memory Safety Support in Commodity Processors for Temporal Memory Safety, Other Program Analyses, Hardware-Accelerated Data Structures, and More
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Changhee Jung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 05/31/2020
* USD 516,000.00

In every generation of computer hardware, researchers and practitioners have
found uses for hardware features that their designers did not anticipate. The
project aims to find new ways to adapt special-purpose hardware for general and
multiple ends, using Intel's Memory Protection Extensions (MPX) as a proof of
concept. Intel's designers intended MPX to be used to improve software security
by ensuring an important property called spatial memory safety. The project
investigates many other surprising uses for MPX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project explores the idea of viewing special-purpose "hardware" as general-
purpose hardware-accelerated "software". In particular, the project aims to
repurpose MPX for three broader uses, beyond its original specialized hardware
support for spatial memory safety. First, a technique to transparently augment
temporal memory safety on top of MPX will be studied to ensure full memory
safety. Second, a novel dynamic program analysis framework, which repurposes the
MPX as a general-purpose metadata store, will be designed and developed. Last,
the project will investigate the potential of MPX as a general-purpose hardware-
accelerated data structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will impact both
current and future researchers, practitioners, and students. The project will
unlock the full potential of Intel's special-purpose hardware, explore the
limitations of its instruction set architecture, and thus help design next-
generation processors powered by more general-purpose features. These next-
generation processors will enable more secure, reliable, and performant
software. New undergraduate course modules will be developed to integrate
research discovery with teaching. A K-12 summer class will be offered as an
outreach and diversity program. The project also includes a plan to offer a
program analysis workshop for non-computer scientists to support the broader
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main results will be
software prototypes and hardware simulations, along with benchmarks,
documentation, and research papers. The source code, benchmark applications, and
documentation will be made publicly available on GitHub. The papers will be
available on the dedicated project website as well. The project repository will
be maintained for at least five years beyond the end of the project. All of
these resources will be available from the project web page:
http://research.cs.vt.edu/gpx.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.