* 1814949
* Mapping the Complete Velocity Field of Extragalactic Jets from sub-parsec to kiloparsec Scales
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Markos Georganopoulos, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,141.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We now know that essentially all massive galaxies
have a super-massive black hole (a million to billion times more massive than
the sun) at their centers. Actively growing black holes, also known as active
galactic nuclei, are some of the greatest 'recyclers' of matter and energy in
the Universe. These accreting black holes are on the scale of our solar system,
but have been observed to drive outflows of hot (ionized) gas, known as jets,
reaching distances of up to a few million light years (equivalent to typical
galaxy separations). These jets have a major impact on both their host galaxies
and the clusters of galaxies in which they reside. However, it is still unclear
how much energy these jets carry, how they are physically launched from the
black hole, and how particles comprising the gas are accelerated to very high
energies very far from the black hole engine. The goal of this project is to
utilize over 30 years of archival radio imaging with NSF facilities along with
new observations, to make the first-ever large compilation of time-lapse
observations of dozens of jets over a much larger range of scales than ever
before: from very close to the black hole (a few light years) to thousands or
millions of light years. Because these jets are moving at nearly the speed of
light, we can observe the movement of the gas within the jet on several-year
timescales - work that is possible for a large number of jets now that extensive
radio archives cover several decades. Mapping the velocity structure of jets
will allow us to finally investigate the nature of bright 'knots' in the jet
flow, probing regimes of extreme particle acceleration, and to calculate the
total energy carried by jets in to the galactic and extra-galactic environment.
This is not only critical for understanding the jet phenomenon itself, but will
also allow us to improve large-scale computer models of how to Universe was
built up over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
open question in Astronomy is the nature of the bipolar jets of relativistic,
ionized plasma seen to emanate from a subset of super-massive black holes at the
centers of galaxies. An important tool that has been developed over the last two
decades is the use of proper motions (motions on the sky) to track the movement
of plasma within these jets, both with Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI)
and more compact interferometers like the Very Large Array (VLA). Because the
plasma in these jets is relativistic (moving very close to the speed of light)
and moving with a small angle to our line-of-sight, the motion of features in
the jet flow can appear super-luminal (faster than light). A map of the velocity
'field' of a jet, from parsec scales (close to the black hole) to hundreds or
thousands of parsecs (outside the host galaxy) is a very important constraint on
jet models, showing exactly how gas is accelerated and deposits energy into the
environment. Further, measurements of superluminal speeds allow us to constrain
intrinsic properties of jets that are very difficult to determine through any
other means (including theoretical modeling, due to degeneracies). In this
proposal, we aim to dramatically increase the number of extragalactic jets with
measured proper motions on the kiloparsec scale, primarily through the use of
the VLA archives. Along with complimentary work using the VLBA, the overall goal
is to build the first catalog of jets with velocity fields mapped from the scale
of the black hole environment to the final terminus of the jet as it impacts the
intergalactic medium. These goals will be accomplished by using both standard
interferometric imaging techniques and a recently developed wavelet
decomposition code. The science questions addressed by this work include the
physical nature of the bright 'knot' structures in the jets, the origin of the
anomalously high X-ray fluxes from these knots, the connection between
morphological type and jet energetics, and the impact of jets on their
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.