* 1814936
* Mechanism and Dynamics of the YidC Insertase in Membrane Protein Insertion
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ross Dalbey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 06/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

This project examines how the bio-machine named YidC inserts and folds proteins
into the membrane bilayer. Protein insertion into membranes is one of the most
critical processes in biology, and understanding the mechanisms by which
proteins are transported across or integrated into membranes has enormous
potential impact for understanding cellular and organismal structure, function
and health. The project will yield, as yet undiscovered, fundamental information
on the function of YidC, which is key to understanding how biological membranes
are assembled, maintain their identity, and support many functions such as
signaling and transport. The resulting new knowledge on biogenesis of membrane
proteins could also impact human health-related research in the future since
membrane proteins make up more than 50% of the known drug targets. The project
will also provide opportunities for training students in a multidisciplinary
research environment involving molecular biology, biochemical and biophysical
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to determine how
YidC functions to insert proteins into the cell membrane. YidC is novel as a
membrane insertase as it contains a hydrophilic cavity that is crucial for its
insertase and chaperone function. YidC can function on its own or cooperate with
the Sec machinery to insert proteins. The project utilizes fluorescence
spectroscopy, electron paramagnetic resonance spin labeling, and single molecule
approaches to examine the dynamics and structural relationships of membrane
insertion events. The research specifically aims to determine the mechanism of
action and dynamics of YidC in membrane protein insertion, elucidate the
interactions in the YidC/Sec machinery complex, and identify features of
membrane protein substrates that determine selection of YidC and Sec translocase
pathways in E. coli. The project will advance the field of membrane protein
insertion in bacteria and will impact understanding of similar pathways in human
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.