* 1814756
* SHF: Small: Ferroelectric Transistor based Coupled Oscillators for Non-Boolean Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sumeet Gupta, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Since conventional computing architectures based on Boolean processing of inputs
may be sub-optimal for tasks involving recognition and sensory processing,
exploration of new non-Boolean computing technologies has the potential to
assume an important role. This project aims at addressing this issue by
investigating new post-CMOS devices and circuits, and extensively analyzing
their implications at the application level. The research outcomes are likely to
have a direct impact on critical applications such as computer aided diagnosis,
speech/face recognition, data classification and resource allocation, and
benefit several areas such as healthcare, defense, and security. Moreover, power
savings achieved with the proposed techniques may translate to longer battery
life for mobile systems facilitating a richer user experience and ultra-low
power processing. The project will enhance graduate and undergraduate education
by integrating the research outputs in the curriculum. The participation of
under-represented groups will also be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research utilizes the emerging technology of ferroelectric transistor
to design novel low power and compact oscillators by translating the inherent
non-linearity of the ferroelectrics to sustained oscillations. A multitude of
such oscillators, whose dynamics can be controlled, are coupled to realize a
non-Boolean computing fabric. The extent of synchronization amongst the
oscillators provides information about the degree of match/mismatch amongst
different signals, enabling efficient decision-making for applications such as
pattern matching, motion sensing and others. The proposed approach involves
extensive co-design of devices and circuits to harness the unique features
offered by the ferroelectric transistors for enhancing the energy- and area-
efficiencies of the coupled oscillators. The research effort spans different
levels of design abstraction including (i) the exploration of novel
ferroelectric based devices amenable for the proposed approach, (ii) new
oscillator designs, and (iii) a comprehensive application-level analysis.
Extensive benchmarking of ferroelectric based oscillators will be performed
against previously explored oscillators to comprehensively quantify their
benefits and trade-offs. In addition, detailed investigation establishing the
relationships between the device-circuit characteristics and the inherent
properties of the ferroelectric materials will be carried out to uncover the
fundamental attributes of the proposed oscillators and their rich oscillation
dynamics.