* 1814592
* Inverse Problems Arising in Novel Modalities of Biomedical Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Leonid Kunyansky, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,425.00

Computerized tomography plays a central role in biomedical imaging. Since the
invention of computer-aided tomography in the 1960s, numerous imaging modalities
have been introduced and became indispensable for diagnostic instruments in
biology and medicine. Recently, the quest for more sensitive and more reliable
techniques has led to such promising coupled-physics modalities as
Thermoacoustic and Photoacoustic Tomography (TAT and PAT), and
Magnetoacoustoelectric Tomography (MAET). These imaging methods combine high
resolution of ultrasound with the sensitivity of electromagnetic waves to
optical absorption and conductivity of the tissues. Sharp abnormalities in the
latter physical parameters are good markers of breast cancer, thrombosis,
ischemia, and other medical conditions. Thus, these new techniques overcome
limitations of classical tomography, and deliver otherwise unavailable,
potentially life-saving diagnostic information - at a lesser cost and with less
harm to a patient. The images in these modalities are obtained by complex
mathematical procedures, rather than through direct acquisition. The mathematics
of these methods is, mostly, at very early stages of development. The
investigator and his collaborators work to resolve the central theoretical
problems and to develop efficient numerical techniques for PAT, TAT, MAET and
other hybrid techniques. A graduate student and a postdoc are playing a
significant role in the project, gaining exposure to the exciting area at the
junction of exact sciences, medicine, and biology. The results will be
disseminated through publications in high quality research journals,
presentations at national and international conferences, and series of lectures
at various major venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematics underlying and
enabling such modalities as PAT, TAT, MAET and several novel techniques based on
Compton scattering, contains a number of challenging open problems, important
from both the theoretical and applied points of view. The investigator and his
collaborators aim to gain a theoretical understanding and to develop algorithmic
foundations for these modalities. In particular, they work on (1) deriving exact
inversion formulas for the problem of TAT/PAT reconstruction from the sets of
data reduced both in time and in space; (2) developing efficient reconstruction
algorithms for different MAET data acquisition schemes, including MAET with loss
of low frequencies, and MAET of objects with anisotropic conductivity; (3)
devising efficient numerical techniques for congregating strongly over-
determined Compton data sets, and processing them using attenuation compensation
techniques previously developed for Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography.
In addition, the newly developed theoretical and algorithmic tools will be used
to process real MAET data obtained by the PI in experimental MAET research done
jointly with the researchers from the Medical Imaging Department at the
University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.