* 1814947
* AF: Small: Multiparty Communication, Polynomials, and Noise
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Alexander Sherstov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Communication complexity theory studies the minimum amount of communication,
measured in bits, required in order to compute functions whose arguments are
distributed among several parties. In addition to the basic importance of
studying communication as a bottleneck resource, the theory has found a vast
number of applications in many areas, including machine learning, mechanism
design, streaming algorithms, data structures, pseudo-random generators, and
VLSI layouts. This project tackles fundamental questions whose resolution will
have a significant impact on the discipline. This work will exploit insights
from, and contribute new ideas to, other areas such as quantum computing,
computational learning, and approximation theory. The project is an ample source
of research problems at various levels of difficulty and will be used in
advising graduate and undergraduate students. The investigator will integrate
this research into his graduate and undergraduate teaching, take an active part
in scientific dissemination, and promote theoretical computer science in
Southern California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises two related
components. First, the investigator will tackle longstanding open problems in
the study of multiparty communication, such as settling the communication
requirements of the set disjointness problem and breaking the logarithmic
barrier for multiparty communication lower bounds. The second, complementary
component of this project will advance the study of analytic representations of
Boolean functions. Here, the investigator aims to obtain tight lower bounds for
the polynomial approximation and sign-representation of the k-element
distinctness function, constant-depth circuits, and Boolean formulas of
arbitrary depth. The two research components of this project are intimately
related in that they require the same class of analytic techniques. Indeed,
major advances in communication complexity over the past two decades have been
obtained by transforming, explicitly or implicitly, communication protocols into
multivariate polynomials of comparable complexity and by analyzing the resulting
approximation questions. The planned research on multiparty communication and
polynomials is further unified by a focus on noise, in the sense of imperfect
output or adversarial corruption of intermediate
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.