* 1814077
* The Spectrum Laboratory:  Towards Authentic Inquiry for All
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Philip Sadler, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 10/31/2022
* USD 795,601.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses physics, astronomy, and
chemistry education at the high-school level. Spectroscopy is the single most
important diagnostic tool in the sciences, and is required for inquiry at the
frontiers of science across many disciplines, yet is unavailable to most
classrooms. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory proposes to design,
implement, and investigate the impact on students of an innovative curriculum
supplement called the Spectrum Laboratory. The Spectrum Lab will be an online,
interactive learning environment that enables students to make use of the
database of publicly available spectra from research scientists, as well as from
students. The online learning resource and associated materials are purposefully
being developed and tested with a demographically diverse set of schools. The
project will determine how the design of a spectroscopy workspace can help
students to use spectra while gaining fluency with a range of important science
practices. The project's significance and importance is to greatly increase the
opportunities for high school students to engage in authentic inquiry. Being
able to evaluate and interpret real-world data is a hallmark of data literacy
that is developed with Spectrum Lab. Project will potentially benefit the field
through advances with respect to education and diversity, and benefit society by
equipping high school students with the perceptual and cognitive factors that
promote students' reasoning about spectra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spectrum
Lab's initial design applies research-based principles recommended for
educational interfaces that engage students with graphical data advancing
knowledge from prior research into understanding of how students make sense of
spectroscopic data and its graphical representations. The project will be
developed in collaboration with partner teachers in up to eight high school
classrooms, representing a diverse population of learners, and then tested with
a national group of 20 teachers with 600 to 800 students. A mix of quantitative
and qualitative measures, including pre/post surveys and assessments, analysis
of student project work, classroom video, and teacher surveys, will help address
researcher's questions about students' experiences with the Spectrum Lab. The
data to be gathered will be used to iteratively improve the design of the
laboratory to aid students understand the source of these authentic data coming
from spectroscopy to address real-world science questions of interest and
importance to them. The Spectrum Lab will enable students to engage in a broad
range of inquiry projects that were previously inaccessible, including projects
near the frontiers of science. The students will become involved in their
authentic inquiry projects, where each activity engages them in key science
practices, including generating model spectrum plots to make predictions,
assessing and interpreting data, and reasoning from evidence (and models) in
support of a claim. The students will be using graphs of well-documented
experiments and in physics, more challenging graphs of spectra of less familiar
wavelength axis. The students in chemistry will learn how to relate the bright
lines observed in an atom's spectrum to energy levels of the atom. There will be
studies that track students' eye movements show that students associate the
peaks or valleys of a spectrum with individual atoms in a molecule, rather than
with the overall properties of the molecule. The resources developed by the
project will be freely available online for teachers and researchers. The
Spectrum Lab is an advance in education technology that uses modern tools for
enabling interactive data visualization. Its features enable students to
integrate and apply the most important elements of science practice, such as the
ability to draw evidence-based conclusions, as well as the ability to gather,
evaluate and interpret data, intended to help students' science practice more
closely resemble how research is done. The Spectrum Lab will modernize a
critical part of high-school science classrooms, help teachers meet the
expectations of the Next Generation Science Standards, and will better prepare
students for college work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.