* 1814613
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Matrix Signings and Algorithms for Expanders and Combinatorial Nullstellensatz
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Karthekeyan Chandrasekaran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,986.00

This project will investigate spectral properties of graph-related matrices and
their signings, which have become fundamental tools in computer science. The
spectra of such matrices have had a tremendous impact in numerous areas
including machine learning, data mining, web search and ranking, game theory,
scientific computing, and computer vision and have influenced several
algorithmic innovations. The project will have significant technical as well as
educational impacts. The inherent mathematical and algorithmic nature of the
project together with the plethora of potential practical applications will
bring together researchers from varied areas such as mathematics and network
design. The investigators will organize a workshop on Spectral Graph Theory to
bring together experts in these areas. The project will support graduate
students who will receive mentoring and extensive training in the design and
analysis of algorithms. The investigators will also direct special efforts
towards fostering diversity through educational activities targeting under-
represented groups in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the investigators will design efficient algorithms for constructing various
combinatorial structures that are guaranteed to exist through suitable signings
of matrices. The combinatorial structures to be studied include expander graphs
and several other applications of the algebraic method. Notably, the algorithmic
problem of efficiently constructing of expander graphs is at the core of
spectral graph theory. This project will develop a comprehensive understanding
of the inherent difficulties, as well as propose algorithms for efficiently
constructing expander graphs via signed adjacency matrices. Combinatorial
Nullstellensatz is a powerful algebraic tool often used to show the existence of
certain combinatorial structures. However, the non-constructive nature of its
proof has been a barrier towards finding these structures efficiently.
Existential proofs based on the algebraic method have resisted progress on the
constructive front (unlike those based on probabilistic method). In this
project, the investigators will break ground along this direction by obtaining
efficient constructive proofs for restricted applications of Combinatorial
Nullstellensatz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.