* 1814719
* Cosmology, Education, and Diverse Other Projects Supported by Two Astronomical Imaging Instruments
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Antony Stark, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 602,888.00

This project supports the operation of two astronomical cameras at the Las
Campanas Observatory in the Andes Mountains of Chile: the Parallel Imager for
Southern Cosmology Observations (PISCO) and the Southern MicroObservatory. PISCO
is a professional astronomical camera mounted on the 6.5 meter Clay Telescope.
PISCO has a novel design that allows it to take pictures in four different
colors at the same time with four large CCD detectors over a piece of the sky
about 1/10th the size of the moon. While the unique design of PISCO has made it
useful for many astronomical discoveries, the principal project for which PISCO
was built is follow-up of clusters of galaxies discovered by the South Pole
Telescope (SPT). The SPT is the most sensitive and highest-resolution telescope
in the world for observing the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation that
arises in the early Universe. Because the space between galaxies in clusters is
filled with hot plasma gas, galaxy clusters appear as a dark spots in front of
the CMB. This is called the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect. Among the discoveries by
the SPT so far are 530 galaxy clusters, and with a newly-installed highly-
sensitive detector called SPT-3G, it will discover thousands more. When the SPT
discovers a galaxy cluster, all that is known about it is its location and the
size of the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich spot, so follow-up observations by an optical
telescope are needed. Some of those galaxy clusters will appear in existing
optical sky surveys, but others will be too faint to appear or will be outside
the survey area -- those galaxy clusters will be followed-up by PISCO in this
project. The number and distribution of galaxy clusters provides information
about the nature and history of Dark Energy, the mysterious force that dominates
the Universe. Furthermore, PISCO may contribute to improving our knowledge of
the mass of neutrinos via "weak lensing" measurements of the mass of the
clusters. The determination of the mass of neutrino species has been identified
as an important next step in particle physics, an advance that may have wide-
reaching impacts on physics and technology, including nuclear physics here on
Earth. The Southern MicroObservatory will be part of a network of automated
telescopes that can be controlled over the Internet (mo-www.cfa.harvard.edu).
The telescopes are designed to enable youth nationwide to investigate the
wonders of the deep sky from their classrooms or after-school centers. This
project will support the installation of a robotic MicroObservatory telescope at
Las Campanas and integrate it with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory's
Science Education Department Robotic Telescope Network for the online STEM
learning community. The maintenance effort will be efficiently shared with PISCO
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South Pole Telescope consortium has
completed the SPT-SZ and SPTPOL surveys and is now engaged in the SPT-3G deep
millimeter-wave continuum survey that will detect thousands of previously-
unknown galaxy clusters and groups through the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect. PISCO
observations will play a key role in the production of a mass-limited redshift-
independent catalog of galaxy clusters over ~9% of the sky. This searchable
public database will include imaging as well as spectroscopy in the optical,
infrared, and X-ray, enabling a wide variety of scientific studies. In this
project, the SPT consortium will conduct multi-wavelength follow-up of the new
SPT-3G survey in order to complete the SPT Cluster Legacy Archive. This three-
year program will produce photometric and spectroscopic catalogs of volume
complete samples of galaxy clusters over a 4000 square degree area of sky. After
analyzing candidate cluster positions in existing survey data such as DES and
VISTA, the SPT team will: (1) make the additional photometric imaging
observations needed for completeness in redshift and mass limit, (2) obtain weak
lensing measurements during periods of excellent seeing for a representative
(albeit still large) subsample of these clusters, (3) make these evolving data
sets promptly available to the astronomical and STEM learning communities in
both raw and reduced form, through publications and a web-accessible, searchable
archive, and (4) analyze the data for cosmology and the determination of
neutrino properties. The formation of clusters and groups of galaxies is a
battle between the gravitational attraction of Dark Matter, the dynamics of
relativistic and non-relativistic particles, and the repulsive effect of Dark
Energy. Their abundance over cosmic time is a sensitive probe of cosmology that
complements and refines other cosmological tests. The redshift-independent
archive of ~ 8000 confirmed clusters in this project will be the foundation for
profound enhancements in our understanding of (a) fundamental properties of the
Universe, including greatly improved constraints on the mass and number of
neutrino species and the nature and history of Dark Energy out to z ~ 2, and (b)
the astrophysics of galaxy clusters and their intracluster medium, the evolution
of galaxies and their constituent stellar populations in high-density
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.