* 1814190
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Collaborative: Design and Security Verification of Next-Generation Open-Source Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ruby Lee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2021
* USD 165,597.00

This project will develop new open-source processor architectures with advanced
security features. The security features will be added to existing open-source
processors to help protect the confidentiality and integrity of data and to
protect against side-channel attacks. Beyond the design, the project will also
provide new methodology to verify the proposed security feature, to provide
assurance that the processor hardware itself is provably secure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first thrust of the project focuses on side-channel
protections, especially of processor caches, and other functional units that can
be exploited to leak secret information. It further adds security counters and
new means to protect trusted software modules. The second thrust focuses on the
design of the security verification approaches for hardware, including the use
of satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) based solvers and temporal
logics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this will make open-source
processors and their applications more secure against attacks. It will enable
the academic community to further develop and extend the capabilities of the
ope-source secure processor and further education in hardware
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All artefacts developed by this project will be
available online at http://caslab.csl.yale.edu/code/ or
http://palms.ee.princeton.edu. The web sites will be maintained for the duration
of the project and as long as the research groups involved in this project are
active.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.