* 1814603
* CIF: Small: New Coding Techniques for Synchronization Errors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Venkatesan Guruswami, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 488,229.00

Coding theory has advanced our understanding of how to efficiently correct
symbol corruptions and erasures. The error-correcting codes developed by this
theory have had a tremendous practical and theoretical impact on technology and
engineering as well as mathematics, theoretical computer science, and other
fields. Correcting closely related synchronization errors, such as insertions
and deletions, however, while also studied since the 1960s, has largely resisted
progress so far. The goal of this proposal is to close this gap and develop a
better understanding of and new coding techniques for synchronization errors. In
addition to resolving fundamental questions on natural and basic error models,
the investigators believe that the study has the potential to guide the design
of systems which use efficient coding techniques to address synchronization and
noise issues jointly, instead of spending significant resources on ensuring very
tight controls on synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build
on the recent work in this area by the investigators and their students, and
investigate new coding approaches for coping with insertions/deletions. For the
case of large finite alphabets, the project will investigate codes based on
synchronization strings. Synchronization strings isolate and directly tackle the
synchronization aspect which distinguishes insertion and deletion errors from
symbol corruptions and erasures, yielding an efficient way to reduce them to
regular errors. Such a transformation can then leverage the tremendous progress
made on regular error-correcting codes toward the design of insertion-deletion
codes. The project will also investigate new approaches for the setting of
binary or very small alphabets with the goal of better understanding the
potential of insertion-deletion codes together with efficient constructions.
Beyond simple insertions and deletions, the project will also study more general
synchronization error models stemming from practical applications such as tandem
repeats or block corruptions. The educational component will infuse appropriate
concepts from the project into courses taught by the investigators, and take
advantage of the accessible and attractive nature of the topic to engage
undergraduates in research, in addition to the substantial involvement of
graduate students. The project will aim to forge stronger intellectual ties
between the computer science and information theory communities which are both
actively engaged in study of codes in various models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.