* 1814621
* International Workshop on Connecting Woman Faculty in Sustainable Building Research (WISB)   Location: Dalian, China   Date: July 2018
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Jin Wen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 59,997.00

Sustainable Building research, which focuses on improving indoor environmental
quality, reducing building energy consumption and overall life cycle cost, as
well as promoting a better human-building relationship, has grown significantly
in the past decade. This is an area of research that requires collaboration
among many disciplines including engineering, computer science, social sciences
and architecture. However, due to the STEM gender gap, woman faculty may be
isolated and find it difficult to identify, network, and collaborate with other
researchers from different disciplines. This lack of effective multi-
disciplinary networking opportunities among researchers significantly restricts
the growth of sustainable building innovations, delays the career mobility of
woman faculty, and can steer away promising women researchers from this area.
This international workshop aims to engage woman faculty worldwide in
sustainable building research 1) to provide a networking opportunity that will
promote future international and multidisciplinary research collaborations; 2)
to identify the challenges and gaps that affect woman faculty's success in this
area and to seek potential solutions, and 3) to explore future research
directions. The workshop will offer a diversity of activities, including ice-
breaking presentations on future research directions, round table sessions on
mini-proposal writing and road-map discussions, career panel discussions, and
other collaborative and networking opportunities. One pre-workshop and two post-
workshop surveys will be conducted to understand the immediate and longer-term
impacts of the workshop. Engaging international participation in the workshop
will not only introduce viewpoints from many different cultures, but also
increase the opportunities for the U.S. participants to develop potential
international collaborations. The workshop will 1) Identify the needs, research
gaps and roadmaps for emerging research directions in sustainable building
research; 2) Provide an international and multidisciplinary collaborative
platform for women in sustainable building research to generate novel ideas and
develop long-term collaborative relationships; and 3) Advance understanding of
how to promote women in sustainable building research by identifying and
addressing career needs, challenges, and roadblocks through panel discussions
and survey studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on promoting
women in sustainable building research by 1) providing international and
multidisciplinary networking opportunities for woman faculty, especially those
at the beginning of their academic careers and near-graduation PHD students; 2)
developing an understanding of how to support woman faculty to overcome the
career roadblocks; 3) building rapport among women in sustainable building
research; and 4) support and encourage woman faculty to pursue more leadership
roles. Promoting woman faculty in sustainable buildings will not only stimulate
growth and innovation in this area but also attract more women to enter
engineering and encourage women to pursue more leadership roles. The findings
from this workshop will also help the community to develop better design and
operation practices for sustainable buildings and therefore benefit the society
at large.