* 1814034
* Dust Obscuration towards the Epoch of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Caitlin Casey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 332,534.00

Deep-space images from the Hubble Space Telescope reveal the most distant
galaxies in the Universe. These objects are groups of thousands to millions of
stars like our sun. They are so distant that light from their stars has taken
billions of years to reach us. Most galaxies this distant are visible in the
deepest images from Hubble, but not all. Some galaxies contain a lot of dust,
making them more difficult to see because the dust obscures starlight. Starlight
heats the dust, which then re-radiates that energy at millimeter wavelengths.
These dusty galaxies form stars very rapidly, and are important to our
understanding of how stars form. Little is known about how common dusty galaxies
were in the first few billion years after the Big Bang. This project will use
all available data at millimeter wavelengths to estimate how common they were
during those early times. This is important to our fundamental understanding of
how the first galaxies formed. This project will also host students from under-
represented minority backgrounds in astronomy research through the Texas
Astronomy Undergraduate Research for Under- represented Students (TAURUS)
program at UT Austin. The goal of the research program is to retain these
excellent students in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking census of the
cosmic history of star-formation is a key goal of galaxy evolution surveys.
However, measurements to date, particularly at the highest redshifts, are almost
exclusively determined from unobscured star-formation tracers in the rest-frame
UV/optical. However, galaxies are increasingly obscured by dust emission at
higher stellar masses (&gt; 10^10 Msun) and star-formation rates (&gt; 50
Msun/year), such that UV/optical-inferred SFRs can be underestimated by factors
of 10-100x. The goal of this proposal is to use all of the collective FIR
through millimeter data in a newly developed backward evolution model to: (1)
statistically constrain the total integrated IR galaxy luminosity function out
to high-redshifts, (2) measure the AGN contribution to the total cosmic infrared
background, (3) provide non-clustered predictions for submm source multiplicity,
and (4) use simulations to motivate future large (sub)mm surveys for
optimization at high-redshifts. This project will draw in undergraduate research
scholars from under-represented backgrounds to UT Austin for the summer to
conduct research on this topic through the TAURUS program. TAURUS focuses on the
long-term retention of highly-motivated under-represented students in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.