* 1814041
* CCF-BSF: AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Practice-Friendly Theory and Algorithms for Linear Regression Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Petros Drineas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 257,892.00

The project focuses on one of the most fundamental problems in the intersection
of applied mathematics and computer science: solving systems of multiple linear
equations in multiple variables. Such systems, also known as linear regression
problems, have applications in various fields, from classical engineering to
data science and machine learning. These applications yield systems with
millions of equations and variables. The design of very efficient solver
algorithms is thus a problem of paramount importance. Over the last twenty years
there has been a tremendous focus and progress in the theory of algorithms for
solving certain types of linear systems that are ubiquitous in applications,
despite the fact that they are somewhat restricted (e.g. each equation has only
two variables). Along with these algorithms, a wealth of new notions, techniques
and tools has been acquired. The project will develop extensions of these
techniques, targeting concrete applications in related fields. Towards this end,
the project includes research problems that are appropriate for advanced
undergraduate and graduate students with complementary interests and skills,
ranging from applied to theoretical. Research will be disseminated through all
standard channels, importantly including free software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will pursue three main directions: (i) Bring the recent progress from
the theoretical to the practical realm. Linear system solvers are useful in a
variety of contexts, implying a need for implementations in disparate
computational environments, including basic consumer computers, graphical
processing units, or big parallel and distributed systems. This necessitates the
development of new theory and algorithms that are practice-friendly, i.e.
designed with the practical performance end-goal in mind. (ii) The impact of
linear system solvers in the downstream applications in Data Science and Machine
Learning can be accelerated and strengthened by pursuing their tighter
integration with the target applications. A second major goal of the project is
thus to pursue an exportation of techniques and notions from the theory of
linear regression to specific problems in Machine Learning. This will require
the development of adaptations and enhancements of these techniques. (iii) The
study of specific algorithmic applications in Machine Learning also serves the
third major goal of the project: the design of solvers for regression problems
that go beyond the restricted types for which efficient solvers are currently
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.