* 1814531
* Understanding Magnetic Fields in the Milky Way Galaxy and in Star Forming Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Dan Clemens, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,504.00

The magnetic field that threads through the gas and dust in the Milky Way Galaxy
has been mapped by the awardees using their own instrument, Mimir. Mimir was
built over a decade ago with support from NSF, NASA, and the W.M. Keck
Foundation. Mimir measures the polarization of infrared light produced by the
dust in the Milky Way. Most of the dust (and gas) is found in large clouds that
drift through space. These clouds collapse under their own weight to form new
stars. Careful analysis of the polarized light from these dusty clouds teaches
us about the magnetic fields that control the shapes and sizes of each cloud.
The magnetic fields also affect the way the clouds collapse to make stars. Much
of the data has already been collected. The awardees now need funding to support
the careful examination of the data. The data will be used, together with
observations from other telescopes such as the Stratospheric Observatory for
Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) and NSF's Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA), to
test models of Milky Way clouds and star formation. Students from Boston
University will be trained on how to take the Mimir data and examine the
polarimetry results. A graduate student will use Mimir, SOFIA and ALMA data to
complete their PhD project. Undergraduate students (including many who are not
majoring in astronomy) will be brought to Arizona to operate Mimir on the
Perkins telescope. These telescope trips often inspire students to follow
careers in science. Other students will participate in the observing by
videoconference. The team will also pursue outreach opportunities at the Boston
Museum of Science, where the Department of Astronomy at Boston University holds
weekly open nights. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mimir is being used by the awardees to
survey the magnetic field structure along the galactic plane and in various star
forming regions via background starlight polarization measurements in the near-
infrared H-band. Their survey, dubbed the Galactic Plane Infrared Polarization
Survey (GPIPS), covers 76 square degrees of the inner disk and probes up to 20
magnitudes of extinction. Complementary mid-IR polarization measurements are
used to probe star forming clouds up to 50 magnitudes of extinction. Various
well-known techniques (Zeeman splitting, the Davis-Chandrasekhar-Fermi method,
etc.) will be used on these and complementary archival data to infer field
strengths and orientations across the surveyed areas. Analysis of these data
will provide quantitative tests of models of galactic B-fields and constrain
theories of star formation in dense molecular clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.