* 1814551
* NeTS: Small: Exploring the Design, Implementation, Operation Issues of Cellular IoT via Formal Analysis and Empirical Validation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* GUAN-HUA TU, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,980.00

The Internet of Things is coming into our daily life. As the only large-scale
wireless network infrastructure on a par with the Internet, the cellular network
plays a critical role in interconnecting a variety of things. Connected cellular
IoT (CIoT) devices are forecast to grow almost four-fold from 2015 (0.4 billion)
to 2021 (1.5 billion). With the explosive growth of CIoT devices, any design
defects of CIoT standards, implementation issues of CIoT devices, and
operational slips of CIoT service operators could lead to devastating
consequences on a global scale. This project seeks to conduct a full
investigation of CIoT services from their design, implementation and operation
perspectives. The successful completion of this project will not only contribute
new techniques to identify design defects, implementation issues, and
operational slips of CIoT services, but also facilitate the deployment of CIoT
services and boost the CIoT economy in the U.S. The research findings may also
influence the design of CIoT in the upcoming 5G wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three key areas of
technical contributions. First, it aims to develop a CIoT control-plane protocol
verification tool based on formal methods, which identifies design defects of
CIoT standards in terms of functional incorrectness, performance downgrade, and
security issues. Second, it aims to develop a rigorous testing methodology for
exploring the implementation issues and operational slips of CIoT practice,
which covers CIoT conformance testing standards, CIoT practice, and feedbacks
from SQA (Software Quality Assurance) experts in the CIoT industry. Third, it
aims to develop an open-source CIoT test-bed including CIoT terminals and
infrastructure to verify the possible design defects, implementation issues, and
operational slips which are hardly to be validated in practice due to security,
business, and other concerns. This CIoT test-bed will be released to the
research community for future CIoT research. Besides technical contributions,
the proposed project allows the researchers to integrate their research findings
into both undergraduate and graduate curricula for both Electrical and Computer
Engineering and Computer Science majors. Finally, this project will contribute
to the nation's workforce by training students to obtain technical expertise in
mobile systems, wireless networking, and formal
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.