* 1814753
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Consistent and Private Group Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Hopper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,659.00

Texting and social media-based messaging applications have become nearly as
common as face-to-face communications for conversation between individuals and
groups. While it is known how to provide privacy for conversations between two
individuals, there is a gap in extending these techniques to group
conversations. This project is developing new communication techniques and open-
source software for private communication among groups of users. These
techniques and software enable new long-distance communication and collaboration
in situations where privacy is important, which will benefit society by allowing
groups to communicate without sharing their private data with advertisers and
data brokers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While several protocols are known
that can provide strong privacy protections for two-party conversations, less is
understood about the properties of private group conversations. In particular,
neither deployed protocols such as Signal, nor academic protocols such as
multiparty OTR and GOTR, can guarantee that participants in a group conversation
maintain a consistent view of the set of messages, order of messages, or even
the list of fellow participants in the conversation. Meanwhile, reliable
broadcast protocols can provide some of these consistency properties but do not
have the same privacy goals, carry a heavy bandwidth overhead, and are ill-
suited for deployment in the modern network
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing new algorithms and
software to close this gap between deployable private, two-party communication
schemes and high-overhead, reliable group communication primitives. It has three
specific aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. By extending two-party privacy notions to
a group context, and relaxing reliable broadcast requirements to a consistency
formalism, the project is developing formal definitions, provably secure
protocols, and software for private group messaging in realistic network
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. In order to practically carry out private
group conversations, messaging software must support several additional
functionalities while preserving privacy. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, both the core
communication and these additional functions must&lt;br/&gt;be usable, in that
users can understand and act on the information about these
protocols&lt;br/&gt;provided by the implementations. The project is developing
and implementing protocols for these tasks, while studying the usability of
these protocols and implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Beyond group
messaging, the project is investigating notions of privacy and consistency in
other group settings, such as voice and video communication, semi-public forums
and closed mailing lists, and adapting the tools from the first two aims to
address these settings. The project is expected to result in new efficient
algorithms for private group communication and supporting tasks, training of
undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students, and the broad dissemination of
free software that promotes private group
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.