* 1814364
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Generation, Maintenance, and Dynamics of Immune Diversity via Clone-Count Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Thomas Chou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2022
* USD 246,471.00

The project will exploit mathematical and computational approaches to understand
the evolution of the diversity of the adaptive immune system. T cells that
express different cell surface receptors (or "clonotypes") are produced by the
thymus and allow an organism to respond to a broad spectrum of pathogens. How
many different surface cell receptors and their total numbers present in the T
cell pool are critical quantities that determine an organism's ability to
neutralize pathogens. Results of the research have the potential to
significantly improve understanding of how the immune repertoire evolves with
infections and aging, how it can be more accurately measured, and how it is
affected by procedures such as thymic transplantation. As part of the research
the investigators will also foster a series of educational activities involving
Cal State-Northridge and UCLA students, including joint seminars, student
presentations, and summer projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two representations of
counting clonotypes, clone-counts and cell-counts, will be further developed to
better measure and quantify the adaptive immune system. Clone-counts describe
the number of T cell clonotypes represented by a specific number of cells while
cell-counts quantify the number of cells within each clonotype. Mathematical
models for T cell populations and T cell diversity typically use one of these
two representations and often rely on strong physiological assumptions. The
large number of clonotypes, the constant birth and death of each clonotype, the
activation of certain clonotypes upon infection, and the slowing down of thymic
output associated with disease and aging all render the quantification and
prediction of T cell diversity challenging. By exploiting the mathematical
connection between these two representations, the investigators will develop
hybrid models of T and B cell components of the immune system applicable under a
wider range of physiological conditions. These hybrid models will be pivotal in
extending current models to include important physiological processes such as
clonotype proliferation, cellular maturation, and regulation. Finally, hybrid
models, both deterministic and stochastic, will facilitate more accurate
determination of an organism's immune diversity through small blood
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.