* 1814347
* CSR: Small: A Multi-Layered Deniable Steganographic File System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ethan Miller, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

Journalists, aid workers, and democracy advocates all put themselves in harm's
way for the benefit of others. Yet, there is a glaring need for them to store
data securely. Typically, secret data is protected with encryption that is
assumed unbreakable. Yet, if those in a hostile environment are caught with
encrypted data, they could be forced to comply through coercion or threats of
bodily harm. The investigators propose to secure data in plain sight by hiding
it so that the operating system does not even know it is there. Therefore, the
owner can completely deny the existence of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Steganographic file system operates through the use of an external virtual block
device driver. It utilizes secret sharing, external entropy sources, and erasure
coding to store data deniably and reliably within the unallocated space of an
existing file system. A set of data blocks to be hidden are combined with
entropy blocks through erasure coding to produce a set of obfuscated carrier
blocks that are then indistinguishable from other pseudorandom blocks on the
disk. A subset of these blocks is then required to reconstruct the data. The
system is information theoretically secure without knowledge of the entropy
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system will be the first fully deniable,
secure, and tunable steganographic file system. All previous attempts might
attain security or performance but sacrifice deniability. The project will not
only push the boundaries of modern steganography, but the investigators will
build a fully working system that can survive intensive forensic examination.
This will allow users in the field to have a reliable, secure means of carrying
information where the presence of that information does not endanger their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to maintain the project well
beyond the project period through publicly available sources such as Bitbucket
or Github, as well as on the Storage and Systems Research Center's web page. At
some point the investigators intend to include the system in the Linux source
tree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.