* 1814557
* SaTC: CORE: Small: FIRMA: Personalized Cross-Layer Continuous Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* John Harris, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2022
* USD 516,000.00

An important problem in computer security is verifying that people using
computing devices are authorized to use them, not just when they first sign on
to the device but during the whole time they are using them. Most existing
continuous authentication schemes impose burdens on users, for instance, when
systems quickly log users out and require frequent re-entry of passwords. This
project will build and evaluate FIRMA, a user-transparent, continuous
authentication software framework that collects usage data, targeted at
corporate security contexts where such monitoring can be done. To the extent
that people have unique but recurrent patterns of use -- itself an interesting
research question -- FIRMA can estimate the likelihood that the current user is
still an authorized, authenticated user based on how current use patterns
compare to historical ones. Doing this might both reduce the burden of frequent
re-authentication and provide early warning signs of malicious activity by
malware or insider attacks. Further, by leveraging the unique way people use
computers, FIRMA will be diverse by design -- adversaries will not be able to
predict how specific individuals use their devices and their attacks will fail
in many devices -- thereby "herd-protecting" security by making it difficult for
malware to automatically spread across many devices. If successful, the project
could have real impact on corporate security, reducing data breaches and
downtime while improving the usability of these systems. The work will also have
educational and training impacts through interdisciplinary collaboration and
education between computer engineering and psychology, involvement of
undergraduate researchers, and efforts to recruit female and minority students
to participate in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIRMA will be composed of a
kernel module, which will continuously record at the operating system level all
events related to user activities: user events (mouse clicks, keystrokes, and
timestamps), processes, and the files and network events created as a
consequence of user-driven activity. These events, recorded during a training
period that represents a user's typical computer usage, will be applied to
create a user profile using a novel Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based
deep learning approach called AttenGAN/P-GAN, which will be composed of a user
profile generator and a runtime classifier. AttenGAN/P-GAN will both provide new
deep learning tools for processing sequences of unknown length as well as
improved ability to train classifiers for anomaly detection without negative
samples. The runtime classifier will continuously observe events generated by
FIRMA's extractor, leverage the user profile to classify the current window of
events being observed as normal or anomalous, and update the current user
confidence score. This classifier will be resilient to benign profile changes
caused by fluctuations in a user's activity pattern caused by external factors,
such as travel (change of time zone) or change of groups or projects. FIRMA's
evaluation will comprise four-week captures of natural computer usage data from
recruited computer users. This evaluation will consider usability,
classification accuracy, and false positives in the presence of various types of
anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.