* 1814493
* III: Small: Durability Queries in Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jun Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,805.00

Real data tends to be noisy and often exhibits transient patterns. When using
data to make decisions, one must avoid jumping to conclusions based on one
particular query result. In practice, most datasets are temporal, and the
abundance of historical data will continue to grow as our economic, social, and
scientific activities are increasingly captured in digitized forms. Therefore, a
useful way of assessing the "robustness" of a query result is to consider its
durability, or how long it has remained valid. There is an abundance of real-
life examples where the notion of durability can help make more meaningful
decisions from data, reveal transient patterns in data, or search for
interesting patterns in data that are also robust. This proposal studies the
notion of durability for database queries, techniques for efficiently evaluating
durability queries, and their practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a framework for durability queries, which unifies common
variants and introduces novel ones. Instead of tackling each variant separately,
the project identifies underlying properties of durability queries that lead to
fundamental understanding and reusable algorithmic techniques. The project will
take principled approaches to designing fast, scalable algorithms and indexing
methods for durability query processing. These approaches combine geometric,
statistical, and approximation techniques for a meaningful balance between query
efficiency and result quality. Going beyond worst-case analysis, the project
researches query and indexing methods as well as complexity analysis methods
aimed at non-adversarial cases that arise in practice.In addition, the project
brings efficient support for durability queries to an open-source database
system. The project will apply durability queries to three real-world domains
with public-facing websites, as a practical test bed for the effectiveness of
durability-based analysis and the efficiency of durability query processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.