* 1814477
* NeTS: Small: Fundamentals of Internet-of-Things with Energy Harvesting and Edge Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 531,978.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is a massive interconnected ecosystem of wireless
connected devices ranging from traditional computing devices to mundane objects.
The low-cost nature and limited resources of most IoT devices coupled with the
sheer scale of the system introduce fundamentally new design constraints. In
particular, a significant fraction of IoT devices will be deployed at hard-to-
reach places which makes it challenging to replace their batteries frequently.
One appealing solution to this is to allow IoT devices to harvest their own
energy from ambient sources, such as the radio frequency (RF) signals of
existing wireless networks. To this end, the overarching goal of this research
is to develop a foundational framework that will unravel the performance and
operational limits of a large-scale energy harvesting IoT system. In particular,
the developed framework will provide a unified approach to the modeling,
analysis, and optimization of an energy harvesting IoT under realistic
operational constraints obtained from the proposed test-bed of prototype IoT
devices. This research is complemented by an elaborate educational plan that
includes development of new courses and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students on research at the intersection of wireless networking, energy
harvesting, and IoT. Elaborate outreach events leveraging hands-on IoT
experiments targeting under-represented minorities at local schools are also
planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative research will lay the
foundations of an energy harvesting IoT by developing the first comprehensive
framework for analyzing and optimizing IoT performance under energy harvesting
constraints. This framework integrates novel ideas from wireless networking,
stochastic geometry, game theory, learning, and device implementation, to yield
the following fundamental innovations: 1) New spatial models and associated
performance metrics for the joint analysis of energy harvesting and
communication aspects of energy harvesting IoT systems, 2) Energy-constrained
and correlation-aware edge-intelligence techniques for an energy harvesting IoT,
3) Novel, self-organizing resource management mechanisms that advance new ideas
from game theory to capture the scale, dynamics, and inter-dependencies across
IoT devices, 4) Real-time, online algorithms that enable each IoT device to find
its optimal resource management solution in a fully self-organizing manner, and
5) Design and implementation of a novel wideband RF energy harvesting module
using wake up circuits that will only activate energy harvesting on the bands
where RF energy harvested is more than the energy dissipated by the
corresponding components. Collectively, these innovations will lay the
foundations of a new breed of energy-harvesting IoT that can cater to emerging
smart city services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.