* 1814799
* Elucidating the Local Supermassive Black Hole - Galaxy Connection
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jonelle Walsh, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 366,643.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Supermassive black holes, weighing a million to
several billion solar masses, reside at the centers of most, if not all, massive
galaxies. Although the black hole's gravitational influence is limited to a very
small region at the center of the galaxy, surprisingly the black hole mass has
been found to strongly correlate with the properties of the larger host galaxy.
This suggests that black holes are essential components of galaxies, with the
growth of one somehow affecting the growth of the other. Our understanding of
the underlying physics, however, is limited by the current sample of galaxies.
In particular, black hole mass determinations have been made in galaxies that
are not representative of the global population. Our program seeks to address
this troublesome bias by measuring black hole masses in 31 local galaxies using
state-of-the-art observational and dynamical modeling methods. The proposed
research will yield the largest uniform black hole survey carried out to date.
By specifically targeting galaxies with sizes and luminosities that are not well
represented in the existing sample, the PI will obtain a more complete census of
local black holes in a wider range of galaxies. Forgoing the approach that has
been used for years of measuring a few black holes at a time, and instead
examining large, homogenous datasets of carefully selected samples is the ideal
way to achieve a breakthrough in our understanding of how black holes and
galaxies grow and evolve together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also
incorporates an educational component, reaching a potentially large number of
people who may never opt to attend a science event on their own. The PI will
organize and coordinate the presentation of interactive physics and astronomy
demonstrations during First Fridays in downtown Bryan, TX. During First Fridays,
the public gather to take in culture through live music, street performances,
and art exhibitions. The outreach activity will engage the public while they
partake in their normal activities and show that science is relevant to their
everyday lives. The program will further provide undergraduate students with the
opportunity to interact with department members at all levels, which is
particularly useful for retaining beginning undergraduates who may not yet feel
at home and connected to the department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades it has become increasingly clear that
supermassive black holes are essential components of galaxies. About 100 black
hole mass measurements in nearby galaxies have been made to date, leading to the
establishment of tight correlations between the mass of a central black hole and
its host galaxy's large-scale properties. Our understanding of the underlying
physics driving the empirical relations, however, is limited by the current
sample of galaxies. In particular, black hole mass determinations have been made
in galaxies that are not representative of the global population. Instead,
galaxies with small sizes at a given luminosity have been preferentially
targeted, as they are generally the easiest to observe and model. The project
seeks to address this troublesome bias by weighing black holes in 31 local
galaxies using adaptive optics integral field spectroscopy from the Gemini North
telescope, Hubble Space Telescope imaging, wide-field integral field
spectroscopy from McDonald Observatory, and state-of-the-art dynamical models.
The proposed research will yield the largest uniform black hole survey carried
out to date, and will significantly enhance the diversity of black hole hosts by
targeting galaxies with sizes and luminosities that are not well represented in
the existing sample. This benchmark study will produce a more complete census of
black holes in a wide range of galaxies that have experienced diverse
evolutionary pasts, and will provide a deeper understanding of black hole-galaxy
co-evolution. Detailed investigations of large, carefully selected samples using
a homogenous approach is the ideal way to make major progress in the field prior
to the next generation of extremely large telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program also incorporates an educational component, reaching a potentially large
number of people who may never opt to attend a science event on their own. Using
the lessons learned from a previous pilot program, the PI will organize and
coordinate the presentation of interactive physics and astronomy demonstrations
during First Fridays in downtown Bryan, TX. During First Fridays, the public
gather to take in culture through live music, street performances, and art
exhibitions. The outreach activity will engage the public while they partake in
their normal activities and show that science is relevant to their everyday
lives. Beyond reaching an untapped audience, the program will provide
undergraduate students with the opportunity to interact with department members
at all levels, which is particularly useful for retaining beginning
undergraduates who may not yet feel at home and connected to the
department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.