* 1814721
* SaTC: CORE: Small: The Blurring of Non-essential Notifications and Critical Security Warnings: Examining the Problem of Generalization in the Brain
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2019
* C. Brock Kirwan, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 151,823.00

This project measures how decreased attention to frequent software notifications
negatively influences peoples' responses to uncommon security warnings that are
truly critical. The researchers will use eye tracking equipment to examine this
problem by measuring attention to notifications and warnings through eye gaze
patterns, and individuals' decisions in response to these messages. They will
observe how changes occur in the context of a single computing device, such as a
laptop computer, as well as diminished attention across devices, such as how
frequent notifications on a mobile device affect people's responses to uncommon
security warnings on a desktop computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series
of laboratory experiments using eye tracking and functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) technologies, the researchers will examine the conditions under
which habituation to frequent software notifications generalizes, or carries
over, to uncommon security warnings. These conditions include the similarity of
visual appearance and mode of interaction (i.e., look and feel) between
notifications and warnings, the volume of notifications, and whether these
factors cause generalization to occur across devices. They also examine how
people behaviorally respond successfully to security warnings by adhering to the
warning recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.