* 1814359
* III: Small: Improving de novo Genome Assembly using Optical Maps
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Stefano Lonardi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,978.00

Out of the estimated 8.7 million eukaryotic species on the planet, only a few
thousands have been sequenced and assembled. While sequencing cost continues to
decrease, the problem of de novo sequence assembly is still computationally
challenging, in particular for large, repetitive genomes. New, cost-effective
optical mapping technologies on the market are creating opportunities to improve
assembly contiguity and to reduce assembly errors. Despite the importance of
optical maps in the genome assembly pipeline, there is a surprisingly small set
of automated software tools to allow users to take advantage of them. In fact,
some of these steps are still carried out manually, which is tedious and error-
prone. This project will develop innovative algorithmic solutions for
automatically and accurately improve de novo genome assembly. Deliverables will
include software tools for genome assembly which will benefit researchers and
the public worldwide, and potentially lead to new international and industrial
collaborations. This project will directly support two graduate students in a
highly interdisciplinary environment. Undergraduates will have opportunities to
participate in research, in collaboration with a nearby community college. Young
people will be inspired to pursue science and technology careers through
demonstrations based on this project at outreach events such as the annual
Bourns Science and Engineering Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are aimed at providing user-friendly software tools to enable users
to enhance assembly contiguity and reduce assembly errors using optical maps.
The proposed research plan is articulated around the following questions: how to
take advantage of one or more optical maps (A) to accurately detect and split
chimeric contigs and chimeric molecules, (B) to accurately create scaffold
genome assemblies, (C) to accurately stitch multiple (redundant) genome
assemblies, and (D) to devise, test and deploy a user-friendly genome browser to
visually inspect multiple optical maps. For task (A) the team will leverage
multiple de novo genome assemblies (obtained using different assemblers on the
same sequencing data or the same assembler with different parameter settings)
and one or more optical maps to correct both chimeric contigs and chimeric
optical molecules. Alignment conflicts between the assemblies and the optical
maps will be encoded in a weighted graph. The minimum vertex cover of each
connected component of the conflict graph will provide the most parsimonious
solution. Similarly, the approach for other tasks is to encode the constraints
of these problems in weighted graphs (e.g., overlap or conflict graphs), frame
them as combinatorial optimization problems and provide efficient algorithms to
compute optimal global solutions or approximation
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.