* 1814602
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Defending Against Authorship Attribution Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patrick Juola, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 238,766.00

Authorship attribution techniques identify the author of an unsigned document
such as an e-mail, memo, or social media post by analyzing candidate authors'
writing styles for tell-tale "fingerprints" such as distinctive words and
sentence structure. Everyone leaves these fingerprints in his or her writing.
This creates a problem for people who have a need to remain anonymous, people
including whistleblowers and journalists working in states hostile to their
work. Because a small sample of prose risks exposing the identity of a writer,
guarantees of anonymity and confidentiality offered by government-sponsored
whistleblower programs are difficult to sustain. Many strategies have been
proposed for protecting writers from attackers who want to discover their
identities. This research compares the effectiveness of these methods and
develops software to help individuals write documents in ways that minimize
information revealed about their identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
characterizes the effectiveness of known defenses against authorship attribution
attacks, including a novel defense which requires a source to write using a
widely-used simplified variant of English. The project develops software which
provides interactive feedback to sources who need to write prose which does not
reveal their identity. This software tool supports automatic, non-interactive
rewriting of English prose that preserves the semantic content of a document
while removing identifying stylistic fingerprints. The research translates into
deliverables which are of practical use to organizations and corporations
running anonymous and confidential whistleblower programs to better protect the
identities of sources and, in doing so, make reporting suspected wrongdoing less
risky. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.