* 1814440
* A Search For Failed Supernovae and Other Observational Constraints on the Supernova Mechanism
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Kochanek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2022
* USD 291,728.00

Astronomers know that all massive stars (stars more than eight times the mass of
our Sun) must collapse when their cores become mostly iron and they can no
longer generate energy through nuclear fusion. In most cases, this collapse
leads to a supernova (SN) explosion, but it is believed that some stars collapse
directly to a black hole without exploding, an outcome known as a "failed
supernova." A research group at the Ohio State University will use a
multifaceted observational and theoretical approach to better understand the
fates of massive stars and the formation of black holes. To do this, they will
use the twin 8.4-meter Large Binocular Telescope (LBT) to monitor all of the
massive, mature stars in 27 nearby star-forming galaxies. This will allow them
to confirm the first candidate failed supernova, measure the properties of SN
progenitors, and explore the boundary between the faintest SNe and stellar
outbursts. While doing so, the project will advance the training of students and
broaden the public's understanding and interest in the science of stars and
their complicated roads to death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Searches for the
progenitors of SNe are finding a deficit of high mass progenitors. This deficit
can be explained if about 20% of core collapses fail and produce a black hole
without a SN explosion. This failed SN fraction also naturally explains the
compact object mass function. Very few SN progenitors are well characterized,
making it difficult to determine the mapping between progenitors and outcomes.
The Ohio State program will yield roughly one well-characterized progenitor each
year. It will also pioneer the study of low-level progenitor variability, as a
balance to SN searches that are detecting small numbers of bright outbursts
shortly before SN explosions. This project will also explore the late time
properties and evolution of mysterious, low luminosity, SN-like objects, and may
validate modern theoretical surveys of core collapse outcomes that suggest weak
SN occur in several different mass ranges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.