* 1814234
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Fine Grained Protection for Scalable Single-Use Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Timothy Wood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2021
* USD 282,000.00

Popular Internet servers and web sites may serve thousands of users
simultaneously. To handle this volume of activity, these servers share
resources, such as processors, memory, and hard disk space. These shared
resources provide an avenue for an attacker to affect other users connected to
the server if the attacker successfully exploits a vulnerability in the server.
This research project aims to eliminate this risk by creating an individual,
customized server instance for each user that runs within an isolated single-use
container. When the container isolation is carefully managed, this technique
prevents an attacker from being able to affect other users, even if the attacker
exploits a server instance within a container. The project explores innovative
techniques to achieve scalability and security for these containerized services.
With over 3 billion people using the Internet, many of whom interact with user-
facing servers multiple times a day, the project's outcomes can broadly impact
society's computer security. In addition to preventing attackers from affecting
other users, the container approach enables detailed forensics to allow
defenders to learn from attacks. The research project additionally provides
educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as
outreach activities for the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create these
single-use containers, the project explores new techniques across the areas of
operating systems, network controllers, authentication, and capability
management. The project's first research direction explores opportunities to
create new operating system and network-function virtualization techniques to
scale to large numbers of containers on each host. A second research direction
focuses on the design and implementation of new network and container management
algorithms so that flexible security policies can be applied on a per-user
basis. A third research direction explores how to manage the access and identity
associated with each container to tailor permissions to match those of the user
on the client. A final research direction explores automated response mechanisms
and forensic collection measures needed to understand and reconstruct attacks.
These techniques allow defenders to learn the details surrounding container
vulnerabilities each time an attacker compromises a container. In combination,
these research activities shift the security advantage to the server operator by
transforming previously destructive attacks into instructive lessons for the
defenders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.