* 1814114
* Using Technology to Capture Classroom Interactions: The Design, Validation, and Dissemination of a Formative Assessment of Instruction Tool for Diverse K-8 Mathematics Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ruth Heaton, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,984,657.00

An important aspect of mathematics teaching and learning is the provision of
timely and targeted feedback to students and teachers on the teaching and
learning processes. However, many of the tools and resources focused on
providing such feedback (e.g., formative assessment) are aimed at helping
students. However, formative assessment of teaching can be equally
transformative for teachers and school leaders and is a key component of
improved teacher practice. This project will refine, expand and validate a
formative assessment tool called Math Habits Tool (MHT) for Kindergarten through
8th grade classrooms. MHT is intended to capture and understand patterns of in-
the-moment teacher-student and student-student classroom interactions in ways
that can promote more equitable access to high quality math learning experiences
for all students. The tablet or computer-based tool is intended for use with
teacher leaders, principals, coaches, and others interested in assessing teacher
practice in a formative way. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
continue the development of the MHT through: (1) the integration of an access
component; (2) analysis of videos collected during prior studies covering a
diverse set of classrooms across the K-8 spectrum; (2) a validation study using
validity-argument approach and (3) the development, piloting, and refinement of
professional development modules that will guide math educators, researchers,
and practitioners in using the MHT effectively as a formative assessment of
instruction. The revised MHT will be validated through analyses of video data
from a range of K-8 classrooms with varying demographics and contexts such as
socio-economic status, language backgrounds, gender, school settings (e.g.,
urban, rural, suburban), and race, with particular attention to increasing
accessibility to mathematics learning by students who are traditionally
underserved, including emergent bilingual students. The data analysis plan
involves video coding with multiple checks on reliability, dimensionality
analysis with optimal scaling, correlation analysis, and hierarchical linear
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.