* 1814457
* CCF-BSF: SHF: Small: Integration and Evolution of Software Models with Executable Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Michael Kifer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 412,497.00

Model Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) is an approach for building large
software systems in which one describes the system in a modeling language and,
once the model is considered consistent and correct, then transforms the models
into software programs. The MBSE approach is motivated by the growing complexity
of software, which requires multiple views of the software system at multiple
levels of abstraction. Programming languages do not support this modeling
activity, which has triggered the development of new modeling technologies and a
variety of model-level services such as model verification and validation,
testing, analysis, transformation, refactoring, design patterns, meta-modeling,
and model evolution. The goal of this research is to develop an executable
formal modeling framework that can support and integrate a wide variety of
modeling tasks, and thus enable the building of robust, large software systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop logical foundations
and a prototype realization of reasoning services for model engineering. In
particular, the plan is to focus on mediation-based integration, partitioning,
and evolution of software models and use the recently developed language, F-OML,
inspired by prior work on F-logic, HiLog, and Transaction Logic. F-OML is a
compact yet powerful logic-based language supported by a well-defined semantics
and a provably correct execution method. The project includes the following main
efforts: (1) Building logical foundations for reasoning services, including
higher-order capabilities, actions, reasoning under inconsistent or incomplete
knowledge, and explanation generation; (2) building uniform logical foundations
for integration (vertical and horizontal) and evolution of software models; (3)
building a proof-of-concept prototype of an MBSE system based on the above
ideas; and (4) evaluation of the proposed approach via case studies and
benchmark models. This project involves a number of challenging problems ranging
from reasoning about models to verification and integration of models to model-
guided code generation to model partitioning and evolution. The expected outcome
of this work will be a theory, algorithms, and a prototype for mediated
reasoning services for logic-based systems engineering, which will support
integration and evolution of modeling services. Eventual incorporation of such
services into existing interactive software development environments will make
the new capabilities available to software engineers to increase their
productivity and reliability of the software they
produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.