* 1814595
* CHS: Small: An Optimized Human-Machine Intelligence Framework for Single and Multi-Label Classification Tasks Through Active Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Senjuti Basu Roy, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2023
* USD 317,722.00

The goal of this project is to develop an optimized human-machine intelligence
framework for single and multi-label classification problems through active
learning. The focus is on citizen science based cyber-human systems that collect
species observation information for ecological applications, but the findings
will apply more broadly. It will adapt several existing active learning
techniques for single and multi-label classification, but study them in the
context of crowdsourcing, especially considering worker-centric optimization.
The innovations lie in systematically characterizing variables to model human
factors, designing optimization models that appropriately combine system and
worker-centric goals, and discovering innovative solutions. The project
describes an iterative framework that judiciously employs human workers to
collect labels, which, in turn, are used by the supervised machine algorithms to
make intelligent predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework derives its
principles by appropriately combining active learning and human factors modeling
strategies to judiciously select tasks and workers for single and multi-labels
classification problems. The key intellectual contributions are: 1. Novel
worker-centric optimization models considering variables pertinent to workers
and tasks through human factors modeling. 2. Optimized human-machine
intelligence models for single-label classification through active learning. 3.
Optimized human-machine intelligence models for multi-labels classification
through active learning. 4. Innovative solutions for human factors estimation,
task assignment for single and multi-labels tasks. 5. Real world deployment and
rigorous evaluation in the citizen science domain. The project is likely to
impact multiple disciplines and domain experts, such as the works of
naturalists, ecologists, conservation biologists and citizen
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.