* 1814788
* AF: Small: Challenges in Unconditional Pseudorandomness for Boolean Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Michael Forbes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

The performance of modern computers can be measured on several axes, such as the
time or memory consumed. Another axis is the amount of randomness used, as many
common algorithms (such as opinion polls) use randomness as a key resource.
However, true randomness (such as that derived from physical phenomena) can be a
scarce resource, and as such significant research has explored how the use of
randomness can be minimized while still efficiently solving key algorithmic
problems. One prominent algorithmic challenge is to compute the volume of
geometric objects. While this problem is simple in low dimensions, it is
significantly more difficult in the higher number of dimensions often required
for applications. While randomized algorithms have been developed for
(approximately) computing volumes, comparable deterministic algorithms have yet
to be developed. This project will study techniques for the design of such
algorithms. It will also promote the study of pseudorandomness in general
through course design, organization of workshops, and training of undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project will
design pseudorandom generators, which are maps that stretch a short seed of
(true) randomness to a longer output of pseudorandomness, where this output is
indistinguishable from random (from the perspective of the relevant algorithm).
The construction of suitable pseudorandom generators is a well-known avenue to
the derandomization of algorithms. However, existing constructions of
pseudorandom generators fall short of derandomization even for simple
algorithmic problems. This project will study new paradigms for the construction
of pseudorandom generators, especially for those which can derandomize
algorithms for geometric problems such as (approximately) computing volumes.
This study will be facilitated by combining existing tools, such as those from
communication complexity and cryptographic pseudorandomness, in novel
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.