* 1814259
* Simulating Galaxy Formation with Cosmic Dust
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Vogelsberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 465,191.00

The growth of galaxies over the age of the universe is an important part of the
history of our own galaxy and our place in the universe. Galaxies assemble and
grow by bringing gas together under the force of gravity to form stars. The
stars then return gas and dust to the interstellar and intergalactic space. The
interaction between starlight, gas, and dust can then change the rate at which
gas assembles and forms stars, so it can alter the growth of the galaxy. This
project will study the effect of dust on the growth of galaxies and the rate of
star formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a novel dust
evolution scheme to a state-of-the-art galaxy formation framework to simulate
the growth of galaxies over cosmological time. The project will use the
Illustris cosmological simulations to provide the framework for galaxy evolution
in isolated galaxies, cosmological uniform volume simulations, and zoom-in
simulations on Milky Way-like galaxies. The dust simulations will include models
of dust production in stellar evolution, dust grain growth in the interstellar
medium through accretion and coagulation, and dust grain destruction through
sputtering, shattering, and supernova shocking. The interaction of the dust with
interstellar gas and radiation will be mediated by a dust-gas drag force. The
project will produce models of the dust mass content of galaxies and the
expected grain size distribution in galaxies. The models will be used to provide
data for observational tests of galaxy formation using ALMA and JWST
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.