* 1814745
* RI:Small: Learning shape features with deep neural networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 465,999.00

This project investigates how to effectively learn shape features with deep
neural networks from images. It has been commonly believed that features learned
by deep neural networks from images include texture, color, and shape of
objects. Although visualizations of learned features demonstrate that contours
of objects are extracted in the process of deep learning, our preliminary
results provide clear arguments that 2D shape features are not well captured by
current deep neural networks. This project develops a framework for effective
learning of shape features with deep neural networks. The research brings new
insights to a core problem in computer vision: shape understanding, which
relates to many subfields in computer vision ranging from low-level tasks, such
as segmentation and image statistics, to high-level ones, such as visual
retrieval and object detection in images. The project includes plan to deploy
the research results directly to applications such as biodiversity study
(species recognition). The project also involves high school students and
undergraduates in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts both
theoretical and experimental research to gain better understanding why shape
features are not well captured by current deep neural networks. Then it develops
new learning strategies specifically targeted for shape features by following
two main alternatives: (1) constraining the filter learning for Convolutional
Neural Networks so that they are more contour focused, and (2) designing special
structures of Deep Neural Networks for learning shape representation. The
project designs circular sequential networks for silhouette-based shape
classification, which encode naturally contour context information while
implicitly performing contour matching. It also extends these networks to
sketches, which are composed of both closed and open contours. Attention models
are investigated on shapes to analyze roles of parts in shape representations so
as to improve further shape matching and recognition
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.