* 1814967
* Modeling White-Dwarf Merger Events: The R Coronae Borealis Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Orsola De Marco, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 506,228.00

Stellar mergers are mysterious phenomena that pack a broad range of physical
processes into a small volume and a fleeting time duration. In a merger, two
stars become one as their structures and evolution are violently perturbed. A
stellar merger is a natural experiment that can help astronomers answer
important questions about stellar evolution. The R Coronae Borealis (RCB) stars
are rare, hydrogen-deficient, carbon-rich, supergiant stars surrounded by
circumstellar dust. It has been suggested that there is a possible connection
between the RCB stars and certain stellar explosions called Type Ia supernovae
(SNe), where both classes arise when two white dwarf stars (WDs) merge. A
research group at Louisiana State University (LSU) plans to study RCB stars in
detail using computer models to simulate the evolution of an RCB star to answer
questions about their formation, lifetime, and evolution into a different type
of star. By investigating this type of WD merger, the LSU group will also help
to better understand the origin of Type Ia SNe, which are important for
understanding the expansion of the universe. The researchers will continue to
participate in outreach efforts including public observing nights and talks,
involving amateur astronomers in research projects and developing innovative
distance learning and online astronomy courses that will reach large numbers of
the public. They are also training the next generation of astronomy researchers
and working to increase diversity in astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSU
group plans to simulate the evolution of an RCB star using a combination of
their new self-gravitating hydrodynamics code and MESA, a 1-D stellar evolution
module. Their new code, Octo-tiger/HPX, is a 3-D, finite-volume adaptive mesh
refinement (AMR) hydrodynamics code with Newtonian gravity. The group will
develop a radiation transport module and incorporate a limited nuclear reaction
network. Octo-tiger/HPX is parallelized for execution on multi-core high
performance computers, which will allow them to probe new areas of parameter
space such as much higher spatial resolution, much larger grids, and multiple
dynamical time scales. The results of this work will not only broaden the
understanding of stellar merger events that lead to RCB stars, but will also
shed light on many other related objects for which mergers and common envelope
evolution may play a crucial role, including contact binaries, blue stragglers,
hot subdwarfs, red novae, massive star mergers, X-ray binaries, cataclysmic
variables, short gamma-ray bursts, and Type Ia supernovae. Beyond the
astrophysics domain, the research has promise to pave the way for other fluid
simulations requiring a high degree of linear and angular momentum conservation,
nuclear simulation, multi-physics simulation, and AMR
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.