* 1814804
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Techniques for Enhancing the Security and Trust of FPGAs-Based Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Chintan Patel, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,414.00

Secret keys that are stored and used within physical devices can be extracted by
adversaries. The attacks involve measuring the power consumption or
electromagnetic radiation emanating from the chip as it carries out encryption,
and then analyzing them to deduce the secret key. This project investigates
techniques that self-mutate the hardware at runtime as a means of significantly
reducing and ideally eliminating signal information leveraged by the
adversary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research carried out in this project
investigates side-channel leakage, particularly as it relates to signal
propagation paths within the encryption engine. A hardware description of the
proposed self-mutating hardware will be implemented on a field-programmable gate
array (FPGA) using dynamic partial reconfiguration. Multiple instances of
encryption engine components, e.g., the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
substitution box (SBOX), will be created using implementation diversity
techniques as a means of diversifying signal propagation paths, and a self-
reconfiguration hardware engine will randomly choose instances to reprogram on-
the-fly. Advanced differential power analysis (DPA)-type attacks will be carried
out to determine the resilience of the proposed
countermeasures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques, data and hardware
developed in this research will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate
level courses at University of New Mexico, University of Maryland Baltimore
County and University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and red-team/blue-team
competitions will be created. Minority and underrepresented students will be
recruited to participate in funded research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
project repository will be created and maintained at University of North
Carolina, Charlotte at the web address http://www.ece.uncc.edu/fareena/SPREAD
for 5 years. The hardware description language, software, data, analysis methods
and copies of the papers will be made available for
download.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.