* 1814777
* Imaging Convective Patterns On AGB Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Fabien Baron, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,977.00

Even in the absence of distortions caused by our atmosphere, our ability to the
resolve spatial structure of distant objects is limited by the diameter of
telescope mirrors. Optical Interferometers, such as Georgia State University's
Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy (CHARA), get around this limitation
by combining the signals received by smaller telescopes placed a long distance
apart. We are now able to measure the sizes and shapes of bright stars, and we
are beginning to be able to image their surfaces. This team will study the
brightness variations on the surface of giant stars, which is caused by
convection just beneath the surfaces. In turn, this will enable a better
understanding of how the "winds" from these stars replenishes and enriches the
interstellar medium, from which future generations of stars (and planets) are
formed. This project will be used to train Georgia State University's
undergraduate students in astronomy, optics, and computer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to image the surfaces of a
group of chemically-diverse asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars via long
baseline near-IR interferometry using CHARA. The investigators will monitor the
lifetime, size, and variability of the AGB convection patterns over the three-
year duration of the project. Their maps of the surface effective temperatures
will then be compared to predictions made by state-of-the-art 3D radiative-
hydrodynamics models to determine regions of high mass-loss and to determine how
that mass is distributed back into the interstellar medium via stellar winds.
Imaging different types of AGBs with sub-milliarcsecond resolution will help
quantify the roles of convection, pulsation, multiplicity and magnetism in the
variability and mass-loss processes. The PI will also conduct workshops designed
to help broaden the community of astronomers capable of obtaining and analyzing
interferometric observations. They will also develop open source codes to
produce images of a wide variety of stars from interferometric
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.