* 1814798
* SHF: SMALL: DockerizeME: Automatic Inference and Repair of Computing Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Christopher Parnin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 349,675.00

When developing or deploying software, programmers must ensure that any external
libraries or services which are necessary to run an application are properly
installed and configured. The process of preparing computing infrastructure to
properly execute an application is referred to as software configuration.
Currently, programmers often manually perform software configuration, which can
result in errors and poor maintainability; as a result, improper software
configuration can cost billions of dollars of loss for business, lead to
unexpected downtime of services, and cause failure of critical infrastructure
and loss of data. Unfortunately, the skills required for proper software
configuration can be orthogonal to software development, meaning there are
limited programmers who are trained in software configuration
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop techniques to
automatically perform the software configuration necessary to run an arbitrary
application. Two main research tasks will be investigated for this project. One
task will be to develop an approach for automatically inferring a Dockerfile, a
configuration script for the Docker container system, capable of executing an
application. The approach will use automatic code analysis of existing software
libraries to build an offline knowledge base capable of recovering the
dependencies between them. The approach will augment the knowledge base with
rules learned by mining existing Dockerfiles, configuration scripts, and
developer resources like Stack Overflow. Further, the approach will apply
minimization techniques on environment specifications extracted from this
knowledge base to arrive at a minimal set of application dependencies. The
second task will develop a system to detect when configuration scripts are
incompatible with code, such as in the event of a dependency upgrade, and use
search-based techniques to automatically repair these configuration scripts. In
addition, transfer learning will be used to guide successful inferences and
repairs. Finally, these approaches are applied in two applications: detecting
when code snippets in community resources are incompatible with an API version,
and building repair bots that can automatically create a pull request for
repairing configuration scripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.