* 1814033
* Collaborative Research:  Design and Development of Transmedia Narrative-Based Curricula to Engage Children in Scientific Thinking and Engineering Design
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Glenn Ellis, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,391,638.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering is an important component of the
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). However, resources for supporting
teachers in implementing these standards are scarce. This project will address
the need for resources by applying an innovative pedagogy called Imaginative
Education (IE) to create middle school engineering curricula. In IE,
developmentally appropriate narratives are used to design learning environments
that help learners engage with content and organize their knowledge
productively. To fully exploit the potential of this pedagogy, this project will
combine IE with transmedia storytelling. In transmedia storytelling, different
elements of a narrative are spread across a variety of formats (such as books,
websites, new articles, videos and other media) in a way that creates a
coordinated experience for the user. Once created, the curricula will be
implemented in classrooms to research its impact on (1) increasing learners'
capacities to engage in both innovative and direct application of engineering
concepts, and (2) improving learners' science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be led by
Smith College and Springfield Technical Community College in collaboration with
Springfield (MA) Public Schools (SPS). Additional expertise in evaluating the
findings will be provided by the Collaborative for Educational Services and an
external advisory board of leaders in STEM education and transmedia
storytelling. The project will result in the development of a transmedia
learning environment that includes two NGSS-aligned, interdisciplinary
engineering units and seven lessons that integrate science and engineering. The
research study will be implemented in four phases in eight SPS middle schools.
Approximately 900 students will participate each year. In Phase 1, the project
team will collaborate with SPS teachers to create engineering units, lessons,
and standards-based achievement measures. In Phase 2, teachers in the treatment
group will participate in professional development (PD) workshops covering IE,
transmedia learning environments, structure of the curriculum, and connections
to NGSS. In Phase 3 the curricula will be implemented in treatment classrooms
and both treatment and control group students will be assessed. In Phase 4,
testing and assessment will continue in SPS schools and will be expanded to
rural and suburban classrooms. Teachers in these classrooms will use online
multimedia PD that will ensure scalability and mirrors the structure and content
of in-person PD. Data analysis will provide evidence of whether this imaginative
and transmedia educational approach improves students' capacities for using
engineering concepts and enhances their STEM identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.