* 1814409
* AF: Small: New Frontiers in Local Error-Correction
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Swastik Kopparty, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 397,000.00

Modern communication and data storage technologies use mathematical error-
correcting codes to cope with noise and unreliability of physical devices. This
project will develop new error-correcting codes which support "local" algorithms
for error-detection and error-correction: these give strong error-correction
guarantees at ultra-fast speeds. The error-correcting codes and algorithms
developed in this project will have the potential be applied to real-world data
storage applications, which is very relevant to current cloud computing
technology. The educational component of this project will involve the mentoring
and education of junior researchers who intend to pursue their own careers in
research, including women and minorities. This project will also develop courses
about the important advances in the relevant topics, and make the course
materials publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the technical level, this
project investigates the main problems on the existence and construction of, and
algorithms and fundamental limits for local error-correcting codes. Local error-
correcting codes are modern versions of error-correcting codes that support
sublinear-time error detection and/or correction. They have gained increasing
importance in theoretical computer science over the last few decades, both
because of potential applications to communication and data storage, as well as
connections to complexity theory, pseudorandomness, and cryptography. This
project will develop new algebraic, probabilistic and algorithmic tools to
design and reason about such codes, and local algorithms more generally. This
project is motivated by several recent advances made by the investigator, such
as the construction of new high rate error-correcting codes allowing, for the
first time, subpolynomial-time error-correction and error-detection, and the
first constructions of probabilistically checkable proofs of constant rate,
checkable in sublinear time. These advances have significantly altered what is
believed to be possible in this domain, and have the potential to dramatically
change the way data is stored in data centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.