* 1814510
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: A Multi-source Data Driven Optimization Framework for Inter-connected Express Delivery System Design and Inventory Rebalance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Hui Xiong, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,977.00

The inter-connected express delivery system is very needed for many emerging
applications, such as public bike rental service, electric car sharing service,
and fresh product delivery. The successful deployment of inter-connected express
delivery systems can greatly improve transportation, energy saving, food supply,
and urban sustainability. Compared with traditional delivery systems, the inter-
connected express delivery system has the following unique characteristics: (1)
each station covers a small service area; (2) all stations are internally
connected because they can act as inventories or suppliers to each other. There
are two fundamental research challenges for the development of the inter-
connected express delivery system: how to decide the station locations for a
given area and how to timely rebalance the inventories among stations. It is
very important to address these fundamental challenges in order to make the
inter-connected express delivery system more effective, efficient and
sustainable. This project aims to develop a data driven solution for solving
these challenges. This study will advance the field of inter-connected express
delivery system, expand the curricular content of data mining and optimization,
and train undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on two basic research problems: station site selection and station
inventory rebalancing optimization. To solve the first problem, this project
collects and analyzes a variety of data from different sources, such as
historical demand data and geographic data, and combines neural network-based
prediction method and combinatorial optimization techniques. To solve the second
problem, this project identifies two distinct cases of the inventory rebalancing
problem: static rebalancing and dynamic rebalancing. The research objective of
the static rebalancing is to minimize the overall travel distance. This project
develops a clustering-based heuristic solution for solving the static
rebalancing in order to make the solution scalable for practical use. The
research objective of the dynamic rebalancing is to minimize the overall
unsatisfied demand, which involves much more uncertainty than the static one.
This project develops a hybrid approach that combines advanced data mining and
stochastic optimization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.