* 1814778
* Collaborative Research: Photometric redshifts via Bayesian functional data analysis
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Tamas Budavari, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,505.00

Many projects mapping the sky require precise estimates of the speed at which
galaxies are receding. A wide-spread technique derives this number, the
redshift, from carefully measuring galaxy colors, using an analysis called
"photo-zs". Unfortunately, current estimation methods are not precise enough to
achieve major survey science goals. The present team of astronomers and
statisticians will improve both the precision and the reliability of photo-zs.
This work will provide key enabling technology for large surveys in progress and
in development, which represent a considerable investment in astronomy. This
project will increase the return on that investment. The research requires
innovation in both astronomy and statistics and the development of new
statistical methods likely to have significant additional impact. The research
will help to train a diverse population of students and postdocs in advanced
statistics via summer schools and other special sessions, and historically, many
such trainees have gone on to pursue careers in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current and forthcoming automated digital sky
surveys aim to push further into "precision cosmology" territory by meticulously
mapping the distribution and properties of hundreds of millions of galaxies, and
measuring the details of thousands of supernovae. This requires accurate and
precise estimation of the redshifts of galaxies using broad-band photometric
data, by the technique known as photometric redshifts, or photo-zs for short.
Unfortunately, current estimation methods do not enable the most complete
science return from these surveys. The present project unites astronomers and
statisticians to improve the precision as well as the reliability of photo-zs,
by modeling spectral energy distributions of galaxies, using Bayesian functional
data analysis (FDA), an approach that emphasizes predictive modeling and
thorough propagation of information and uncertainty across hierarchical, multi-
stage discovery chains. The project will use a modular, hierarchical modeling
framework and account for similarity and diversity, with both conventional
parameterizations, and new data-driven parameterizations. Because this framework
will produce probabilistic photo-z estimates, with possibly complex
uncertainties, the team will also study how optimally to provide such estimates
and to use them for cosmological science. Open-source implementations of their
algorithms will be accelerated by graphics processing units where appropriate.
The research will provide valuable inter-disciplinary training to a graduate
student, while developing new statistical methods by innovatively combining FDA,
machine learning, and high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.