* 1814920
* SHF: Small: Novel SW/HW Approximate Computing Methodologies with Case Studies on Biometric Security Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sherief Reda, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 321,475.00

Biometric systems are increasingly deployed to meet the security demand of
mobile, embedded and internet-of-things devices. The goal of this project is to
devise techniques that lead to biometric systems with faster response time, less
energy consumption and cost without compromising the accuracy and security. In
addition to the main research goal, this project includes a comprehensive
education and outreach plan that includes research experience for undergraduate
students, interdisciplinary educational courses, outreach to high-school
students, and tech transfer to industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
goal of this project, new approximate computing techniques will be developed to
simplify the hardware of biometric systems with little or no compromise to
accuracy. The project investigates new methods for approximate logic circuit
synthesis using Boolean matrix factorization, which leads to smooth trade-off
between circuit complexity and quality of results. The project also investigates
the use of reinforcement-learning techniques to navigate the space of potential
approximate designs to identify the best ones. Finally, the proposal
investigates the impact of using the proposed methods on case studies of end-to-
end biometric systems, including fingerprinting, iris scanning, and 3D facial
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.