* 1814460
* SHF: Small: Revisiting Elementary Denotational Semantics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeremy Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 380,714.00

Advances in programming language theory and formal methods have enabled
researchers to specify complete programming languages, verify the correctness of
their compilers, and prove that particular programs are correct. However, with
the current state of the art, such proofs are tedious and require heroic work.
The project's impact will be to greatly simplify such work by discovering new
techniques for specifying programming languages that better align with the
structure of the proofs. The project's novelty is in the investigation of
practical applications of denotational semantics that are elementary, based on
set theory rather than domain theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The preferred
approach today for specifying programming languages is operational semantics.
Such semantics are mathematically simple and not too far removed from
implementations. However, correctness proofs using operational semantics often
require fiddly simulations and syntactic logical relations. Looking back to the
1980s, researchers preferred denotational semantics, which enable compositional
reasoning about program fragments. However, most denotational semantics involved
sophisticated mathematics, which made for slow progress and created barriers to
adoption. Most that is, but not all. In the 1970s, Scott, Plotkin, and Engeler
invented graph models of the lambda calculus. In the late 1970s, the Torino
group invented filter models. These so-called elementary models combine the best
of both worlds: they are simple mathematically and they are compositional, which
enables equational reasoning. Unfortunately, by some accident of history, these
models did not become popular and were never applied to complete programming
languages or proofs of compiler correctness. The project will determine whether
elementary models are good for the day-to-day work of language specification,
mechanized meta-theory, and compiler correctness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.