* 1814476
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Socio-Technical  Strategies for Enhancing Privacy in Photo Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Apu Kapadia, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 515,978.00

With the rise of digital photography and social networking, people are capturing
and sharing photos on social media at an unprecedented rate. Such sharing may
lead to privacy concerns for the people captured in such photos, e.g., in the
context of embarrassing photos that go "viral" and are shared widely. At worst,
online photo sharing can result in cyber-bullying that can greatly affect the
subjects of such photos. This research builds on the observation that viewers of
a photo are mindful of the privacy of other people, and could be influenced to
protect their privacy when sharing photos online. First, the research will study
how people think and feel about sharing photos of themselves and others. This
will involve measuring their behavioral and physiological responses as they make
their decisions. Second, the research will identify to what degree these
decisions can be altered through technical mechanisms that are designed to
encourage responsible image sharing activity that respects the privacy of people
captured in the photo. The investigators will involve graduate and
undergraduates students in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
brings together expertise in the psychological and brain sciences and computer
security and privacy to explore socio-technical solutions for privacy in the
context of photo sharing. In particular, the research focuses on first
developing an understanding of people's cognitive and affective dynamics while
sharing photos on social media. The research seeks to 1) determine the effects
of attention, depth of processing, and decisional uncertainty on image sharing
decisions; and 2) identify the relationship between affective responses to
images and decisions to share images on social media. Building on the knowledge
gained from these experiments, the research seeks to develop and test a series
of socio-technical intervention strategies such as face-highlighting and
identity-priming, which are informed by a novel theoretical and methodological
framework called objectification theory, or the idea that people are often
motivated to see other people in terms of particular features or as objects of
entertainment. These interventions will counteract objectification by
encouraging viewers to consider the personal identity or privacy of the people
depicted in each image before making image-sharing decisions. Thus, the
mechanisms for addressing bystander privacy will be grounded in a psychological
study that understands and manipulates the elements of decision making while
sharing photos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.