* 1814782
* Unfolding the Dynamic and Colorful Lives of Compact Object Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Wen-fai Fong, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,069.00

The mergers of two astronomical compact objects (neutron stars and/or black
holes) in a binary system serve as sources of gravitational wave emission,
potential sites of heavy element nucleosynthesis, and laboratories for high-
energy astrophysical processes not seen elsewhere in the universe. With the
onset of advanced gravitational wave detectors, only recently have astronomers
begun to place direct constraints on these processes. Short gamma-ray bursts
(SGRBs), which are detected at cosmological distances, also offer a unique and
independent window into the dynamic and colorful lives of compact object
mergers. A research group at Northwestern University, under the direction of the
principal investigator (PI), will capitalize on complementary streams of data
from gravitational wave observatories, ground-based telescopes and space-based
gamma-ray and X-ray missions to: (i) develop informed follow-up strategies for
electromagnetic (EM) observations following gravitational wave events, (ii)
confront theoretical models of heavy element production in mergers with optical
and near-infrared observations, (iii) place constraints on the fraction of
mergers that produce SGRBs with radio through X-ray observations, and (iv)
decipher the histories of the pre-merger binary systems with a complete census
of their host galaxies. To make this research publicly accessible in a novel
way, the PI will partner with Evanston (Illinois) Township High School (ETHS)
which has an on-campus planetarium. The PI will use the planetarium as a venue
for engaging students with research material and exposing students to Astronomy
researchers from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research group
will utilize the inferred properties of previous SGRBs to build light curve
prediction tools that will optimize an observatory's chance of an EM counterpart
detection following a gravitational wave event. These adaptable tools will serve
as an important community resource, not only for determining current observing
strategies but also for planning future EM surveys. The research group will also
place direct, observational constraints on the role of mergers in populating the
Universe with heavy elements, by determining independently-measured ejecta
masses and event rates. The researchers will build a complete census of SGRB
host galaxies and the spatial offsets of bursts from the galaxy centers. From
these observations, the researchers will determine the distributions of merger
kick velocities and delay times. These distributions are vital inputs for binary
evolution models, yet they are highly uncertain. The project is well-designed to
exploit both methods of merger discovery: gravitational wave emission from
Advanced LIGO/Virgo and gamma-ray burst detection from space-based missions. For
all objectives in this proposal, the research group will make crucial
connections between the local population of compact object mergers discovered by
Advanced LIGO/Virgo and their cosmological analogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.