* 1814011
* Collaborative Research: A Multiscale Approach to Understand Outflows During High-Mass Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Peter Hofner, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,473.00

Most stars in the Milky Way Galaxy are like our Sun, but there are also stars
with masses up to 100 times higher. These high-mass stars output enormous
amounts of energy and live only for a few million years before ending their life
as a supernova. A major challenge in astrophysics is to understand how these
stars are formed. The investigators will use the National Science Foundation's
large radio telescopes to observe young high-mass stars, which are still growing
as surrounding matter falls onto them. During this process some of the matter is
expelled in the form of jets and outflows of hot gas. To make progress in our
scientific understanding of high-mass star formation, the next step is
understanding the flow of material near these stars. A systematic study of
outflows and jets is thus urgently needed. With these radio telescopes, the
investigators will chart the flow of matter near these stars. Specifically, the
investigators will make new observations every few months and map the motion of
the clumps of material over time. The project is a collaboration between a
primarily Hispanic serving university in New Mexico and a primarily
undergraduate institution in rural Illinois. Student involvement in the planned
observations provide hands-on STEM education on a variety of educational levels.
Students will also take part in institutional interchanges and public outreach
activities lead by the principal investigators. This project will thereby
promote the participation of women and minorities in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionized jets and molecular outflows are commonly
present in high-mass proto-stars. This project will carry out a multiscale
observational study which addresses fundamental unanswered questions on the
physics of the mass outflows. The goals of the project are 1) to connect the
ionized jets to the large scale molecular flows with high quality measurements
of the momentum rates, 2) to directly measure the ionized jet motion via proper
motion and spectral line observations, and 3) to use water and methanol maser
observations to study the jet launching mechanism, as well as the momentum
transfer between ionized and molecular gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.