* 1814533
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Algorithms Everywhere: Identifying and Designing for Data Privacy Styles
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Eric Baumer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 281,709.00

The computational algorithms that analyze our personal data online and in myriad
medical, credit card, and other databases can make it increasingly easy to infer
personal, intimate details about us (such as our personality, political
ideology, or sexual preference) from seemingly mundane data (such as which pages
someone has "Liked" on Facebook). People may not notice or know about these
risks, and if they do, they must make ongoing decisions about which algorithms
they may be providing with their personal information, which to ignore, and
which to decry as invasive or unethical. Currently, the behaviors that emerge
around these systems are poorly accounted for in existing technology design
practices. To address this shortcoming, this work will answer the questions: How
do people navigate a world in which data collection and analysis is a continuous
feature of their environment? What strategies do people adopt based on their
varied privacy perceptions, attitudes, and needs? How can interfaces and other
features of internet systems be designed to support different styles of data
privacy?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal uses search-related behaviors as a
research and design context to examine user adaptation and response to pervasive
data collection. Through a series of surveys, the project team will develop a
validated measure of privacy patterns or styles related to the technologies,
tools, and beliefs that people habitually use to guide their data privacy
behaviors. The researchers also will conduct qualitative interviews with users
of data protection tools. These interviews will establish what specific
strategies these users employ to protect their privacy from algorithmic
analysis, if any, as well as the mental models that give rise to efficacy
beliefs about those strategies. They will create a collection of experimental
prototype tools to explore the design space around algorithmic privacy.
Collectively, this work will expand our technology design vocabulary in terms of
being able to account for different styles of privacy practices. This research
has the potential to significantly improve privacy policies and technologies by
describing the specific challenges that people face as they attempt to protect
their privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.