* 1814001
* Interdisciplinary Approaches to Teaching Computational Environmental Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* R. Benjamin Shapiro, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,519,631.00

Because of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, there is an urgent need for real-world, interdisciplinary, and
computational preparation of students from the early grades through high school
(preK-12). Researchers at Boston College, Iowa State, the University of Colorado
Boulder, and the Educational Development Center will train environmental science
teachers to use a recent scientific discovery, artificial transparent soil to
integrate computational environmental science into their teaching practice.
Artificial transparent soil allows for the visualization of roots in living
plants and allows scientists, teachers, and students to study root structures
and soil ecology on a microscopic level. Mechanically, the artificial soil
mimics real soil, supports root structures, holds suspended minerals, can be
colonized by microorganisms, and exchanges gases like soil. The project
investigators will bring this new computational technology to environmental
science teachers in public schools in Massachusetts, Iowa, and Colorado.
Teachers will learn how to integrate computational science into their
environmental science curriculum and will be immersed in an interdisciplinary
training program where they will learn the physics, chemistry, and biological
principles underlying artificial transparent soil, while also learning how to
program and code micro-electronics and conduct scientific experiments with their
students. This project was submitted in response to NSF Dear Colleague Letter:
Discovery Research PreK-12: Advancing STEM + Computing (17-149) and is supported
by the STEM + Computing Program that advances research and development of
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings.
STEM+C supports research on how students learn to think computationally to solve
interdisciplinary problems in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching driving question for the research revolves around understanding how
and in what ways a supportive professional development ecosystem can be
developed that enables teachers to infuse computational science into their
teaching that supports their students in conducting scientific research.
Specifically, the research team questions are: (1) How do teachers adapt and
implement computational science practices when teaching science? (2) How do
teachers and the curriculum design help teachers navigate the tensions of
infusing computation while also ensuring STEM content and what computational
science and scientific practices do teachers utilize in their teaching?, and (3)
What are the supports, both in terms of professional development and as a part
of the curriculum materials themselves, that need to be provided to teachers to
support them in integrating and adapting the program for their classroom? The
project team will utilize design-based research approach that will involve
classroom observations, interviews with teachers, and surveys to evaluate how
and in what ways teachers adapted the materials to their classrooms. The project
team aims to develop case studies of teachers across contexts that will serve as
the basis for future professional development. The project team will recruit
teachers who teach in under-resourced schools, teach youth of color, or teach in
schools with a high percentage of underrepresented populations in STEM fields.
The project team has existing partnerships with school districts throughout
Massachusetts (Boston Public, Waltham, Springfield, and Lawrence), Colorado, and
Iowa. The research and evaluation of this program will enable, educators and
teachers, to implement best practices regarding the infusion of computational
science using a holistic interdisciplinary to STEM instruction. Further, given
the limited work, and general lack of computational knowledge amongst the
nations' environmental science teachers this work will provide some of the first
insights into how to support science teachers to use coding and computation in
their classrooms. This work will be shared with a wide range of audiences
through public festivals, teacher conferences, and traditional academic research
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.