* 1814594
* RUI:AAG: A Holistic Search for Megamaser Disks and their Role in Feeding Black Holes in the Nearby Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anca Constantin, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 190,256.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite sustained and extensive searches for
luminous emission from masers (the microwave version of the lasers) produced by
water molecules in galaxy centers, their detection remains a mere 3%. These
systems, when found in a disk-like configuration, provide the most precise and
accurate tools for weighing supermassive black holes, as well as unique
constraints on the geometry of the universe because they can be used to directly
determine extragalactic distances. The aim of this project is a comprehensive
investigation of the relationship between cosmic water maser activity and the
properties of their host galaxies, which is imperative for assessing the true
chances of finding more of these golden standards. Maser disks are uniquely able
to probe physical processes in the centers of galaxies, such as black hole
accretion processes. This should improve astronomer's knowledge of black hole
demographics in active galaxies, and the inter-relationship between accretion,
star-formation and other issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The investigation will consist of a complex multi-parameter analysis
of various measures of the nuclear water maser emission and an extensive suite
of optical, infrared, and X-ray characteristics of their host galaxies, their
nuclear activity, as well as their small-scale environments and morphologies.
The statistics necessary to perform this study are only now available via multi-
wavelength public databases, making possible to analyze the largest sample of
galaxies found to date to host water masers, in comparison with galaxies in
which maser detection failed. Well-defined projects are designed to address key
scientific questions on the potential links between the physics of water maser
emission and the age, presence, absence, type, strength, and obscuration of the
nuclear star-formation and galactic black hole accretion. This study will offer
unprecedented holistic constraints to the degree to which the strength and
spatial configuration of water maser emission are linked to the associated
nuclear galactic activity and host properties, thus providing the most efficient
criteria for future disk-maser searches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
students will be actively involved in the proposed research by performing data
mining, image and spectral processing, designing and testing of a large variety
of statistical analysis methods, participating in obtaining new observations and
networking with scientists at national observatories. Deaf and hard-of-hearing
undergraduates will be included in each summer research session, and a pre-major
internship for women will be implemented yearly in the existing recruiting and
retaining program. A novel grass-roots public outreach program will be
established to literally take Astronomy to the Market, via a "scientific corner"
where the PI and a team of undergraduates will offer hands-on science-driven
activities along with safe solar observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.