* 1814708
* Understanding particle acceleration in collisionless shocks using kinetic simulations
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Anatoly Spitkovsky, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2023
* USD 526,586.00

Collisionless shocks occur in tenuous plasmas where the mean free path for
collisions mediated by electrostatic interaction is large, as found in supernova
remnants, clusters of galaxies, relativistic jets, and pulsar winds. The
conditions under which this occurs, and the efficiency of accelerating charged
particles, are not well understood. This project will carry out advanced
numerical simulations and use them to construct a self-consistent theory of
shock acceleration. It will resolve the complex microphysics of plasma
instabilities, particle scattering, and magnetic field generation and
amplification, and calibrate the theory for its application to astrophysical
objects. The results will help to interpret new studies of high-energy
astrophysical and cosmological sources, including the next generation of
laboratory experiments, and the physical insights will even apply to shocks in
our solar system. The work will train graduate and undergraduate students in
numerical modeling and the visualization of multiscale systems, mentor a
postdoc, and support open source simulation software and its analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collisionless shocks span different speeds and
strengths of magnetic field, and accelerate both nonthermal electrons which
energize synchrotron emission, and the protons commonly found in cosmic rays.
The main process is thought to be diffusive shock acceleration, in which
particles scatter on magnetic fluctuations, but the conditions for this Fermi
mechanism and its efficiency are not understood from first principles. This
project will carry out large-scale multidimensional particle-in-cell (PIC) and
hybrid simulations of astrophysical collisionless shocks to consider: 1) what is
the relative efficiency of acceleration as a function of shock speed, Mach
number, and magnetic inclination? 2) what waves mediate electron acceleration in
quasi-parallel and quasi-perpendicular shocks? 3) what is the ratio of electron
to ion temperature downstream, and what is the physics of energy transfer? 4)
what is the nonlinear structure of the shock when ion acceleration is efficient?
With microphysical parameterizations measured with PIC simulations, new software
will combine a magneto-hydrodynamic description of the background plasma with
kinetic particles to represent cosmic rays and their back-reaction on the flow.
This will enable modeling of macroscopic astrophysical objects such as supernova
remnants or galactic outflows, including the effects of cosmic rays and their
acceleration. These kinetic simulations address how nonlinear shock acceleration
works and will constrain the parameters of the flow when it is
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.