* 1814225
* Student Support: IEEE Cluster 2018 Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Amanda Randles, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,000.00

It is important that the STEM community identifies and develops the next
generation of scientists through engagement in premier scientific conferences.
The IEEE Cluster conference series, an international event for presenting the
research results, problem solutions, and insights on new challenges in high
performance computing in general and cluster computing in particular, has
been&lt;br/&gt;pursuing this mission by seeking to increase student
participation in the conference and the cluster computing field. To this end,
the student program at the Cluster conference has been established to provide a
comprehensive means for students to improve their overall research skills and
planning rather than just presenting posters and papers. By attending the
student program, students can now obtain unique experiences and interactions
with academic and industry researchers in the cluster computing community. The
overall exposure to research through the IEEE Cluster student program promotes
foundational understanding of scientific methods, which will serve the students
well throughout their careers, and is aligned with NSF?s mission of promoting
progress of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the travel of up
to 20 students from US-based institutions to participate in the student program
at IEEE Cluster 2018. The student program at IEEE Cluster 2018 includes multiple
sessions scheduled during the lunch breaks and after the end of the regular
sessions. The sessions target research presentation training, research
experience and career guidance, industry interaction, and feedback from the best
paper candidates. Travel grants particularly encourage the research interests
and the involvement of students in the field who are not well funded and those
who are just beginning their participation in the field or are interested in
entering it.&lt;br/&gt;Particular effort is made to solicit applications for the
travel support from female students and students from under-represented
communities by reaching out to graduate programs of computer science and
engineering departments at universities who are members of the National
Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering and
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.