* 1814725
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research:Toolkits for Aging in Place for Older Retirees (TAIPOR)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Katie Siek, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 274,446.00

Many older people want to live in their homes for as long as possible. Much
computer and sensor-based technology is being developed and deployed to support
aging in place, ranging from fall sensors to complicated systems that monitor
all of a user's activities and provide reminders, warnings, and alerts to family
and caregivers. However, by and large such technology has been designed by
engineers rather than the end users. As a result, adoption and acceptance of
these systems by older adults is low. The project will begin with studies and
focus groups of retired adults to determine the kinds of technological support
elders actually want in their homes. Next, the project will create an easy to
use "toolkit" that will enable an elder to create and customize a system to use
in her own home. Finally, the project will create training materials to help
ordinary people learn to design these technologies. As a result, this project
will lead to the development aging in place systems that better meet the needs
of elders and find more widespread acceptance. In addition, project will bring
together people of all ages to engage in intergenerational design, including a
workshop where Girl Scouts will collaborate with their grandparents to learn
about each others technology needs and utilize the toolkit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, TAIPOR, builds on sociotechnical research in
personal informatics that engages underserved populations in making their own
customized technologies for tailored personal use and identifies perceptions
related to adoption and abandonment of pervasive computing technologies by the
people who live with them. TAIPOR research can be abstracted into three areas:
(i) Identify Perceptions related to Adoption and Abandonment of IoT through
contextual, qualitative studies where older retirees document their experiences
with aging in place technologies. Investigators will develop a set of design
guidelines and highlight exemplar IoT that meet older retiree needs. (ii) Design
a Toolkit to Create and Customize IoT by novice, older retirees with minimal
training. Based on the design guidelines, the investigators will develop a
toolkit that abstracts the functionality of the exemplar IoT to enable older
retirees to create their own aging in place technologies. (iii) Develop
Scaffolded Training Materials so that older retirees can develop their own
technologies with limited researcher intervention. Design workshops have arisen
as a way to involve the end user in the design of technologies, but require
significant resources on the part of researchers and are not scaleable. The
investigators will disseminate a set of best practices for how to teach older
retirees, an underserved population, about making at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.