* 1814909
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Tools for Mental Health Reflection: Integrating Social Media with Human-Centered Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Eric Baumer, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 213,875.00

The widespread adoption of wearable devices and social media is generating
population-scale data about people's behavior as situated in their everyday
lives. Prior research has shown how machine learning techniques can use such
data in modeling attributes of individuals' health and wellbeing; these
techniques are also promising additions to tools that support self monitoring
practices and health interventions outside of clinical contexts. However, most
such tools enable only simple mechanisms to review one's data, and require high
compliance from individuals actively volunteering relevant information. These
limitations prevent such tools from effectively supporting reflection, that is,
conscious re-examination of prior experiences to form new understanding.
Reflection is a key to improved health and health maintenance, and recent work
has shown the promise of data-driven health reflection. Effectively supporting
reflection, however, requires more sophistication than simply showing a patient
their data. This project will develop tools to support reflection for eating
disorders (ED) by combining voluntarily shared and unobtrusively gathered social
media data with strategic presentation of machine learning analyses. The
interface designs will meet the needs of multiple stakeholders: patients, family
members, and clinical partners. By doing so, the research will result in novel
mechanisms to support the treatment of ED, going beyond existing personal health
informatics tools by being sensitive to the complex psychological struggles of
ED patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will follow a multi-
phase process, interleaving the use of machine learning and human-centered
approaches. The first phase will seek to understand the current practices of
three stakeholders, patients, clinicians, and support network members, involved
in ED reflection. In the second phase, informed by those current practices, we
will develop theoretically-motivated, and psychometrically and clinically
validated, machine learning techniques to support ED inference and reflection
based on analysis of both textual and visual social media data. The third phase
will use participatory design methods to develop interactive tools that
encapsulate these machine learning techniques in order to support ED reflection
among the three stakeholders. This final phase will include evaluating these
tools through a field deployment to understand how they become embedded in and
affect current practices of ED reflection. These activities will lead to
complementary contributions in the areas of machine learning and of designing
for reflection, offering novel approaches to outstanding challenges surrounding
mental health and facilitating novel collaborations between computational and
clinical researchers. Broader implications of the research will include
conducting mental health outreach activities in the researchers' respective
campuses and facilitating the training of the next generation of cyber-human
researchers and professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.