* 1814958
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Summarizing Heterogeneous Crowdsourced &amp; Web Streams Using Uncertain Concept Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,953.00

Ubiquitous access to mobile and web technologies enables the public to share
valuable information about their surroundings anywhere and anytime. For example,
during an emergency or crisis people report needs from affected areas via social
media as an alternative to the traditional 911 calls. This can be valuable
information for a range of emergency service officials. However, the utilization
of this data poses several computational challenges as it is generated in real
time, is heterogeneous, highly unstructured, redundant, and sometimes
unreliable. This project innovates in two specific directions to alleviate the
challenges associated with large, streaming datasets during emergencies: (1) The
project investigates new summarization approaches to handle noisy, unstructured
data streams from multiple web sources in real time while accounting for the
possibility of untrustworthy information, so that they can be fed into decision
support systems of public services in a structured and machine-readable format.
(2) The project develops and validates robust decision support systems for
allocating critical resources to needed areas based on the structured summary
reports. The evaluation plan includes collaboration with emergency responders
and the communities they serve. The broader impacts of this research include the
design of a generic methodology to extract, integrate, and summarize structured
information from big data streams on the web for helping public services of
future smart cities. The research team plans to share simulated datasets with an
open source system for real-time decision support during emergency response
exercises. This can assist in workforce training and also, help design novel
educational projects of data science for social
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formally, this research project investigates the
theories behind a novel knowledge representation called Uncertain Concept Graph.
The graph contains heterogeneous nodes based on key concepts of an application
domain (e.g., regions, incidents, and information sources during a disaster).
The graph has heterogeneous edges connecting these concept nodes, based on the
inference of concept relationships using the extracted information from data
streams (e.g., Twitter and news sources). The structure of the graph evolves
over time and both nodes and edges can be added, deleted, or updated. An
equivalent Bayesian Network is derived from the Uncertain Concept Graph
describing the dependencies between the events captured in the graph at a given
time instance. Based on the relationship edges in a graph state and the
constructed Bayesian Network, an action recommendation system is created to
support an application domain task (e.g., dispatching ambulance resources to
incident-specific regions). To ensure robustness, this project develops and
validates a novel anomaly identification and diagnosis approach using mode
similarity to assess the correctness of current state of concept nodes and their
relationships in the Uncertain Concept Graph at any time. The research team uses
historical datasets of recent disasters to construct the graph and develop a
demo system for domain evaluation, in order to recommend actions in emergency
response for the city emergency services. The investigators are including the
lessons learned and methodologies developed in their respective course
curriculums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.