* 1814906
* SHF: Small: Models and Design Tools for Tethered Molecular Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Matthew Lakin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 458,000.00

Molecular computing devices detect input signals, including molecules indicative
of disease states, and carry out autonomous information processing tasks on
these inputs at the nanoscale. Recent work has explored the use of molecular
computing devices in which the computing components are tethered to a DNA
origami tile, with the layout of the components influencing their computational
functionality. Such devices have a number of advantages, including faster
computation times and the ability to reuse devices to scale up a circuit. This
project will develop computational models, algorithms, and software tools to
automate the design, implementation, and analysis of this new class of molecular
computing devices. The award will enable more reliable design of these systems,
providing enhanced guarantees that they will function as intended when
constructed in the laboratory. The software produced will be released to the
broader research community. The project will support training and education of
undergraduate and graduate students, and members of underrepresented groups will
take part via tracked science involvement programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
modeling and simulating molecular circuits involving tethered components, the
geometry of molecular interactions is of vital importance. This project will use
a novel representation of molecular structures via sets of geometric constraints
on variables that represent the physical positions of specific parts of the
structure. Finding a solution to these constraints corresponds to proving that
the specified structure can adopt the corresponding physical conformation. This
will be used as a filter to eliminate any tethered reactions for which the
resulting product structure could not actually form, for example, if the
reactants are too far apart to actually interact. These models will be tested
and parameterized by experimentally validating their predictions with wet lab
experiments, and novel designs for modular circuits will be developed as a proof
of concept. The developed algorithms will be implemented and distributed as
usable software tools that enable computer-aided design of tethered molecular
systems. Thus, the project will adapt established techniques from theoretical
computer science to handle the unique challenges of tethered molecular
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.