* 1814797
* CIF: SMALL: Toward a Molecular Computer: Scaling up Programmable single-molecule Junctions Based on DNA self-assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Risheng Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 365,999.00

The field of molecular electronics aims to exploit single-molecules as the main
building blocks for creating electronic circuitry. This would allow the
unprecedented miniaturization of computers and many electronics with enhanced
data transfer speed, storage efficacy, and signal processing. While some single
molecule- and carbon nanotube-transistors have been created, no complex and
functional electrical circuits have been fabricated. One fundamental challenge
in the fabrication of single-molecule electronics is to create a metal electrode
junction with nanometer gaps in a reliable, reproducible, and mass-producible
manner. The goal of this project is to discover ways to fabricate such junctions
using DNA-based origami nanostructures as templates. DNA based self-assembly has
the potential to dramatically decrease the manufacturing cost of electronic
devices compared with lithography techniques, while reducing the environmental
footprint. This project will provide interdisciplinary research training for
graduate and undergraduate students from computer science, biochemistry,
material science, to nanofabrication, which is relevant for industrial and
academic careers. Through "Outreach and Pre-college Programs" high school
students from minority backgrounds will participate in laboratory research and
take classes during the summer months to become acquainted with the fields of
computer science, engineering and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will use self-assembled DNA nanostructures as templates to organize
anisotropic nanoparticles into rationally-designed architectures with precisely
controlled position and orientation at the nanometer scale. This work will
provide a novel platform for fabricating scalable and cost-effective metallic
electrodes which could be used to: a) integrate multiple single-molecule
components in parallel, and b) study electron transferring of various molecules
in a reliable and reproducible manner. The research and findings constitute an
important step towards the fabrication of the new generation of integrated
molecular circuits for miniaturization of computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.