* 1814739
* CSR: Small: Dynamically Customizable Safety-Critical Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Christopher Gill, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 501,797.00

Major functionalities of many modern consumer products, such as smartphones are
largely defined by the software that runs upon them. Such functionalities are
typically customizable, and are often dynamic in the sense that they may be
modified via software updates over the lifetime of the device. This project will
extend the ability to perform such dynamic customization to safety-critical
systems as well, thereby enabling one to customize safety-critical embedded
systems and to extend their functionalities as and when a need arises for doing
so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main challenge in extending dynamic customizability
to safety-critical systems arises from the need to ensure the continued
correctness, both functional and temporal, of all components of a system upon
updating one or more components. This project seeks to meet this need by
combining formal methods, which are particularly well-suited to dealing with
functional correctness, with real-time scheduling theory, which primarily deals
with timing correctness. The major intellectual contribution of this project is
thus integrated consideration of formal methods and scheduling theory to develop
methodologies for enabling dynamic customizability in a safe and effective
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of dynamic customizability have been
made evident by its success in consumer products; the industrial applicability
of a framework allowing dynamic customizability of safety-critical systems is
potentially enormous, and the findings of this project will enable this.
Software implementing algorithmic findings will be made available on the project
web-site; all software produced for this project will be open-source. Results
obtained will be incorporated into technical publications, survey papers, and
perspectives articles. Teaching materials will be developed for relevant courses
at the project home institution, and shared with interested instructors
elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Publications, open-source software, and
teaching materials produced by this research will be made available to the
public on the web at URL https://sites.wustl.edu/dcsces/ and also will be
retained in an Subversion (SVN) repository at Washington University in St.
Louis, both for the duration of the project and for at least 5 years following
its completion. Digital artifacts needed to reproduce results of this research
also will be assigned Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) and archived in
Washington University's Open Scholarship web portal at
https://openscholarship.wustl.edu/ as well as being provided on the
https://sites.wustl.edu/dcsces/ project website along with their
DOIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.