* 1814007
* Collaborative Research: The Development of Computational Literacy through the Integration of Computational Thinking and Early Language and Literacy Development in Urban Preschools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Marisa Wolsky, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,172,590.00

Building on the current and growing interest in supporting young children
(especially those from underserved backgrounds) to think computationally, this
project will integrate storytelling and computational thinking. Computational
thinking in this setting includes knowledge such as finding patterns and
understanding logical sequencing that are essential for disciplines such as
mathematics and engineering. The project will conduct an exploratory research
process starting with understanding what computational thinking learning
opportunities already exist for children and how they can be integrated into
existing storytelling and literacy activities. Then the project will examine how
preschool children apply computational thinking while developing their narrative
skills (storytelling and understanding the structure of stories). The project
will also investigate how preschool children and their teachers make meaning of
experiences that are designed to foster computational thinking while composing
narratives. The project will design and adapt a new learning resource called The
Story Emporium and consisting of a touch-screen digital platform that children
can use to program their own stories, along with accompanying hands-on
activities and teacher scaffolds. Then, the project will investigate what
evidence of promise exists for the Story Emporium as a resource to support
children's use of computational thinking to solve their own challenges and to
develop their narrative competence in storytelling. The project is funded by the
STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address emerging challenges in
computational STEM areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning
in early childhood education through high school
(preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To conduct the research, a team of education
researchers, practitioners, and technology experts will collaborate on a co-
design process with preschool teachers, children, and field experts. Experts
from the fields of early childhood education, literacy, computational thinking
education, and the design of learning environments will collaborate on this
project. Modeled on Clements' (2007) Curriculum Research Framework, project
activities will begin with developing a model of the project's pedagogical
foundation, informed by a forum of experts and a review of literature. Then
exploratory research will investigate the opportunities to integrate
computational thinking and narrative development by observing educators and
preschool children during classroom activities for early literacy instruction.
The model of the project's pedagogical foundation will be revised based on
findings from the exploratory research. Finally, the project will use multiple
design cycles to develop computational literacy learning tasks and conduct
formative research on children's computational literacy and teachers'
instructional practices while iteratively developing and testing a learning
intervention (The Story Emporium). The project will also investigate the promise
of the intervention in cultivating preschoolers' computational literacy and
narrative competence. The research questions examine what aspects of
computational thinking are already present in children's practice with narrative
development and language followed by understanding the learning process when
children engage with a learning intervention designed to integrate computational
thinking and narrative literacy. The learning process will be supported by
designing tasks and a digital learning platform. Data to be collected include
qualitative data to document student learning, such as video observations,
transcript analysis, coding of students' work, and storyboarding tasks for
children. Students' knowledge will also be measured using a general literacy
measure, computational literacy tasks, a narrative comprehension test, and video
observations. Data from teachers will also include classroom observations,
interviews, and implementation logs when the educators use the learning
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.