* 1814487
* CIF: Small: Information Recovery Under Connectivity and Communication Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Alexander Barg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,502.00

Modern-day large-scale distributed storage systems store data on thousands of
storage nodes, and failure of individual nodes is everyday reality of the system
operation. Companies maintaining storage systems make provisions for node
failures, relying on erasure codes to ensure data integrity. While specialized
encoding methods developed in recent years involve minimum amount of inter-nodal
communication possible for such systems, most current solutions rely on the
common assumption of universal connectivity between the nodes. At the same time,
in many applications starting with Internet-of Things, connections between the
nodes are established based on physical proximity or similar features that
affect the ability of the nodes to communicate with each other or with the data
collector. With this in mind, this project investigates methods of data recovery
in systems with limited connectivity whereby the cost of data repair is governed
by the length of the path between the nodes, and therefore depends on the
topology of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to establish
fundamental limits of communication complexity of data recovery that account for
connectivity properties of the underlying network as well as to construct coding
methods that ensure data integrity against node failures, incorrect information,
or adversarial action that approach the bounds on the minimum possible amount of
communication. As an indicator of the network properties, the research conducted
in this project aims to investigate limits of data recovery in random networks
and to quantify thresholds between high-probability recovery and the
impossibility of recovery in random networks. This project also examines
algebraic constructions of codes that correct errors under communication
constraints including codes on algebraic curves, and optimal-repair codes for
the cooperative repair model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.