* 1814421
* Collaborative Research: Observing the Cosmic Evolution of Neutral Hydrogen
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Andrew Baker, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,900.00

Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, and neutral hydrogen
atoms are thus an important constituent of interstellar gas in galaxies, but
also one of the most challenging to study. The faintness of neutral hydrogen
emission means that it can only be detected beyond the nearby universe via long
observations with large telescopes. A new telescope with improved sensitivity,
the MeerKAT array, will examine how galaxies' neutral gas reservoirs have
evolved over two thirds of the universe's history (i.e., the last nine billion
years of cosmic time). It will determine how galaxies' neutral atomic hydrogen
content relates to the properties of their stars, their environments, and their
cosmic epochs. This will be compared with theoretical predictions in order to
understand how gas flows into and out of galaxies and forms new stars while
inside galaxies. The research will support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students at the four universities; graduate students will gain
additional experience in computation and statistics, research mentorship,
education in STEM disciplines, and outreach to a variety of
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This survey will probe neutral hydrogen (HI) in
emission to an unprecedentedly high redshift of z = 1.45. The combination of
individual and stacked HI detections, complemented by theoretical modelling,
multiwavelength observations, and a rich z = 0 reference dataset, will probe the
evolution of (i) the baryonic Tully-Fisher relation, (ii) the HI mass function,
and (iii) the dependence of galaxies' HI content on stellar and dark matter
properties. OH megamasers detected as strong line emitters in the MeerKAT data
will be used to place constraints on the cosmic history of gas-rich galaxy
mergers. Both the HI survey data and the instructional modules used to provide
student training will be publicly released as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.