* 1814832
* Diffusion in Stochastic Environments: Analysis and Biological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Sean Lawley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This project will develop and apply the mathematics of random motion to reveal
features of (i) how chemicals react inside a cell, (ii) how brain regions
communicate, and (iii) how insects breathe. These diverse applications are
united because they all involve the motion of small molecules (such as oxygen).
Because the molecules are so small, they move by an inherently random process
called diffusion. While theoretical work on diffusion dates back to Einstein and
others, the biology driving this project requires significant extensions to the
classical theory. In particular, this research will construct a mathematical
framework to calculate statistics of diffusion inside a randomly changing
environment, and the theoretical results and predictions will be compared to
empirical measurements. In addition, this project will train new mathematical
biologists since graduate students will be closely involved in the research.
Additionally this research and its biological applications will enrich pair of
new courses that the PI is developing: a graduate course on applied random
processes and a course on probability and statistics for secondary math
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to being widely applicable in
biology, diffusion in a random environment is a rich mathematical topic. It has
two complementary descriptions, either a randomly switching partial differential
equation (PDE) or a randomly switching stochastic differential equation (SDE).
In either case, the process combines two layers of randomness interacting across
spatial scales: Brownian motion at the particle level and a random environment.
Analyzing these processes will require combining tools from disparate areas of
mathematics to develop new mathematical machinery. In particular, the dual
PDE/SDE representation will allow for the combination of PDE methods and
probabilistic tools and elucidate new connections between these fields.
Furthermore, the mathematical results will provide the tools needed to model a
broad collection of biological systems. These models will in turn (i) transform
the understanding of a ubiquitous class of biochemical reactions, (ii) uncover
basic properties of an essential neural communication mechanism, and (iii)
answer a longstanding and fundamental question in insect physiology.
Furthermore, the combination of mathematical techniques pioneered in this
project will serve as a prototype for future investigations in stochastic
spatial processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.