* 1814375
* RUI: Clocking the formation of today's largest galaxies: Wide Field Integral Spectroscopy of Brightest Cluster Galaxies and their surroundings
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Louise Edwards, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2022
* USD 198,989.00

Mass in the universe is not smoothly distributed. Maps of nearby galaxies show
that they are clustered and that these clusters are separated by large voids,
where little matter is present. Each cluster has one galaxy that is the
brightest. Curiously, these Brightest Cluster Galaxies (BCGs) are often found at
the center of their host cluster, and often contain the oldest and reddest stars
around. One outstanding question in the field of extragalactic astronomy is the
following: How and when do galaxies build-up their mass? This project will
measure the ages and chemical compositions of BCGs from their cores to their
outskirts. It will also calculate how long it would take a BCG to grow by
merging with nearby systems. The results will help astronomers discriminate
between various galaxy evolution scenarios.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Imaging
spectroscopy (IFU) of 25 local cluster galaxies and their nearby companions will
be collected and analyzed. In addition to doubling the sample of IFU studied
BCGs and companions, wide field observations obtained from this work represent
the first spectroscopic study of a sample of intra-cluster light (ICL). Focusing
on the local universe means that its components can be studied in exquisite
detail. To help elucidate the nature of the BCG and its formation, the
objectives for the period of proposed work are to determine mechanisms and
timescales that govern stellar mass build-up in the sample. The main
deliverables include: 1) Maps of the kinematic properties and stellar
populations of the BCGs, the close companions and the ICL. The location of the
oldest and youngest stars within the galaxies can lend credence to whether or
not the galaxies formed inside out. Whether the BCG is coeval with the intra-
cluster light can be determined if the two have similar stellar populations, and
if the surface brightness profile breaks; 2) Estimates of the timescale and
relative contribution to the recent stellar mass buildup of BCGs and the ICL
from major and minor mergers; 3) Constraints on the amount of any new or ?in
situ? stellar mass buildup. This can be determined by examining the stellar
populations, from searching for wet minor merging, or looking for cooling from a
hot halo. Determining the properties of these local systems will provide
powerful constraints for cosmological models and will form an important
comparison sample for higher-redshift BCGs already being compiled.
Undergraduates will be heavily involved in every aspect of this project. Through
performing their research with cutting edge data, visiting a national
observatory site, and presenting their work to colleagues they will experience
training in the technical and social skills required to enter STEM fields as
graduate students or in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.