* 1814679
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Enabling Precise and Automated Insecurity Analysis of Middleware on Mobile Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Peng Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 165,495.00

During the past decade, middleware on mobile platforms (such as the Application
Framework in Android and the Core Services layer in iOS) has been flourishing,
but the insecurity analysis of such middleware has been lagging behind. For
example, while comprehensive studies have been conducted at the application
layer of the Android system, there is very limited work analyzing the Android
Application Framework (Android Framework, for short), a middleware layer in the
Android system. The two billion Android mobile devices and the many Android
Things devices all rely on the system services provided by Android Framework.
Recently, many vulnerabilities of Android Framework are exposed, showing that
Android Framework is vulnerable and exploitable. Given the critical role of
Android Framework, a vulnerability in the framework can be exploited to launch
large-scale cyber attacks and cause serious harms to user security and privacy.
However, the insecurity analysis of Android Framework has been rather ad hoc,
imprecise, and requires much manual effort, mainly because there is a severe
lack of techniques and tools developed for insecurity analysis of such
middleware on mobile platforms (MoMP). This research project seeks to fill the
gap by developing new techniques and tools for insecurity analysis of MoMP like
Android Framework and consequently lead to more secure and trustworthy computing
environments for the huge number of smartphone and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
device users. Educational resources developed in this project, including course
modules on mobile computing security and vulnerability discovery, will be
disseminated through a dedicated web site. Collaborations with the industry will
be sought to transfer the technology to interested software companies and
government entities that perform insecurity analysis of
MoMP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new architectural designs,
algorithms and techniques for precise and automated insecurity analysis of MoMP.
To make the research concrete, demonstrations will be created for the Android
Framework for mobile smartphones, tablets and IoT devices, and the first
platform for precise and automated insecurity analysis of Android Framework will
be built, combining current software analysis techniques, such as symbolic
execution, hybrid dynamic/static analysis, and cross-process and cross-layer
software analysis, to make them capable of analyzing complex and large-sized
MoMP like Android Framework. The platform will be evaluated and applied to
discovering various types of zero-day vulnerabilities and generating proof-of-
concept exploits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.