* 1814654
* SHF: Small: The Whole Program Critical Path Approach to Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* David August, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Multicore processors are everywhere, from the smartphones in our pockets to
compute nodes in data centers. The key to speed and energy efficiency in devices
with multicore processors is in finding enough parallelism in computer programs
to keep as many of the multiple cores active as possible. Historically, both
computers and people have not been very good at finding enough parallelism for
multicore processors. This leaves many cores idle, making multicore devices slow
and inefficient. This project addresses this problem by helping computers and
people extract previously unconsidered parallelism, parallelism that the
investigator and others have shown to exist but is hidden because it spans large
portions of the whole program. The project's novelties are new methods and tools
to help computers and people extract this previously unconsidered parallelism in
programs for multicore processors. The project's impacts are increased
performance and energy efficiency for all multicore devices, from smartphones to
data centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work by the investigator and others
demonstrated the applicability and importance of considering the loop critical
path in extracting scalable parallelism from loops. Despite the successes of the
loop critical path approach, it misses many opportunities, and its gains seem to
have plateaued. The problem is that optimal loop-local decisions often dismiss
opportunities revealed by considering the whole program critical path. To
realize these opportunities, this project goes beyond loop-level optimization by
applying the lessons learned in earlier critical-path-based approaches to entire
programs. This project's aim is a dramatically higher degree of parallelism
realized by exploiting concurrency across loop invocations and through non-loop
sections of programs. This project's tasks include analyzing information from
dynamic data dependences to expose the whole program critical path, making this
information readily accessible to both compilers and programmers, and guiding
new compiler transformations to create even more scalable and efficient parallel
versions of programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.