* 1814898
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Program Analysis and Transformations for Secure Computation on the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ana Milanova, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 483,038.00

Cloud service providers offer a wide range of data storage and computation
products. Customers increasingly outsource data and computation to third-party
cloud providers. However, when customers upload their data to the cloud
provider, they relinquish data confidentiality. As countless recent events
attest, securing data and computation is a problem of tremendous importance.
This project explores whether customers can take advantage of inexpensive,
efficient, and convenient cloud services, including computation, while
preserving to some extent data confidentiality, and retaining efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds new program analyses that mitigate the
impact of data conversion, and transform programs to compute securely using
these methods. This research leverages prior work on SecureMR, a system that
automatically transforms a MapReduce program into one that works over encrypted
data on a public cloud. This project addresses a key issue with SecureMR,
namely, that a single trusted client is bound to limit scalability of highly
parallel MapReduce programs. This project envisions program analyses and
transformations that split work between two cloud systems, and explores key
challenges in building models and analyses that guarantee confidentiality of
data such that neither system can reconstruct the original plaintext input data.
The project develops SecureMR-2PC, based on 2-party computation (2PC), which
splits input data into shares among two clouds, to avoid leakage of aggregate
data and achieve provable privacy guarantees. Additionally, the project develops
novel program analysis techniques that reason about sharing protocols to improve
efficiency of multi-party computation. The project builds a comprehensive
benchmark suite of MapReduce programs to facilitate research on secure
computation on the cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.