* 1814370
* CDS&amp;E: Reconstruction of universe's initial conditions with galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Uros Seljak, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 520,827.00

The universe evolved from a simple state where matter was almost uniformly
distributed in space. In the present day the matter is very strongly clustered
into galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and even larger structures. This evolution
is governed by gravity and by additional processes such as formation of stars in
galaxies. There is enormous amount of information about the universe origins,
content, and future evolution hidden in the galaxy distribution. This
information is difficult to access in the present-day form because it has been
scrambled by gravity and other processes. The goal of this project is to use
simulations to reconstruct the initial conditions of our universe. When these
are evolved in time with known laws of physics, they give rise to our visible
universe. Ultimately this will allow a movie to made of our universe starting
from the initial smooth distribution and ending in images of actual galaxies
such as the Hubble Deep Field. A major benefit of this method is that
information about our universe can be simply extracted from the initial
conditions. More broadly, an aim of this project is to impact other communities
where similar problems arise such as machine learning via the methods and tools
developed &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to develop
and apply a new set of theoretical and computational instruments, including new
statistical methods, algorithms, and computational implementations, to optimally
reconstruct the initial condition of our universe from the spatial distribution
of galaxies. Galaxies are a primary probe of the large scale structure of the
universe that are or will be observed by surveys such as the Sloan Digital Sky
Survey (SDSS), the Dark Energy Survey (DES), the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
(LSST), the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI), EUCLID and the Wide
Field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST). This project will extend a
hierarchical probabilistic generative model developed by the PI's team to the
modelling of galaxies. The framework attempts to solve an exact probabilistic
model for the initial conditions that is conditioned on the data with a process
that combines elements of numerical optimization in high dimensions and analytic
marginalization to find the best solution and their covariance matrix. The
proposed research will apply this method to galaxy redshift catalogs and their
surrounding dark matter information inferred from weak lensing. The method will
be developed using realistic simulations of both dark matter and of galaxies
populated in the dark matter and hydro simulations, before being applied to real
data. This research will explore best methods to achieve fast convergence in the
search for local and global minimum and aims to have an impact more broadly to
research areas (e.g. neural networks) outside astronomy in the tools developed
for non-convex optimization in very high dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.