* 1814322
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Lightweight Adaptive Algorithms for Network Optimization at Scale towards Emerging Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 227,745.00

The past decade has witnessed enormous transformations of information
technologies. The era of cloud computing transformed how information is
delivered. With more and more devices becoming ``smarter'' and ``plugged'' into
the Internet (through embedded microprocessors and communication chipsets), we
are entering into a new era of ``Internet of Things'' (IoT) and cyber-physical
systems where the cyber world and physical world are increasingly integrated
through a variety of sensors and actuators that are planted into the physical
world but controlled through the cyber world. Both today's cloud services and
emerging IoT applications alter the point-to-point communication paradigm of the
existing IP Internet architecture, and require increasingly demanding quality-
of-service (QoS) requirements. These requirements call for scalable and
intelligent network algorithms for controlling and coordinating various network
components and managing and optimizing resource allocations, with capabilities
1) to meet ever stringent availability, reliability and QoS requirements
demanded by emerging services; 2) to cope with the enormous complexity of
networked systems; 3) to effectively exploit the rich diversity and redundancy
inherent in such complex systems as well as the new capabilities offered by new
networking architectures and technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
puts forth a three-plane view of networking as a conceptual framework to
structure network functions and guide us in the network algorithmic designs for
timely, resilient and resource-efficient information delivery: 1) an information
plane capturing application semantics and requirements; 2) a (logically)
centralized control plane; and 3) a distributed (programmable) communication
(data) plane. This project postulates two design principles and challenges in
network algorithms: a) the need for co-design of centralized and distributed
network algorithms that can take advantage of a centralized control plane with a
global view of the network state, while also enabling the distributed
(programmable) network elements to make fast and intelligent decisions to adapt
to the changes in the network conditions (e.g., failures); and b) the need for
just-in-time (near) optimality as a key metric to gauge and guide the design of
network algorithms for timely, resilient and resource-efficient information
delivery. The goal of the proposed project is to develop scalable, lightweight,
and adaptive algorithms for scalable and intelligent network control and
optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on new network algorithms will
contribute to the development of new networking technologies. The project will
actively involve undergraduate students - especially female students and
underrepresented minorities in the research project, e.g., via NSF REU grants as
well as senior design courses and the Undergraduate Research Opportunity
Programs at the PIs' institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.