* 1814388
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Practical methods for detecting  access permission vulnerabilities caused by sysadmin's configuration errors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yuanyuan Zhou, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

As data center systems become ever so complex, it has been ever so daunting for
system administrators to configure various permission correctly without
accidentally opening up permissions for unintended users (and also malicious
users) and resulting in catastrophic security disasters. Since data centers have
been used to store and manage data not only for financial, business,
communication, but also our daily life such as emails, photos, even home
appliances and automobile data, it has become ever so important to prevent human
errors (system administrator errors) in access permission configurations to
avoid security attacks and privacy leaks. This project will develop new methods
to detect and prevent permission configuration errors. The project will involve
various educational and outreach activities for students, especially women
students in computer science; the investigator has been a role model and a
mentor for women high school students, undergraduates, graduates and junior
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this access-control misconfigurations
problem, the project has three main objectives: (i) providing sysadmins with
precise, complete information, (ii) detecting suspicious accesses after access
permission changes and (iii) eliminating access-control configuration mistakes.
These three objectives will be achieved by using a combination of static program
analysis, binary instrumentation, profiling, static and quantitative methods,
decision tree machine learning, software testing, etc. The proposed research
includes the following three synergistic thrusts: (1) Informative Logging for
Access Permission-Related Errors. (2) Intelligent monitoring and detection of
suspicious accesses. (3) Holistic Cross-component Access-Control Management. The
three thrusts together well cover the important security problem that has never
been addressed by prior work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.