* 1814825
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: A Framework for Enhancing the Resilience of Cyber Attack Classification and Clustering Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Shouhuai Xu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2021
* USD 499,997.00

Classification and clustering are two important classes of machine learning
techniques that have been widely used for cyber defense purposes. However, these
mechanisms can be defeated by intelligent evasion attacks, such as Adversarial
Machine Learning. Currently, there are no effective countermeasures against
these sophisticated attacks. The objective of the project is to investigate
effective countermeasures to make classification and clustering mechanisms
robust against intelligent evasion attacks. The scientific contributions of the
project include advancing our understanding of the feasibility and impact of
evasion attacks, and the design of machine learning algorithms that are robust
against such attacks. Since machine learning techniques are widely employed in
many other areas such as real-world fraud and crime detection, those areas would
benefit from this project too. The project will involve PhD students who will
directly contribute to the next-generation workforce and will address diversity
by involving female students and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to achieve its goal by
investigating a more powerful class of attacks, called gray-box attacks, than
the traditional black-box attacks investigated in the literature. In the gray-
box attack model, the attacker can perform all the activities that a defender
would normally perform. The project will build a theoretical model and framework
for characterizing the vulnerability and resilience of classification and
clustering mechanisms with respect to intelligent evasion attacks under the
gray-box model, enhance classification and clustering mechanisms to withstand
intelligent evasion attacks with quantifiable resilience
gains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.