* 1814910
* Supernova Shock Wave and Radiative Interactions
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Roger Chevalier, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2023
* USD 359,701.00

Supernovae (SNe) are explosions that end the lives of massive stars. They are
important to study since supernovae seed the galaxy with atomic elements made in
the star and in the explosion, and they help astronomers to understand how stars
evolve and die. One of the ways astronomers study supernovae is by observing how
the matter ejected in the SNe interacts with the gaseous material surrounding
the star, producing a shock wave. In order to help to interpret such
observations, a research team at the University of Virginia will carry out a
program to investigate the interaction of a supernova with a dense circumstellar
medium. Their study will include hydrodynamic computer simulations, modeling of
energy transfer in the form of electromagnetic radiation, and calculations of
physical conditions in the shock. By better defining the nature of the
circumstellar media involved in these events, this research seeks to fill gaps
in stellar evolution theory. The principal investigator will give annual public
lectures at the McCormick Observatory, near the university, as well as talks for
elderly persons given at accessible sites. A graduate student and an
undergraduate student will be involved in the research and will learn techniques
used in theoretical astrophysics, as well as ways of approaching open questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to investigate the interaction
of a supernova with a dense, possibly optically thick, circumstellar medium. The
physical conditions are more extreme than ordinarily encountered in supernova
interactions and the structure of the mass loss region is probably complex. The
researchers will develop diagnostics for the conditions in and structure of the
interaction. Specific topics that will be addressed include the shock wave
structure and hydrodynamic instabilities when cooling is important, consistent
models for X-ray and ultraviolet/optical shock emission, pre-shock ionization
and emission, nonthermal particles and radio emission and absorption, and
infrared emission from the radiative heating of dust. The models will be
compared to multiwavelength observations, from radio to X-rays. The research
will relate the findings for observed interacting supernovae to plausible
mechanisms for driving the pre-supernova mass loss. Supernovae that have narrow
line characteristics are inferred to have a dense, slow moving circumstellar
medium. These characteristics are observed over a broad range of supernova
types, including those with and without hydrogen lines, superluminous
supernovae, supernovae with Type Ia characteristics, and possible low energy
supernovae. For these events, neither the mechanism driving the mass loss nor
the timing with the supernova is understood, although narrow line supernovae
make up about 9% of Type II supernovae. By better defining the nature of the
circumstellar media involved in these events, this research seeks to fill gaps
in stellar evolution theory. In addition, aspects of the physical processes in
dense media should be more broadly applicable, for example to the dense media in
active galactic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.