* 1814537
* NeTS: Small: RUI: Automating Active Measurement Metadata Collection and Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Joel Sommers, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 146,189.00

The extraordinary growth of Internet connectivity and bandwidth has helped to
fuel economic activity, educational opportunities, and social connections around
the world. The network research community has continued to play a critical role
in assessing current Internet performance and in using measurements of network
performance and behavior toward the design of new and improved infrastructure,
protocols, and applications. Even with advances in network performance
measurement techniques over the years, however, it is easily possible for
measurements to exhibit bias or otherwise be error-ridden. The primary objective
of this project is to develop methods for capturing important contextual
information about a network performance measurement experiment and to create
algorithms to assess whether the measurements exhibit bias or other problems.
Extensive experiments will be carried out in both a campus network and in the
wide-area Internet to evaluate the tools developed through this project. The
outcomes of this project will potentially improve the quality and
reproducibility of performance measurements produced through efforts such as the
Federal Communication Committee?s (FCC's) Measuring Broadband America as well as
other prominent network measurement efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical
research in the Internet is fraught with challenges. Perhaps chief among these
is that local environmental conditions (e.g., central processing unit (CPU) load
or network load) can introduce unexpected bias or artifacts that can lead to
poor measurement quality and erroneous conclusions. This project will
investigate and develop new methods for automatic collection of metadata and
calibration data for network measurement experiments and create algorithms for
detecting and potentially correcting for bias in the measurement data.
Collection of metadata for measurement methods that target all layers of the
protocol stack will be addressed through this project, such as latency (ping),
routing (traceroute), TCP throughput, and application-level performance
measurements. The tools developed through this project will be deployed for
extensive experimentation in a campus network as well in a widely-used platform
to evaluate and improve their performance and operational capabilities. The
tools will be made openly available to the research community and will be
designed for lightweight operation on a variety of target computing platforms
and thus be broadly deployable. Best-practices documentation will be created and
published to facilitate optimal use of the tools and algorithms developed
through our research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods, algorithms, and
software developed through this project will provide Internet measurement
researchers with a toolbox for collecting and analyzing metadata and the
associated data from experiments. These techniques will potentially improve
confidence in the use of network measurement data not only by the researcher who
captures the data, but by others who may eventually use the data. They will also
enhance scientific reproducibility by providing portable, independent, and
scalable methods to capture important contextual information about experiments.
The tools and methods developed through this project will potentially improve
the quality of measurements and outcomes produced through efforts such as the
FCC's Measuring Broadband America, which directly serves the national interest
through the progress of science. Lastly, undergraduate students will be involved
in all stages of the research, providing them with invaluable extracurricular
experiences, and inspiring them to pursue careers in science and engineering, a
goal which also serves the national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.