* 1814406
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Super-Human Cryptanalysis for Scalable Side-Channel Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Berk Sunar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The project takes the rapidly evolving advances in deep learning and applies
them in the context of side-channel analysis (SCA). Finding SCA leakages on real
devices can be a tedious process, resulting devices ranging from wearables to
embedded Internet of Things (IoT) devices entering the marketplace without
proper protection. This project explores ways to automate side-channel security
analysis using deep learning techniques. To protect devices against SCA, the
project also explores a novel approach to countermeasure design by applying the
concept of adversarial learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCA is essentially one
complex statistical signal processing problem, which deep learning is ideally
suited to solve. The project systematically quantifies the impact of deep
learning on SCA by applying deep learning methods to all necessary steps in SCA,
namely alignment, noise reduction, feature extraction and model building.
Meaningful parameter sets for a representative list of reference targets are
explored. The project also adapts adversarial learning techniques to counteract
optimized side-channel information recovery, thereby inventing an entirely new
class of side-channel countermeasures, where machine learning adaptively shapes
leakage signals to prevent correct classification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCA
analysis and protection tools explored in this project will be invaluable for
the health of our national computing and communications infrastructure. They
will be released as an easy-to-use open-source toolbox. Furthermore, the project
provides new insights and training for the next generation of experts at the
intersection of two critical technologies, i.e. artificial intelligence and
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information on the project, including
important data and developed code, is available at:
http://v.wpi.edu/research/superhuman, until circa
2026.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.