* 1814993
* An Astronomical Time Machine: Light Echoes from Historic Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Charles Kilpatrick, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2024
* USD 324,176.00

The investigator has discovered a way to study the 3-dimensional (3D) properties
of a Supernova (SN), by observing SN light that only now reaches Earth, after
bouncing off dust filaments. These light echoes provide a unique opportunity in
astronomy: direct observation of the cause (the explosion) as well as the effect
(the expanded remnant) of the same astronomical event. Because the light echoes
come from many directions around the supernovae, a 3D model of the event can be
constructed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan public outreach talks,
video summaries of their research and citizen science opportunities for the
public. The light echoes are novel events and are naturally great introductions
to the history of astronomy, light travel time, SN explosion physics, and the
advantage of spectroscopy compared to historical brightness measurements. They
are developing interactive learning materials available for introductory
undergraduates. They have an exciting Citizen Science plan, which enables the
public to learn the scientific process by identifying new light echoes in their
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3D model is valuable because modern
theoretical work suggests that asymmetry may be a critical ingredient in the SN
explosion mechanism. The investigators will expand their program to regularly
observe 6 historical SN events. They will observe with the NSF?s Blanco
telescope, a large telescope, with a 4-meter aperture size. The 3-degree square
field of view, combined with the fast 20 second readout of DECam, this the ideal
telescope for this search. Since their targets are generally older than already
detected supernovae, they expect the targets to be slightly fainter. They will
produce many 5 minute duration images a night. They will use computers
programmed for machine learning to identify echoes. They will compare their
machine learning results with Citizen Science analysis of the same
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.