* 1814928
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Harvesting Wasted Time and Existing Circuitry for Efficient Field Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Dworak, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 391,769.00

Digital integrated circuits (ICs) are the "brains" in the electronic devices
used throughout modern society. It is essential that these devices work
correctly and reliably - especially in critical applications such as autonomous
vehicles, infrastructure, the financial system, and health care. In such
applications, highly effective and efficient testing should be done in the field
to identify problems that may arise after the device has been sent to the
customer. Thus, in this project, new ways of using circuitry already present on
modern ICs while efficiently creating, applying, and transporting field-based
tests to different parts of the chip will be investigated. At the same time,
educational opportunities made possible through the project will be pursued,
including the use of research findings in courses, the involvement of graduate
and undergraduate students in the research, and outreach to high school students
through summer camps and research opportunities. The inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups in these educational opportunities will be a focus of
the investigators, who already have a proven record in mentoring such students
in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the field-testing issues, three
major tasks will be performed in this research. First, methods that use existing
error-detection circuitry in an IC to make the field testing process more
efficient will be explored. In particular, times when the IC is operating in
normal functional mode will be used to test for the presence of some faults.
Testing for those same faults in dedicated test sessions can then be avoided,
reducing test time and the amount of time a circuit must be taken offline for
test. Next, methods for effectively using otherwise wasted time during dedicated
test sessions to detect faults will be explored. Finally, approaches that
optimize the internal test network to efficiently send data used for test
throughout a chip will be investigated. Taken together, these approaches should
enable field-based test to achieve high fault coverage while minimizing test
time, thus enhancing the reliability of devices that so many people depend upon
every day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.