* 1814369
* NSF-BSF:  SHF: Small: Certifiable Verification of Large Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Clark Barrett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 480,924.00

Software systems play important roles in almost every area of modern life. In
order to reduce the difficulty of developing new software, research in the field
of artificial intelligence (AI) has been promoting a new model of programming:
instead of having a human engineer design and code algorithms, a set of training
examples are used together with machine-learning algorithms to automatically
extrapolate software implementations. In classical programing, because such code
is written by humans, we can persuade others that it is correct. In machine-
learned systems, however, the program amounts to a highly complex mathematical
formula for transforming inputs into outputs. The key difficulty, however, is
that it is not possible currently to reason about correctness in such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this issue by developing an
algorithm, called Reluplex, capable of proving properties of deep neural
networks (DNNs) or providing counter-examples if the properties fail to hold.
The project has three main objectives. First, the investigators develop
algorithmic techniques to greatly reduce the number of states that need to be
explored by a verification tool. Second, they develop a strategy for producing
checkable verification proofs. Checkable correctness proofs make it unnecessary
to rely on correctness of the verification tool; one can instead rely only on
the correctness of a small trusted proof-checker. Finally, the investigators
implement this approach in an open-source tool and evaluate it on real-world
industrial DNNs. Given that AI components are becoming ubiquitous in safety-
critical systems, such as autonomous vehicles, this research will increase trust
in these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.