* 1814298
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Data Popularity in Distributed Storage Systems via Constrained Design Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Charles Colbourn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,475.00

Recent years have witnessed a surge of large-scale distributed storage system
implementations and accompanying data analyses and coding methods that enable
their reliable, secure and low-delay operation. Nevertheless, in many system
studies, important data demand (popularity) features which have a strong bearing
on system access control, private information retrieval and computational
complexity have been largely overlooked. This can be attributed in part to the
fact that most cloud storage facilities employ different storage platforms for
hot and cold data, thereby partly addressing problems associated with variable
data demands. But even within the hot and cold data categories there exist
significant variations in data popularity that create many nontrivial system
design challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, the proposed
research program aims to develop a new family of mathematical objects termed
constrained designs and Steiner systems in particular. Designs represent finite
collections of subsets of a ground set whose elements satisfy predefined
symmetry constraints with respect to set intersections and arrangements.
Elements of a design are associated with data chunks, while subsets of elements
represent data chunks to be stored on the same disk or server; given their
simplicity and rich mathematical structure, designs have been used with great
success in many practical distributed storage system platforms. In the presence
of nonuniform demands for objects and data files, intersection constraints alone
fail to ensure underlying implementation constraints. Consequently, elements
have to be equipped with nonnegative popularity values, and the underlying
combinatorial designs modified to satisfy additional algebraic and frequency
constraints enforced by data popularity values. This new model leads to a unique
collection of challenging mathematical problems regarding constructions of
weighted and labeled combinatorial designs. Particular problems to be considered
include developing designs for balanced server access, private information
retrieval in the presence of popularity side information and transversal designs
for labeled batch codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.