* 1814664
* Iterative Methods in Analysis of Periodic and Almost Periodic Structures in Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Ioulia Karpechina, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2022
* USD 320,877.00

This project is devoted to furthering the theoretical understanding of an
important class of solids and of the new state of matter (Bose-Einstein
Condensate, BEC) that have a wide range of engineering and physical
applications. For a long time, most of materials studied by Solid State Physics
consisted either of periodic arrays of atoms or were amorphous (glasses).
However, in the last decades a new class of solid state matter, called aperiodic
crystals (or quasicrystals), has been found. An aperiodic crystal is a long
range ordered structure, but without strict lattice periodicity. It is found in
a wide range of materials: organic and inorganic compounds, minerals, metallic
alloys and even some proteins. So far, quasicrystals found applications in the
design of surgical instruments, LED lights, etc., and the list is growing. For
the periodic and almost periodic materials, the goal of the project is to
contribute to the fundamental problem in Solid State Physics of explaining the
connections between micro (quantum mechanical) structures of solids and their
macro properties. The third line of research in this project is aimed at a
theoretical study of behavior of BEC (that was first predicted theoretically by
Bose and Einstein in 1924, but was not produced experimentally until 1995).
While quantum phenomena are exhibited on very small micro-scales, and on large
macro-scales nature is well described by classical, Newtonian mechanics, for a
BEC macroscopic quantum phenomena become apparent. There is a long list of
potential applications of BEC, including quantum information and quantum
computer. Several graduate students will be involved in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of rigorous study of topics in quasi-
periodic Schroedinger operators in dimension 2 and higher, the goals of the
project include proof of existence of extended quantum states at high energies,
investigation of quantum transport associated with such operators, and also
analysis of properties of solutions to the stationary Gross-Pitaevskii equation
at high energies. The central analytical method to be used is a multiscale
analysis in the momentum space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.