* 1814520
* Transmission pathways and immunological factors driving invasion potential of the recently discovered pathogen, Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Matthew Gray, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,494,511.00

The recently discovered fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans
(Bsal) is believed to be from Asia and was likely introduced into Europe through
international trade, where it is emerging in fire salamander (Salamandra
salamandra) populations. Bsal is a flesh-eating pathogen that causes necrotic
skin ulcerations and can lead to death in susceptible salamanders in less than 2
weeks. Emergence of this pathogen in the United States would have devastating
effects on biodiversity. Eastern North America is home to more than 100
salamander species that contribute to various ecosystem services, including
control of disease-causing insects, nutrient cycling, and biomedical products
for society. This award will fund research that will characterize the
epidemiology, host immune responses, and pathogenesis of Bsal in one of the most
widely distributed salamander species in North America, the eastern newt
(Notophthalmus viridescens). By taking a proactive approach to studying Bsal
now, this project will generate essential information aimed at developing
predictive disease response tools that can be used by natural resource
organizations to prevent or thwart an outbreak of Bsal in North America.
Additionally, this project will provide broad training opportunities and
capacity building for students and professionals at US academic institutions,
agencies and organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current knowledge of Bsal
epidemiology is restricted mostly to European fire salamanders, which have
different life history strategies than most North American salamander species.
This project will parameterize Bsal epidemiological models using controlled
experiments with adult and juvenile eastern newts that will: (1) include
transmission pathways in both the aquatic and terrestrial environments for a
range of ambient temperatures, (2) consider two unique forms of infectious Bsal
zoospores, (3) identify the role of zoospore persistence in water and soil, and
factors that affect it, (4) explicitly model zoospore shedding and between-host
transmission as disease progresses, and (5) include a recovery stage as an
infection outcome. The project also will quantify innate and adaptive immune
responses to Bsal, identify the mechanisms of Bsal pathogenesis, and
parameterize integral projection models that explore the impacts of host
resistance and infection tolerance on salamander-Bsal dynamics. This award will
significantly advance the foundational knowledge of Bsal epidemiology,
immunology, and pathology, and will provide the basis for science-derived
disease intervention strategies that are generalizable across similar at-risk
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.