* 1814172
* AF: Small: New Directions in Geometric Shortest Paths
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Subhash Suri, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,876.00

Shortest paths and reachability are fundamental problems with a long and
distinguished history in computer science and mathematics. Due to growing
integration of cyber and physical worlds through the Internet-of-Things (IoT),
an increasing amount of data processing entails geometric models, and an ever
growing set of smart mobile devices can interact with, and affect, the
environment in which they operate - from self-driving cars to autonomous robots.
Addressing the needs of these applications, this project explores new directions
for shortest paths in geometric domains, organized around the following two
broad themes: (1) improving shortest paths by removal of some path-blocking
obstacles, and (2) searching for a randomized prize. The specific research
topics of the project are novel, yet the general theme touches on many classical
problems in geometry, combinatorial optimization, probability theory, decision
science and search. The project significantly broadens the scope, applicability
and relevance of geometric algorithms to search and planning in continuous
spaces, by incorporating strategic intervention and planning under uncertainty.
The fundamental nature of topics addressed in this project is likely to appeal
to a broad set of students with diverse backgrounds, both graduate and
undergraduate. The material generated from this project will be integrated into
multiple courses on algorithms and computational geometry, including the
investigator's newly launched Foundations of Data Science
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is centered around two research topics.
The first topic deals with the following question of reachability: can one reach
a target position from an initial position. When this is possible, the goal is
to compute a feasible path, or perhaps the shortest one. The focus of the
project is the "if not" side of this question, which is often left unattended.
Specifically, if no feasible path exists, or the shortest path is unacceptably
long, how many and which obstacles should be removed? This form of reachability
augmentation in geometric domains is both fundamental and intellectually
exciting, with many surprising twists and turns. The solution quality and the
algorithmic efficiency critically depend on the geometry of the workspace and
model assumptions: are obstacles convex or non-convex? Are obstacles disjoint or
overlapping? Is the removal cost the same for all obstacles or different? The
second topic proposes a novel framework for problems in which one tries a
sequence of alternatives in search for a prize (favorable outcome), where each
outcome is determined by a random trial. Computing combinatorial structures,
such as shortest paths, in the presence of such random events poses significant
intellectual challenges, and the project research contributes to an important
body of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.