* 1814507
* CSR: Small: Replication in the Cloud Era
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Manos Kapritsos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 497,223.00

Modern life depends on computers, but 24/7 availability that people expect is
hard to achieve. Computers are far from infallible and frequently crash. To
prevent such failures from disrupting essential services, the research community
has spent the last 40 years developing fault-tolerance techniques, which allow
services to continue uninterrupted despite failures. These techniques have
served us well and are the main reason behind the seamless services we enjoy
today. For all their merits, however, our fault-tolerance techniques have a
fundamental design flaw. They were designed for standalone services: services
which execute on a single machine and do not need to interact with other
services. However, such standalone services are becoming increasingly uncommon
in today's computing, where large systems consist of multiple interacting
components. In this brave new world, our existing fault-tolerance techniques no
longer work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to improve fault-tolerance
for such interacting services and has three main goals. (1) Establish a
framework to simplify the interactions between services. (2) Restore
correctness, by rethinking how we employ advanced techniques, like speculative
execution. (3) Focus on optimizing performance by investigating ways to
implement such interactions efficiently. Achieving these three goals will enable
practical implementations of fault-tolerance in today's large-scale systems,
which is the key to ensuring that we can continue to enjoy seamless services in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now that our systems are too large to be
implemented as a single service, fault-tolerant techniques must adapt to avoid
becoming obsolete. This project aims to steer future academic efforts on fault
tolerance away from standalone services and towards a more practical setting. In
doing so, it aims to strengthen the ties between academia and industry by having
them strive towards this new, common goal: replication in the cloud
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.