* 1814194
* Building Middle School Students' Understanding of Heredity and Evolution
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Louisa Stark, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,607,570.00

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This project will develop and test the impact of heredity and
evolution curriculum units for middle school grades that are aligned with the
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). The project will advance science
teaching by investigating the ways in which two curriculum units can be designed
to incorporate science and engineering practices, cross-cutting concepts, and
disciplinary core ideas, the three dimensions of science learning described by
the NGSS. The project will also develop resources to support teachers in
implementation of the new modules. The planned research will also examine
whether student understanding of evolution depends on the length and time of
exposure to learning about heredity prior to learning about evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early Stage Design and Development project will
develop two new 3-week middle school curriculum units, with one focusing on
heredity and the other focusing on evolution. The units will include embedded
formative and summative assessment measures and online teacher support
materials. These units will be developed as part of a curriculum learning
progression that will eventually span the elementary grades through high school.
This curriculum learning progression will integrate heredity, evolution, data
analysis, construction of scientific explanations, evidence-based argumentation,
pattern recognition, and inferring cause and effect relationships. To inform
development and iterative revisions of the units, the project will conduct
nation-wide beta and pilot tests, selecting schools with broad ranges of student
demographics and geographical locations. The project will include three rounds
of testing and revision of both the student curriculum and teacher materials.
The project will also investigate student understanding of evolution in terms of
how their understanding is impacted by conceptual understanding of heredity. The
research to be conducted by this project is organized around three broad
research questions: (a) In what ways can two curriculum units be designed to
incorporate the three dimensions of science learning and educative teacher
supports to guide students' conceptual understanding of heredity and evolution?
(b) To what extent does student understanding of evolution depend on the length
and timing of heredity lessons that preceded an evolution unit? And (c) In what
ways do students learn heredity and evolution?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.