* 1814221
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Multivariate Public Key Cryptosystems - Candidates for the Next Generation Post-Quantum Standards
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Seungki Kim, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Public-key cryptosystems, a revolutionary breakthrough in cryptography, are
indispensable for our modern communication network. The Internet, as well as
other communication systems, rely principally on public-key cryptosystems that
depend for security on the difficulty of certain number-theoretic problems such
as integer factorization or the "discrete log problem." However, it is now known
that a quantum computer could efficiently solve these problems, thus rendering
all public-key cryptosystems based on such assumptions impotent if a large-scale
quantum computer can be built. To address this issue, technologies resistant to
such quantum attack are becoming a central topic in information security; this
new science bears the moniker "post-quantum cryptography." One of the four main
families of post-quantum cryptosystems under development is known as
multivariate public-key cryptosystems (MPKCs). This research project is devoted
to an in-depth study of multivariate public-key cryptosystems, with the goal of
facilitating the analysis of several multivariate candidates that have great
potential for cyber security. Results of the project are expected to produce
secure and efficient alternatives for the post-quantum computer world, with
application both to addressing the threat that quantum computers pose to
existing cryptosystems and to the growing security needs for small devices with
limited computing resources. The project includes a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students who will receive training through
involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is on
developing more efficient and more secure MPKCs and their fast implementations,
as well as exploring provable security for MPKCs and analyzing the security of
specific MPKCs. The approach is a combination of new mathematical ideas and
computer experiments, relying primarily on mathematical tools from algebraic
geometry and the theory of symmetry. Since the systems under study cannot be
analyzed by hand, the investigator will use computer experiments to build
intuitive understanding and will use theoretical methods to study the
mathematical structures hidden within the MPKC constructions. The results are
expected to lead to a better understanding of the fundamentals of the MPKCs and
of how to design secure and efficient MPKCs. Furthermore, the project should
make a significant contribution in developing the next generation of standards
for post-quantum cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.