* 1814181
* CDS&amp;E: 3-D Stellar Hydrodynamics of Convective Boundary Mixing and Shell Mergers in Massive Stars
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 318,183.00

The evolution of stars and their ultimate fate as white dwarfs, white dwarf
supernovae, neutron stars, or black holes remains at the center of research in
astronomy. This question relates to diverse research topics in time domain
astronomy, supernova research, nuclear astrophysics, galactic chemical
evolution, asteroseismology, stellar populations, and the formation and
evolution of stars and structure in the early universe. However, the fundamental
macroscopic stellar physics process of convection remains poorly understood.
Although there is some good theory, surprisingly accurate despite being rather
simplistic, realistic studies must rely on computationally intensive
simulations. That is what this project will enable, and perform. It will have a
large impact on stellar evolution theory, providing cutting edge techniques and
innovative methods of wide applicability. The study supports one graduate and up
to three undergraduate students, and the results will be used in course
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The details, especially the study of mergers of
convective shells, such as the C- and O-burning shells of massive stars, as well
as convective boundary mixing, can only be realistically captured in complex
three-dimensional (3D) hydrodynamics simulations. This project will build on
prior work to pursue three main objectives: (1) validation of a 1D model of
convective boundary mixing, using brief 3D stellar hydrodynamics simulations
relevant to massive stars near the ends of their lives; (2) assessment of when
two convective shells right on top of each other can in fact merge, using the
model from (1) combined with 3D simulation; and (3) for shell merger cases, use
3D hydrodynamical simulations to study when nearby shells exchange their
chemical abundance mixtures. Prior studies in 1D indicate that the convection
zone above the O-burning shell could incorporate enough material from above it
to reach the C-burning shell. This could cause odd-Z elements like potassium,
scandium, and chlorine to be produced in greater abundance. A sequence of brief
3D simulations alternating with longer 1D simulations will show in detail the
approach to, and ultimate result of, the shell merger process. The large
database of results on convective boundary mixing will be organized and made
available, together with the tools that mine it, analyze it, and display its
results, to enable unanticipated research by the greater
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.