* 1814872
* CSR: Small: IRIS: A unified data access framework for the merging of compute-centric and data-centric storage
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Xian-He Sun, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 12/31/2023
* USD 515,999.00

As the boundary between High Performance Computing (HPC) and High-Performance
Data Analytics (HPDA) continue to blur, the conventional compute-centric HPC and
the newly emerged data-driven Big Data application are converging. HPC becomes
more data-intensive. In the meantime, HPDA requires more computing power.
MapReduce and Spark software environments are developed and are popular for
HPDA. However, these software frameworks are not designed for HPC and not
compatible with HPC storage subsystems. In this research, the design and
development of a unified data access framework, named IRIS, is proposed for the
integration of compute-centric and data-centric storage solutions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is three-fold. 1) Mapping of
incompatible structures: Mapping a file to key-value pairs and vice versa
efficiently is a challenging task. 2) Maintaining metadata information: Since
IRIS is a unified storage layer, it needs to maintain compatibility with legacy
codes. IRIS will address this challenge with tunable consistency, which need to
be carefully studied for implementation and design choices. 3) Minimizing
overhead and memory footprint of IRIS solutions: Mapping of incompatible
structures can cause excessive memory usage; this will be addressed in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have significant
impact, including bridging data generation and data analysis processes;
promoting collaboration between the model simulation and data analysis
communities; and building a foundation element for next generation integrated
storage systems. This research will create advanced solutions and technologies
that will have direct impact on improving the efficiency of data access and
management at scale. Since Big Data is a national strategic infrastructure for
science, engineering, and industry, this research will advance a broad range of
fields. It aims to make significant progress toward a unified storage access
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data generated from this project will be
stored in an electronic format and will be preserved on the server machines at
the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT): http://cs.iit.edu/~scs/. The server
machines have hot-copy backup disks for backing up the primary copy of all data.
A secondary copy of all data will be kept on the server machines in the computer
science department at IIT per semester basis. The data will be transferred to
new storage devices every 2 years. All data will be retained within 3 years of
the project completion date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.