* 1814356
* Testing the Efficacy of the Strategic Observation and Reflection (SOAR) for Math Professional Learning Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jamal Abedi, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,978,900.00

Professional development is an important way for teachers who are currently in
classrooms to learn about new best practices in mathematics teaching and
learning and improve their practice. Little is known about what types of
professional development (PD) and teacher mentoring programs support teachers'
improved practices and ultimately lead to gains in student learning. The purpose
of this project is to develop, implement and test a professional development
program, SOAR for Math, to build capacity for mentors and teachers to improve
English learner's academic language development and mathematical content
understanding. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test
the efficacy of the Strategic Observation and Reflection (SOAR) for Math
professional development program. The mixed methods study is designed to answer
several research questions: (1) What is the impact of teachers' participation in
SOAR for Math on student achievement outcomes for current and recent grade 3-6
English learner students in treatment schools? (2) What is the impact of SOAR
for Math on treatment school teachers' knowledge and practices related to their
academic language and literacy development instruction for current and recent
English learner students, specifically scores on the Knowledge/Use Scale? (3)
What is the impact of SOAR for Math on treatment mentors' knowledge and
practices related to their academic language and math instruction? A randomized
controlled trial will be conducted in 80 elementary schools in one California
school district. Schools serving third- through sixth-grade general education
students will be eligible to participate. The research team will randomly assign
40 schools to provide SOAR for Math training to mentor teachers and 40 schools
to comprise a control group receiving business-as-usual professional
development. Two mentors per school will participate in the study. Measures will
include state math scores and a variety of observations and questionnaires to
assess fidelity of implementation. Data will be analyzed using hierarchical
linear modeling to account for the nested data
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.