* 1814439
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Leveraging community oversight to enhance collective efficacy for privacy and security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Pamela Wisniewski, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 220,272.00

This research concerns how groups of people can cooperate to protect their
privacy. The researchers will study how people can help one another to manage
their digital privacy and security. Offline, people support each other
informally to make privacy and security decisions, by sharing stories or
exchanging advice, but technology designs for privacy do not reflect these
social processes. This project builds on social science research on collective
efficacy and citizen participation in problem solving, and develops a model of
community oversight to help groups of people collectively manage their digital
privacy and security. The researchers will evaluate this model within the
context of mobile smartphones, and prototype a mobile app for groups of
interconnected users to share and provide feedback regarding a range of mobile
privacy and security settings. Research with people will also provide insight
into how to support different groups to communicate and collaborate around
mobile security and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The willingness of individuals
to intervene on others' behalf is known as collective efficacy, and the
intention of the model of community oversight is to support and improve this
outcome among interconnected individuals or existing communities such as
families, friends, co-workers in a manner that enhances their digital privacy
and security. The work makes a theoretical contribution by offering a model of
community oversight and demonstrating how this model might be translated into
sociotechnical design. The user studies will provide valuable insights into the
social and technical factors that impact user participation in community
oversight for digital privacy and security. Through the implementation and
deployment of the mobile app in the field, the researchers will evaluate how
users interact with the technology artifact and with each other, providing
valuable design guidelines for future systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.