* 1814220
* Highly Adaptive Science Simulations for Accessible STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Carrie Bruce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,989,434.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will research, design, and develop
adaptive accessibility features for interactive science simulations. The
proposed research will lay the foundation that advances the accessibility of
complex interactives for learning and contribute to solutions to address the
significant disparity in science achievement between students with and without
disabilities. The PhET Interactive Simulations project at the University of
Colorado Boulder and collaborators at Georgia Tech, with expertise in accessible
technology and design, will form the project team. The project team will conduct
design-based implementation research, where adaptive accessibility features for
interactive science simulations are developed through co-design with students
with disabilities and their teachers. Students will include those with dyslexia,
visual impairments or blindness, and students with intellectual and
developmental disabilities, ranging from 5th grade through high school, and
recent high school graduates. The adaptive accessibility features will be
implemented within a set of PhET interactive science simulations, and allow
students with disabilities to access the science simulations with alternative
input devices (such as keyboards, switches, and sip-and-puff devices), alter the
visual display of the simulations (changing color contrast, zoom and enlarge,
and simplify), hear different auditory representations of the visual display
(descriptions, sonification, and text-to-speech), and control the rate of
simulated events. All features will be capable of being turned on or off and
modified on-the-fly by teachers or students through a global control panel that
includes curated feature sets, resulting in highly flexible, highly accessible,
interactive learning resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PhET simulations are
widely used in US classrooms, evidence-based, aligned with standards, and highly
engaging and effective learning resources. With the proposed highly adaptive
features and supporting resources, teachers will be able to quickly adapt the
PhET simulations to meet the needs of many students with disabilities,
simplifying the task of creating differentiated learning opportunities for
students and supporting students with disabilities to engage in collaborative
learning - a foundational component of a high-quality STEM education - alongside
their non-disabled peers. To research, design, and develop the adaptive features
and investigate their use by students, project team members will co-teach in
classrooms with students with disabilities and conduct co-design activities with
students, where students engage in design thinking to help design and refine the
adaptive features to meet identified accessibility needs (their own and those of
their peers). In addition, interviews with individual students with and without
disabilities will also be conducted, to test early prototypes of individual
features, to later refine the layering of the many different features, and to
ensure the presence of adaptive features does not negatively impact traditional
use of the simulations. The proposed work also includes surveys of teachers and
students and analysis of teacher use, to refine global control features, develop
curated feature sets, and develop supporting teacher resources. The project will
address key questions at the heart of educational design for students with
diverse needs, including how to make adaptive features that support student
achievement of specific learning goals. The project will use design-based
implementation research, with significant co-designing with students with
disabilities (including visual impairments, cognitive disabilities, or
dyslexia), interviews, case studies, and classroom implementation to design and
evaluate the accessibility features. This will inform new models and theories of
learning with technology. The project will investigate: 1) How students engage
with, use, and learn from adaptive accessibility features, 2) how adaptive
accessibility features can be designed to layer harmoniously together in a
learning resource, and 3) how to effectively support access to rich, dynamic
feature controls and curated feature sets for intuitive classroom use by
students and teachers. The project will produce 8 PhET simulations with adaptive
accessibility features and supporting teacher resources. The foundational
research knowledge will result in effective design and implementation of
adaptive accessibility features through the analysis of student engagement,
usability, and learning from accessible simulations. Additionally, the project
will provide technical infrastructure, exemplars, and software for use by other
STEM education technology developers. The project team will work together to
create a deep understanding of how to design adaptive science simulations with
practical, usable, effective accessibility, so that learners with diverse needs
can advance their science content knowledge and participate in science practices
alongside their peers. The work has great potential to transform STEM learning
for students with disabilities and to make simulations more effective for all
learners. Results will provide insight into the effectiveness of accessible
simulation-based activities and their corresponding teacher materials in
engaging students in science practices and learning in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.