* 1814890
* CSR: Small: Software-defied HDDs: A System-centric Design Framework to Minimize Data Storage Cost for Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Tong Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 08/31/2021
* USD 313,909.00

The project aims to develop storage system design techniques that can reduce the
cost of hard disk drives (HDDs) for data centers. Based upon the observation
that one could reduce the HDD cost by relaxing its storage reliability, the
project will develop approaches that can accommodate low-cost but very
unreliable HDDs in data centers without sacrificing the overall
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will cohesively exploit the unique
characteristics of data centers and HDDs to develop cross-layer design
techniques that can most effectively embrace very unreliable HDDs in data
centers. In particular, the project will develop cross-layer design techniques
to achieve: (a) hybrid local/distributed sector repair, (b) iterative cross-
layer decoding-based sector repair, and (c) configurable per-sector protection.
The project will further investigate the integration of these design techniques
and explore the involved design trade-offs. A data center HDD simulator will be
implemented to support the evaluations and design space exploration, and will be
made publicly available to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project could have significant impact on improving the cost effectiveness of
mass data storage in data centers. The success of the project could lead to
establishing a larger-scale inter-disciplinary research area covering data
center storage systems, file system, coding theory, HDD firmware and read
channel, and HDD manufacturing. The research training to both undergraduate and
graduate students will address the concerns of lacking researchers and engineers
with multi-disciplinary experience in computer industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main results will be research papers and a data center
HDD simulator. The simulator source code and the corresponding documentation
will be maintained on GitHub, where anyone can obtain and examine the most
recent versions. Research papers will be available on the project web site at
https://www.ecse.rpi.edu/homepages/tzhang/research.html. All the results will be
kept publicly available for at least five years beyond the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.