* 1814932
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Ubiqomics: HCI for augmenting our world with pervasive personal and environmental omic data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 257,912.00

Recent years are seeing a sharp increase in the availability of personal and
environmental 'omic' data about genomes or microbiomes to non-experts. Popular
omic testing services produce data about people's personal genome, about their
microbiome, and about plants and organisms in their living environment. As a
result, people with no formal education in the life sciences can get access to
their omic data by sending a self-collected sample to a direct-to-consumer
testing provider, and results are delivered online. These people then need to
interpret large amounts of complex data involving sensitive issues such as
disease risk, carrier status, and potentially meaningful correlations with
health and physical traits. While personal omics promise advances in health, for
example through precision medicine, the slew of potential findings and the
rapidly evolving interpretations these approaches produce are difficult to
communicate to most non-experts. This project aims to empower people to explore,
share, curate and better understand such data, which in turn can make
substantial impact on their wellbeing. The project will identify user needs and
develop novel human-computer interfaces to help people make sense of personal,
social, and environmental omic data. These tools will be evaluated in a
longitudinal study in real households, both validating the work and providing
direct impact on participants' understanding of the data and their wellbeing.
The tools will also be available through Open Humans, an open platform that
brings together researchers, citizen scientists, and members of the public who
share their personal omic data. In addition, the project will increase omic
literacy among non-experts and contribute to increasing the participation of
women and other underrepresented minorities in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct research on human-
computer interaction for UbiqOmic environments: living spaces and social
interactions where omic data is available about people, plants, animals, and
surfaces. In particular, the team will identify user needs and develop web-based
visual tools that integrate omic data sets from heterogeneous resources and
multiple samples. These tools will allow users to aggregate, explore, relate,
and connect pervasive omic information, and facilitate collaborative sense
making of omic information within various social contexts including families and
cohabiting communities. In addition, the project will harness the power of
augmented reality (AR) to visualize the invisible, designing, developing, and
evaluating an AR interface which overlays timely and actionable omic data in the
environment and on the user's own body (oral, gut, skin). The team will evaluate
these tools with both general audiences and early adopters through a series of
usability and longitudinal studies. The project will advance the fields of
human-computer interaction, computer-supported cooperative work, and personal
informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.