* 1814845
* RUI: Mechanisms of regulation of mitochondrial DNA transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kristin Dittenhafer-Reed, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2023
* USD 207,901.00

The goal of this research is to determine how the expression of mitochondrial
DNA is regulated to meet the varying energetic demands of a cell. Mitochondria
are the metabolic centers of cells and have a small genome that contains
instructions to make machinery essential for energy production. This project is
expected to provide important advances related to fundamental genetic mechanisms
of mammalian cell function. Additionally, the research will provide
undergraduate research opportunities to students at Hope College, in order to
improve student retention in science and technology. Undergraduate students,
with a particular emphasis for selection on women and first year students, will
be engaged in all aspects of the project, gaining experience in
interdisciplinary research and science communication. Students will be prepared
to populate the scientific workforce and become the next generation of
scientists capable of addressing complex societal
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondrial DNA encodes 13 essential subunits of
electron transport chain complexes. The remaining 1500 member mitochondrial
proteome, including additional components necessary for energy production and
the enzymatic machinery required for mitochondrial DNA expression, is encoded by
the nuclear genome. To respond to metabolic changes, mitochondrial gene
expression must be coordinated with nuclear gene expression. While the control
of nuclear DNA transcription is widely studied, there is a need to understand
the mechanisms that control the transcription of mitochondrial DNA. The
objective of the project is to determine whether reversible protein post-
translational modification regulates mitochondrial DNA transcription. Post-
translational modifications, specifically lysine acetylation and
serine/threonine phosphorylation, are widely found in the mitochondrial
proteome, including on the proteins required for mitochondrial DNA
transcription. The research will investigate how these chemical tags provide a
means to regulate transcription in response to changes in cellular metabolism.
To address this question, a combination of cell biology and protein biochemistry
will be used to map the regulatory post-translational modification sites on
protein components required for mitochondrial DNA transcription. The biochemical
mechanisms by which these sites control transcription will be determined using
transcriptional profiling and DNA binding assays. The research is expected to
contribute a mechanism explaining the role of post-translational modifications
in regulating mitochondrial DNA transcription in response to changing cellular
energetic demands. This fundamental knowledge will help advance the
understanding of the dynamics and coordination of nuclear and mitochondrial gene
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.