* 1814900
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Semantic Foundations for Hole-Driven Development
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ravi Chugh, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2021
* USD 246,771.00

Software developers today spend much of their time editing programs that are
missing pieces or that contain transient errors of various sorts. Conventional
language definitions are silent about programs with "holes" like these. As a
result, current development tools resort to ad hoc heuristics that fail to
provide precise, accurate feedback about the program exactly when the developer
needs it most. To tackle the problem of programs with holes directly, the
project's novelties are to provide (1) a principled mathematical
characterization of programs with holes, and (2) an open source development
environment called Hazel designed from the ground up to support hole-driven
development. The project's impacts are that (1) Hazel will initially target CS
instructors, students, and domain scientists working in STEM fields, all of whom
stand to benefit from more precise, live feedback throughout the development
process; and (2) the theoretical foundations and prototype will inform the
design of other software development environments both in research and industry,
much like programming language theory has had a major impact on programming
language and compiler design in the past decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
applying the rigorous methodology of programming language theory to problems in
programming environment design, the project will open up substantial new
research directions for semanticists and tool designers alike. This project has
several related specific aims that support the practice and (currently under-
developed) theory of interactive software development. These aims are connected
by a common technical device: Typed Holes. Specifically, the project will
develop (1) a static semantics for typed holes, (2) a dynamic semantics for live
programming with typed holes, (3) a semantics for structured edit actions that
insert typed holes automatically, and (4) a mechanism that uses typed holes to
support programming by direct manipulation of graphical user interfaces inside
the program editor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.