* 1814826
* SHF: Small: Knowledge Acceleration for Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Brad Myers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 532,000.00

Programming is a critical skill that is vital for the future of work and having
a globally competitive workforce. While there are many resources available for
programmers to learn the details for writing code, an increasing amount of the
time all programmers spend is not on writing code but instead on choosing among
and adapting the growing amount of existing code and libraries available to
them. One study reported that the most frequent programmer activity is searching
for and trying to understand unfamiliar code, and more than 30% of all searches
are for determining which APIs to use and how to use them. However, after each
sense-making episode in which a programmer gains knowledge for themselves, their
work is essentially lost, with no one else benefiting. Although there are many
tools to help programmers find the answers, there are very few tools to help
programmers make use of the knowledge gained performing the task, or share that
knowledge with others. Capturing the work that programmers do in foraging,
navigating, and organizing code-relevant information could significantly benefit
later programmers interested in similar information. By referencing the captured
knowledge from the resulting code, this can provide design rationale for why the
API is used that way, which is one of the most often missing pieces of
documentation. Furthermore, by making it easier for programmers to build off one
another's knowledge, this proposed work has the potential to reduce common
security vulnerabilities that arise from programmers not learning from others'
mistakes, leading to more secure and correct code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research the PI aims to help the initial programmer collect, navigate, and
organize knowledge to meet their goals, while capturing this knowledge and
making it useful for later programmers with similar needs. This project studies
the sense-making processes that programmers engage in while searching for and
organizing knowledge for themselves, as well as studying which work that they do
is useful for others. This project investigates how programmers spend their time
searching for and making sense of complex information for themselves in order to
accomplish their goals, including choosing among different APIs or methods
within an API, adapting code snippets found on the Internet to meet their needs,
or trying to learn unfamiliar code to fix an error or add a new feature. When
performing tasks like these, programmers continually are making hypotheses,
proposing questions, and discovering answers, both about the details as well as
the meta-level questions such as the design rationale of why the decisions were
made. These studies will inform the design, development, and evaluation of tools
to support both the initial and later programmers. This research has the
potential to significantly accelerate the speed at which programmers can create
correct code by helping them gain relevant knowledge
faster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.