* 1814518
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding Socio-Technical Failure Modes in Public Key Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Linda Camp, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 115,000.00

To avoid phishing and to know which website to trust people are told to "look
for the lock" and "read the url." However, the display of a lock or other
signals of safety does not guarantee that the site is trustworthy, safe from
malware, or not a phishing attack. This research includes consultation with
industry technical professionals and policy makers in all sectors of the economy
to better understand the gaps between ideal safety and practice. One of these
potential gaps is between what citizens using the Internet believe about public
key certificates, and the knowledge that technologists assume people have.
Another potential gap is between how policy makers want to use certificates and
encryption to achieve a set of security goals, and what is already built into
the infrastructure that may prevent such security. The core goals of this work
are to characterize the expectations of nontechnical groups, enumerate the
assumptions of technologists, and use this understanding to help to bridge that
understanding to move towards shared goals for a more trustworthy network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus and level of interventions required to create a
shared and trustworthy infrastructure requires domain knowledge to understand
the specific risks, for example in transportation, as opposed to routing
communications. This knowledge requires empirical investigation to understand
the risk perceptions of the various stakeholders. Customization of interventions
may depend on demographic variables, or more transient variables such as
expertise or time spent interacting with a system. This research will involve
investigation of one or more domains with the result being either a
recommendation for a change in the implementation of the Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI), an interaction design, risk communication, integrated
network sensing, or some combination of all of these. This project is for
planning appropriate methodologies to design, implement, and evaluate these
potential solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.