* 1814762
* The Formation, Evolution, and Fate of Multiple Star Systems
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nathan Kaib, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 287,987.00

Stars are born within clouds of dense gas that collapse under their own gravity.
Sometimes solitary stars form, like our own Sun. But, stars also commonly form
in binary or multiple star systems that are bound by gravity. It remains unknown
how most of these binary stars form. One way that they may form is within the
disk of gas and dust that forms around the newborn star. They may also first
form separately and later become bound due to their own mutual gravity. The
number of&lt;br/&gt;forming binary systems, their separations, and the
environment that the binary stars formed within must be examined to understand
why they are so common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators seek to
understand formation of binary stars, by finding and examining previously
unknown newborn binary stars. These newborn stars will be observed with the
NSF's Very Large Array (VLA) and the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array (ALMA) radio telescopes. These high-resolution observations will discover
binary stars forming with separations smaller than the size of our own Solar
System. They will show where binary stars form, how they most likely formed, and
if they will remain in a binary system throughout their lives. This project will
help reveal how often Solar Systems like our own form around a single star. As
part of this project, radio astronomy will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate education at the University of Oklahoma. Lab activities using the local
3-meter radio telescope will be designed to fulfill educational goals at
multiple levels. Collaboration with local high schools will also enable them to
conduct radio astronomy observations from their
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a systematic
search for multiple stars. The investigators will analyze surveys of the Orion
and Perseus star forming regions, sampling over 400 proto-stars in total,
achieving better than 30 Astronomical Unit resolution. The companion separation
distributions between Orion and Perseus will be compared between themselves and
with the distributions measured for field stars using statistical tests. For a
subset of the systems, molecular line imaging from ALMA will be used to verify
that the disks are Keplerian and to measure the masses of the proto-stars and
estimate their mass ratios. Finally, even if systems lack a companion, but have
a clear disk, their likelihood of later fragmentation will be assessed. In
addition to this census, their formation conditions will be characterized and
the potential for companion formation will be estimated. The investigators will
create a clearer picture of multiplicity at the time of early star formation and
how the distribution of multiple stars must change as the stellar systems mature
to the main sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.