* 1814846
* SaTC: CORE: Small: RUI: Leveraging Movement, Posture, and Anthropometric Contexts to Strengthen the Security of Mobile Biometrics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Kiran Balagani, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2023
* USD 499,758.00

Modern smartphones regularly store and access large amounts of personal data,
such as e-mails, photos, videos, and banking information. For this reason,
securing them is of paramount importance. User authentication is a crucial step
towards securing a smartphone. However, current user authentication mechanisms
such as graphical passwords, Personal Identification Numbers (PINs), and
fingerprint scans offer limited security, and are ineffective after the
smartphone has been unlocked. To address these issues, this project develops
continuous authentication mechanisms that rely on behavioral cues to determine
whether the smartphone is being used by its owner. This project will result in
(1) new foundational understanding of mobile behavioral biometrics under
realistic posture, movement, and anthropometric conditions, and (2) new
techniques to distinguish legitimate behavioral traits from
forgeries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will systematically quantify the
impact of posture, movement, and anthropometric variables on behavioral
biometric traits in hitherto understudied subject populations, such as older
adults and people with Parkinson's disease. To this end, the project involves
the analysis and dissemination of datasets collected in two settings: (1) fine-
grained 3-dimensional motion capture data collected in a laboratory setting, and
(2) real-world smartphone sensor data captured over a period of up to 12 months
in the users' everyday environment. The project is expected to result in new
behavioral authentication techniques that achieve lower error rates under
realistic conditions by adapting to drifts in contexts and behaviors.
Additionally, this project seeks to quantify the susceptibility of behavioral
biometric traits to forgery attacks, and introduce novel liveness detection
techniques that rely on contextual information, as well as lightweight and
unobtrusive user challenges, to mitigate these attacks. The investigators will
evaluate these techniques on up to 150 subjects, and will share the results of
this project in the form of datasets, presentations, publications, and
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.