* 1814450
* CHS:Small:Utilizing synergy between human and computer information processing for complex visual information organization and use
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Qi Yu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,424.00

CHS: Small: Utilizing synergy between human and computer information processing
for complex visual information organization and use&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
years have brought important advances in the use of computational approaches to
automatically extract the meaning of an image (aka, image semantics). But,
understanding these images when they relate to specialized areas such as
medicine is significantly more challenging because it depends on human
expertise. This project brings together human and computer capabilities to
discover image semantics by (1) encoding human image inspection and analysis
behaviors that represent domain expertise, and (2) algorithmically fusing human
expertise with image data. The outcomes will help to provide truly meaningful
interpretations of complex images in areas such as medicine, science, and
security intelligence. This interdisciplinary project will provide extensive
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and for
broadening participation in computing. The team will leverage the college?s
successful program for Women in Computing and PhD Program that has a strong
track record in recruiting students from underrepresented and culturally-diverse
groups. &lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute novel computational models to
capture the complex and unique features of human language and vision related to
performing image understanding tasks, and an innovative probabilistic framework
to fuse human knowledge data with image features. Interpretable knowledge
patterns will be extracted to inform high-level abstractions of human expertise
and establish cross-modality relationships. The hierarchical probabilistic
framework will promote a systematic fusion of multimodal knowledge data with
image content. By fusing data from multiple, complimentary modalities, the
framework is robust to sparseness, noise, and ambiguity in human knowledge data
while being flexible when one or more data modalities become unavailable.
Through nonparametric modeling, the framework can account for the novel
semantics resulting from human expertise, hence closely represent the knowledge-
based processing in human image understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.