* 1814397
* Establishing the Fundamental Physics and Interactions of Coherent Radio and Thermal X-ray Emission from Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Joanna Rankin, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2024
* USD 276,325.00

Pulsars are rapidly spinning, highly magnetized, and very compact stars, which
were discovered just over fifty years ago. The light from pulsars is usually
detected as radio waves or X rays. The radio waves are emitted from charged
plasma flowing along the pulsar's magnetic field lines, while the X rays are
emitted from very hot (hence "thermal") surface areas, heated by backflowing
plasma. While the broad picture of pulsar radio and X-ray emission is known,
many of the details are yet to be fully understood. A research team at the
University of Vermont will carry out a three part observational and theoretical
program aimed at providing insight into pulsar emission mechanisms and studying
the Milky Way's interstellar magnetic field. The radio observations have been or
will be conducted primarily with the Very Large Array, Arecibo, LOFAR and Green
Bank. X-ray observations have been made using the XMM-Newton satellite. The
first part of the program involves confirmation and extension of pulsar radio
emission physics. The second part will connect thermal X-ray to radio emission.
The third part will use pulsar measurements to help to understand the magnetic
field in the plane of our Galaxy. Undergraduate research students will be
extensively involved in the projects and will receive invaluable scientific
training that is simply not available in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through observational interpretation and
computer modeling of the pulsar magnetosphere, astronomers now understand how
charge currents are generated and where they flow, outlining the broad
mechanisms of pulsar radio emission: where it is generated and how part of it
escapes. The planned study will advance capabilities to relate the emission
physics to global magnetospheric processes, and provide the needed specificity
for theorists to develop physical models for charged soliton radiation. The
research team will also use simultaneous X-ray and radio observations of pulsars
with multiple emission states in order to learn how the backflow heating
associated with thermal X-ray emission is connected to changes in the radio
emission properties, and will identify candidate pulsars for future joint
X-ray/radio investigations. The nature, structure, and origin of the Galactic
magnetic field is only partially understood. The project will include analyses
of extensive, existing pulsar Faraday rotation measurements of distant and faint
pulsars to contribute significantly to the understanding of the magnetic field
in the plane of our Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.