* 1814854
* Structures, Metamaterials, Scattering, and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 387,978.00

The significance of this project is multifold. It studies the forces that cable
networks under tension can support, and this should be important to civil
engineering, in particular to bridge or building design. It studies the possible
elastic responses of 3-d printed metamaterials, and this could be helpful in
designing structure that guide acoustic and elastic waves, for controlling
vibrations and potentially for cloaking against sonar. It opens the field of
boundary field equalities, that generalizes the notion of conservation laws, and
which can be used for benchmarking numerical algorithms for calculating the
response of inhomogeneous bodies. It develops a new approach to scattering of
electromagnetic and elastic waves off an inclusion, that can help one understand
the extent to which an arbitrarily shaped inclusion can scatter the waves. It
develops new bounds that can be useful for predicting the electromagnetic
response of two-phase composites even if one does not know the detailed
microstructure. This should help in the identification of the most energy-
absorbing composites and nano-particles. It explores what novel responses can be
achieved in metamaterials, through coupled effects of electrical current flow,
interaction with magnetic fields, and vibrations. This may lead to new types of
magnetic field sensors and to novel devices coupling deformation and magnetic
effects. For biomedical, engineering and counterterrorism applications it is
vitally important to know what is inside a body from non-invasive testing, and
it is better if one can say things with near certainty. The project will provide
new methods of obtaining precise lower and upper limits on the volume occupied
by an inclusion in a body. This may have applications to determining the size of
certain tumors, or voids in a body, or the porosity in an osteoporotic bone. It
studies new classes of theoretical inhomogeneous bodies for which there is an
exact solution for the field and this may be useful for benchmarking numerical
algorithms, and for gaining insight into how fields can be manipulated in
inhomogeneous bodies. Finally, it trains two postdocs in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides a cross-fertilization of
ideas from the four areas of Structures, Metamaterials, Scattering, and Inverse
Problems. Some of these ideas, developed in the theory of composites, will be
applied for the first time to inverse problems where one seeks to determine what
is inside a body from boundary measurements, and to scattering problems where
one seeks to understand the range of possible scattering responses as the shape
of the scatterer is varied. The work on boundary field equalities, that stems
from the theory of exact relations in composites, seeks to explore
generalizations of the classic conservation law that a field which is
divergence-free inside a body has zero net flux through the surface. For bodies
containing certain wide classes of inhomogeneous media these equalities provide
exact identities that are satisfied by the Dirichlet to Neumann map, which plays
a central role when one seeks to extract information about what is inside a body
from boundary measurements. The work on elastic tensors of 3-d printed materials
seeks to bring a close to the challenging question of what elastic tensors are
possible in mixtures of one given material plus void. The proposal addresses the
inverse problem of estimating the size of an inclusion in a body, through
boundary measurements in the time (rather than frequency)
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.