* 1814737
* Disease Spread on Networks: Integrating Structure, Dynamics, and Data Through a Generalized Inverse
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Abigail Norris Turner, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

A fundamental question in the study of many infectious diseases is how contact
patterns and local disease characteristics combine to affect disease dynamics on
networks. Geography, demography, and behavior influence network structure, and
are also associated with variation in disease characteristics such as time to
treatment, immune response, and environmental conditions influencing pathogen
persistence. This project aims to develop new mathematical tools for
understanding how local disease characteristics shape effective network
structure and in turn influence disease spread. Specific applications include
syphilis dynamics on sexual contact networks, in partnership with Columbus
Public Health and the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recently-introduced generalized inverse of the graph
Laplacian is promising for understanding how network structure and node
characteristics combine to affect disease spread on networks. This generalized
inverse, called the absorption inverse, relates directly to disease invasion and
the basic reproduction number for community networks, and also suggests broadly
applicable structural measures that depend upon both graph structure and node
dynamics. Properties of the absorption inverse will be studied, and analytical
tools developed for understanding disease dynamics on networks with
heterogeneous node dynamics. Biological contributions will include insight into
basic questions such as how node dynamics affect core groups and community
structure, and how the distribution of core groups within a network affect
disease prevalence and outbreak size. Mathematical contributions will be made in
the areas of generalized inverses, random walks on graphs, combinatorial matrix
analysis, and spectral graph theory. Algorithmic development of structural
measures using the absorption inverse will also contribute to network science,
with potential application to dynamics on networks outside of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.