* 1814866
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Tangible Privacy: User-Centric Sensor Designs for Assured Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Adam Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 289,973.00

High-fidelity, and often privacy-invasive, sensors are now becoming pervasive in
our everyday environments. At home, digital assistants can constantly listen for
instructions and security cameras can be on the lookout for unusual activity.
Whereas once an individual's physical actions, in their own home, were private,
now networked cameras and microphones can give rise to electronic privacy
concerns for one's physical behaviors. Casual conversations and encounters, once
thought to be private and ephemeral, now may be captured and disseminated or
archived digitally. While these sensing devices benefit the users in many
different ways, hence their popularity, their users may face serious privacy
violations. A major problem with current sensing devices is that it is
oftentimes unclear whether an audio or video sensor is, indeed, off upon visual
inspection by occupants of a space. For example, sensors that have been hacked
may indeed record people without their consent, even when their interfaces
(e.g., small indicator lights) claim that they are off. The goal of this project
is to explore privacy-enhanced sensor designs that provide people with the
knowledge and assurance of when they are being recorded and what data is being
captured and disseminated. Whereas purely software mechanisms may not inspire
trust, physical mechanisms (e.g., a camera's physical lens cap) can provide a
more tangible privacy guarantee to people. This project explores novel, physical
designs of sensors that convey a clear and definite sense of assurance to people
about their physical privacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
expertise in computer security and privacy, access control, human computer
interaction, and social computing. Through this interdisciplinary team, the
project makes socio-technical contributions to both theory and practice by: (1)
understanding the privacy concerns, needs, and behaviors of people in the face
of increased sensing in physical environments; (2) exploring the design space
for hardware sensing platforms to convey meaningful ('tangible') assurances of
privacy to people by their physical appearance and function; (3) exploring
visual indicators of what information is being sent over the network; and (4)
exploring alternative sensor designs that trade off sensing fidelity for higher
privacy. Together these designs combine hardware and software techniques to
tangibly and visually convey a sense of privacy to people impacted by the
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.