* 1814327
* Quantifying mixing by shear instabilities in stellar interiors: differential rotation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Pascale Garaud, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 285,464.00

Understanding the details of the interiors of stars and of their evolution with
time requires a combination of careful observations and sophisticated
theoretical models. This research team at the University of California-Santa
Cruz will provide improved, numerically-validated quantitative computer models
for the transport and mixing of gases and energy within stellar interiors. The
research will bring up to date prescriptions derived nearly 30 years ago that
have never strictly been tested. The work is of fundamental importance for
scientific investigations into the internal rotation of stars. This is
particularly relevant today, when stellar interiors are being probed with
asteroseismology observations. The principal investigator will continue to
advise young researchers at all levels. She is involved at the executive level
in two international graduate training programs, the Woods Hole Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics (GFD) program, and the Kavli Summer Program in Astrophysics. She
helps run the programs and advises students through them. The next GFD program
will be focused on topics similar to this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her team will obtain robust
quantitative estimates for mixing (of heat, momentum, angular momentum, and
chemical species) induced by hydrodynamic shear instabilities in stably
stratified regions of rotating stars. Numerical simulations will be run in
rotating Cartesian domains located at various latitudes in the star using the
shearing-box formalism. The simulations will be used to measure, for given
shearing rate, rotation rate, and fluid parameters, global outcomes such as the
turbulent Reynolds stresses, turbulent fluxes of heat, and the chemical species.
Two regimes will be explored, one in which the effects of thermal diffusion are
important (the low Peclet number limit) and one in which they are not. The
latter is the standard shear instability problem, while the former has been
invoked as an alternative mechanism called secular shear instability. The
results will be used to validate or invalidate existing mixing prescriptions,
and create new prescriptions as necessary. The team also plans to look at both
baroclinically stable and unstable cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.