* 1814974
* CSR: Small: Data Structure Designs and Implementations for Modern Multicore Architectures and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Spear, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Data Structures are the conventional way to store data managed by applications
and system software. Developing data structures that function correctly even in
the presence of multiple simultaneous operations has been one of the most
important topics in the last decade. This project moves research on data
structures ahead by targeting the way these data structures interact with the
underlying hardware infrastructure. The project proposes innovative software
designs and features that allow data structure implementations to improve
performance when deployed on modern servers equipped with hundreds of
processors, and to meet new application necessities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates data structure designs and implementations that exploit the
hardware organization of modern multicore architectures, where memory is
partitioned in multiple zones and each zone is subject to an access latency that
is influenced by the source and destination zone (also known as Non-Uniform
Memory Access, or NUMA, architectures), to improve application performance. The
core intuition is to divide the data structure into independent layers, avoid
synchronization across them, and distributed them among NUMA zones. The proposal
identifies four research tasks, ranging from hardware optimizations to scalable
bulk operations over the data within the data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project include delivering
to programmers, industry, and academia a new open-source data structure library
that scales its performance in modern multicore architectures and meets emerging
application needs. The results of this research will provide a basis for a new
module focused on data structures in a course that includes concurrency in its
curriculum, and will influence the materials that will be included in a
reference textbook on principles and best practices of concurrent programming.
Findings of this project will enable new engagement with local communities and
public schools to inspire next generation of
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Any data produced in the context of this
project will be made available to the public and rigorously maintained
throughout the duration of the project and beyond. Developed source code will
initially be maintained in a private repository (Bitbucket), with periodic
public deliverables. After the software becomes stable, it will transition to a
public repository (Github) so that a larger open-source community can use and
maintain it. Technical reports will be registered into arXiv.org. Published
results will be made available at: http://www.cse.lehigh.edu/~palmieri/. The
Github account for public code release is the following:
"https://github.com/robertopalmieri/dev".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.