* 1814516
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Analog Hardware Trojans: Threats, Detection, and Mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Randall Geiger, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 327,203.00

Vulnerability of electronic systems and particularly computing systems to
malicious attacks through the insertion of software viruses or hardware Trojans
is of growing concern to society. This work is focused on understanding,
detecting, and mitigating a potentially devastating type of hardware Trojans
that an adversary or hardware hacker can insert in the analog component of many
of the integrated circuits that will be fabricated in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The class of analog hardware Trojans that will be
studied are those that can be embedded as undesired solutions of the nonlinear
differential equations that mathematically characterize the performance of an
analog circuit that is typical of a design that would be obtained from a highly
qualified and trusted design engineer. This class of hardware Trojans is
particularly problematic because their presence will typically not be observed
through computer simulations during the normal design or verification processes.
Although the payloads these hardware Trojans can carry can be devastating,
existing methods for Trojan detection or prevention are inherently incapable of
detecting or preventing this type of Trojans. An improved understanding of the
vulnerabilities to these Trojans will be developed along with methods for
detecting and mitigating the vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By reducing
vulnerability to these hardware Trojans, a more secure cyber infrastructure can
be developed. This should improve security of transportation, health care,
financial, and military systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results including
prototype circuits will be accessible on
https://iastate.box.com/s/nazel2i7n5ygk6jy8yawvsnsynmk4qh7. This URL will remain
active for 3 years after public release and project
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.