* 1814512
* Laboratory Astrophysics for Studies of the Chemical Evolution of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* James Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 11/30/2022
* USD 336,452.00

The early Universe was almost completely made up of hydrogen and helium. Heavier
chemical elements are produced in stars through a series of processes known as
"nucleosynthesis". The earliest stars were likely quite different from stars
today. Old stars, called "metal-poor" stars because they are deficient in
heavier elements, were formed from the remnants of the earliest stars. Elemental
abundances in metal-poor stars serve as a "fossil record" of our Galaxy and can
help us understand the beginnings of nucleosynthesis. Testing theories of the
early Universe requires very accurate measurements of elemental abundances in
metal-poor stars. Accurate and precise abundance determination for a given
element requires, first and foremost, accurate laboratory measurements of the
spectral properties of that element. The goal of this research program is to
conduct accurate, high-quality measurements of atomic data for the elements and
to use these data to determine highly accurate abundances in metal-poor stars.
This work could also lead to improvements that benefit other fields of applied
science such as lighting and analytical chemistry. Training and mentoring of
graduate and undergraduate students has been, and will continue to be, an
important part of this program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wisconsin Atomic
Transition Probability (WATP) program develops and applies advanced experimental
techniques to measure accurate, absolute atomic transition probabilities. The
transition probabilities are determined by combining branching fractions with
radiative lifetimes measured using time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence. In
recent years, a 3-meter echelle spectrometer was developed at the University of
Wisconsin to measure very weak lines of Fe-group elements at ultraviolet
wavelengths but is now optimized to work at optical wavelengths for applications
to problems of ground-based astronomy. These weak lines are needed for abundance
determination in stellar photospheres, because stronger lines of the abundant
Fe-group elements are partially to deeply saturated and are therefore less ideal
as abundance indicators. This project will complete work on Fe-group elements,
with measurement of transition probabilities of weak lines of Sc II and Fe II.
Subsequently, the WATP program will begin work on measuring transition
probabilities of the alpha-elements, starting with Ca I. The newly measured
transition probabilities will be used to determine accurate and precise
abundances in the Sun and in metal-poor stars, and the relative abundances will
be compared to models of nucleosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.