* 1814931
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Network Analysis and Anomaly Detection via Global Curvatures
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bhaskar DasGupta, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,986.00

Curvatures of geometric shapes and topological spaces in higher dimension are
natural and powerful generalizations of planes to higher dimensions, and play a
fundamental role in physics, mathematics, and many other areas. In this
collaborative interdisciplinary proposal involving one investigator each from
the University of Illinois at Chicago and the Pennsylvania State University, the
investigators will use powerful higher-dimensional curvature analysis methods to
provide the foundations of systematic and computationally efficient approaches
to find critical components, measure redundancies and detect anomalies in
biological and social networks. There is a pressing need for this, as
identification of critical components are crucial to the analysis of networks,
and curvature-based analysis methods provide a principled way of satisfying this
need using a systematic and rigorous theoretical framework to achieve a clear
understanding. The proposed research will leverage further development of novel
combinatorial tools previously developed by the investigators, in addition to
developing new algorithmic and approximability techniques. The algorithms
developed in the course of this project will be implemented for validation on
simulated and real data and will lead to open-source software for the relevant
research communities. In addition to substantial impacts in network analysis,
the proposed research will have strong impacts on many other research areas in
computational biology, neuroscience, and social network analysis. Other broader
impacts will include integration of research and education via course and
curriculum development, involvement of undergraduates, minorities and under-
represented groups, effective dissemination of research, mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students, outreach and community involvement, and
promoting diversity in related research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of this project, the
investigators will explore two notions of curvature, namely Gromov-hyperbolic
curvature based on the properties of geodesics and higher-order connectivities,
and geometric curvatures based on identifying networks with geometric complexes
and using combinatorialization of Ricci type curvatures. These curvature
measures depend on non-trivial global properties, such as distributions of
geodesics and higher-order correlations among nodes, of the given network as
opposed to many other measures that are local in nature. The investigators will
use these notions to identify non-trivial critical components of the network
whose removal affects the change the network topology or dynamics in a
significant manner. The investigators will formulate mathematically precise
computational problems, study their properties, use novel algorithmic tools to
design efficient algorithms, and implement the resulting algorithms to test
their accuracy and efficiency. The complementary backgrounds of the two
investigators, namely combinatorial optimization in computer science and
computational biology (DasGupta) and modelling and analysis of biological and
social networks (Albert), will make the two investigators a perfect team for the
interdisciplinary applications in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.