* 1814609
* SHF: Small: PAW: Novel Functionality in Programming Models to Productively Abstract Wavefront Parallel Pattern
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Sunita Chandrasekaran, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 415,703.00

With the rapid and globally competitive development of faster computing systems
that can compute up to one quintillion floating-point operations/second, it
becomes imperative to update the computer programs that direct how data is
analyzed. However, it has been a challenge for established and time-tested
legacy scientific code, filling up hundreds to thousands of lines of code, to
adapt and alter to exploit the rich computing capacity of these systems. This is
largely a manpower issue as the adaptation of codes requires application
developers to constantly re-write their program codes. The steep learning curve
associated with both the intricacies of hardware and the ever evolving
programming languages puts pressure on the developers and impedes the progress
of science. The biggest challenge developers face is the inability to maintain a
"write-once reuse multiple times" software. With all eyes on the development of
an exascale machine - one that can compute data at the speed of the human brain
- it is imperative to address this fundamental challenge. The aim of this
project is to design high-level abstractions that can adapt scientific code to
current and upcoming systems in a manner that enhances the performance of these
machines, thus ensuring that these "fast-as-the human-brain" systems are
flexible and adaptable enough to encourage the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project to enable high
performance, memory-efficient, portable and productive software framework for
parallelizing complex parallel patterns such as 'wavefronts', commonly found in
large scientific applications such as neutron radiation transport,
bioinformatics and atmospheric science. To achieve this goal, the investigator
is addressing critical performance portable questions at the algorithmic-level,
programming framework-level and at the software design level. The project
studies the applicability of well-explored polyhedral transformation frameworks
along with task-based environments on novel hardware systems, importantly on
pre- and upcoming exascale systems. The studies are also suggestive of
shortcomings in current programming models paving the way to developing novel
insights towards high-level software abstractions for multi-use in
different/diverse projects simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.