* 1815186
* SHF: Small: Natural GUI-Based Testing of Mobile Apps via Mining Software Repositories
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Mobile devices have become an integral, ubiquitous part of modern society. The
popularity of smartphones and tablets is largely due to the success of mobile
software, colloquially referred to as "apps", that enable users to carry out a
wide range of computing tasks in an intuitive and convenient manner. The
burgeoning mobile app market is fueled by rapidly evolving performant hardware
and software platforms that support increasingly complex functionality. In order
for apps to achieve success in marketplaces such as Apple's App Store or Google
Play, it is imperative that they function as intended and thus must be well
tested. However, the unique aspects of mobile apps that make them popular, such
as their touch-based interfaces, rapidly evolving platforms, and contextual
features such as sensors, make them difficult to test effectively and
efficiently. Additionally, as the marketplace for mobile apps matures,
developers must ensure that their apps function well across a myriad of devices
while addressing feedback from an increasingly large user base through app store
reviews. These challenges illustrate that mobile developers require practical
automated support to ensure that their apps are adequately tested. This research
project aims to design, and thoroughly validate an automated testing approach
for mobile apps that overcomes the challenges listed above. In turn, it is
anticipated that the techniques enabled by this research will contribute to
better-tested, higher quality mobile applications, benefiting both our society
that increasingly depends on smartphone apps and the developers and teams that
create them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve these fundamental challenges, this
project aims to develop an automated testing framework that combines novel
statistical representations of mobile apps and information gleaned via mining
software repositories techniques to efficiently generate practical, effective
test scenarios. More specifically, a novel testing framework, coined as T+, will
be developed. T+ is rooted in a probabilistic model-based representation of
mobile apps. This model will enable a transformative automated approach for
generating feasible test cases that are decoupled from low level events, can be
executed on different devices, and support multiple testing goals and adequacy
criteria. Additionally, this research work will define and develop monitoring
mechanisms for identifying change- and fault- prone APIs in underlying platform
and third-party libraries, as well as informative reviews. Incorporation of this
information into the statistical model of T+ will allow for the generation and
prioritization of test cases covering these APIs and reviews. Broader impacts of
this work will reside in (1) improving the state of the practice in testing
mobile apps, where difficulties are faced in ensuring that apps are adequately
tested with respect to changing platforms, APIs, reviews, and numerous devices;
(2) demonstrating improved testing practices with industry partners, which will
be documented as best practices for other development organizations and test
centers to adopt; (3) developing educational course content and piloting it in
the classroom as part of this research project; and (4) actively involving
underrepresented categories of students in this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.