* 1815336
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Enabling Systematic Evaluation of the Soundness of Android Security Analysis Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Adwait Nadkarni, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Mobile devices have become the fabric of our current consumer computing
landscape, driven by the diverse "apps" they support, which allow users to carry
out complex computing tasks. These devices and apps have become deeply personal,
and as such have access to privacy-sensitive resources and information. To
prevent misuse of this access, it is imperative to understand the challenges in
securing mobile apps, and in effect, the true capabilities of current approaches
for security analysis. The first line of defense against malicious applications
are tools that analyze applications to detect security vulnerabilities or
malicious behavior, ideally before apps are published to application markets. It
is important for such tools to be "sound", i.e., to detect all instances of bad
behavior in the application being analyzed. Prior work has indicated that such
tools may often sacrifice soundness for practical reasons (e.g., for a
reasonable analysis time), leading to tools that are soundy (i.e., mostly sound,
but with some unsound assumptions). However, the effectiveness of these
security-focused program analysis techniques is not well understood, as the
unsound assumptions may not be known beyond a small community of experts,
leading to a false sense of security among the users of such tools. This
research develops a framework for systematically evaluating existing security
techniques to uncover previously unknown unsound assumptions. The methodology
developed in the course of this research has the potential for a large economic
and societal impact, as improving security tools improves the vetting of mobile
applications and prevents or mitigates the loss or theft of private information.
Moreover, while the far-reaching impact of this work will be in increasing
reliability of applications for end users, more immediate impact can be seen in
educational activities. That is, this project incorporates into software
engineering and security courses the best-practices for secure mobile
application development, and novel security evaluation techniques developed via
this project, while disseminating awareness regarding the dangers of unsound
analyses to the broader research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project develops a new methodology for assessing security-focused static
analysis tools for Android, by adopting the principles of mutation analysis from
the field of functional software testing to systematically identify unsound
assumptions. This methodology consists of three major components: (1) empirical
derivation of specifications for security-focused mutation operators (i.e.,
security operators) through the examination of claims by security analysis
tools, security bugs in open source apps, and malware samples; (2) the
instantiation and seeding operators in the context of the security technique
being evaluated using context-specific mutation schemes; and (3) expansion of
the sound core of static program analysis tools for Android by running static
analysis tools on mutants and detecting and addressing vulnerabilities. This
research project cuts across the complementary disciplines of computer security
and software engineering and tackles several open research questions that are
currently unaddressed in both disciplines. More specifically, this project
builds upon the theoretical underpinnings of mutation analysis, which aims at
evaluating the efficacy of functional software tests and instantiates them in a
security-focused context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.