* 1815887
* Next Generation Data Analysis For Next Generation Cosmic Microwave Background Experiments.
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kevin Huffenberger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2023
* USD 594,181.00

The Big Bang explosion at the beginning of the Universe left behind a glow of
radiation in microwaves. Scientists using the next generation of microwave
telescopes will study this radiation for signatures of primordial gravitational
waves that are theorized but as yet unseen. These waves were created by quantum
fluctuations during the Universe's first moments, and finding them would push
the frontiers of physics. This project will develop mathematical, statistical,
and computational tools to better map and analyze the data from these telescope
measurements. It helps sponsor the research and training of the next generation
of scientists at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral level. To ensure
that exciting developments in early Universe research reach the broader
community, this project focuses on attracting new students to STEM disciplines
with public talks and school visits, college-level curriculum development, and
high-quality STEM student mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the state of the art for Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) analysis
tools, with a focus on understanding and developing the role of the new
"messenger method" approach to map-making and filtering. It will develop
messenger map-making into a production-ready tool and apply it to data. Ground-
based CMB observatories produce maps with complex, anisotropic noise
correlations. Messenger methods can account for wider varieties of such
correlations and serve as the basis for new power spectrum estimation tools.
Additionally, messenger methods may allow for multiple tracers of the large-
scale matter field to be combined with CMB lensing into a single tomographic
matter atlas. The well-characterized synthesis of a mass map from multiple
tracers is important for the epoch of wide field cosmology surveys. This project
will promote the existing "Saturday Morning Physics" outreach lecture series at
Florida State University and other K-12 activities. Furthermore, training of
students, including undergraduates, helps to prepare the next generation of STEM
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.