* 1815017
* Systems of Backward Stochastic Differential Equations and Applications in Stochastic Financial Equilibrium Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gordan Zitkovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 376,581.00

Why do stock-price graphs look the way they do? Why do market crashes and
rallies occur? How much do asset prices depend on our risk appetites, and how
much on the inherent randomness of the world around us? These questions can be
answered by analyzing various mathematical models based on the fundamental idea
that prices adjust to equalize supply with demand. This analysis is often very
hard, and requires considerable analytical effort, but is nevertheless within
the reach of contemporary mathematics and its tools. The societal benefits of a
better understanding of the structure behind asset-price movements are numerous;
for instance, it will help us regulate the markets more efficiently and plan
better for potential future financial instabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator and his students and collaborators will study several
separate, but ultimately related, clusters of problems at the intersection of
probability, mathematical finance and stochastic-control theory. One area of
concentration is the class of equations, known as Backward Stochastic
Differential Equations (BSDEs), which describe evolutions of random processes in
many different contexts. The PI and his collaborators will focus on the
existence and uniqueness theory for systems of nonlinear fully-coupled BSDEs.
While their interest in this subject originates in its pivotal role in the
financial equilibrium theory, there are numerous other applications in finance,
economics, game theory, optimal stochastic control, and other fields. The second
cluster of problems centers around the so-called mean-field limits in the
context of equilibrium theory. The main goal here is to provide a meaningful
simplification of the equilibrium problem when the market consists of a large
number of small economic agents. Attention will be paid to the limiting behavior
of the systems of BSDEs which appear in incomplete-market equilibrium models
with exponential investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.