* 1815526
* Student Support for the 2018 U.S. Semantic Technologies Symposium (US2TS)
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Pascal Hitzler, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 11/30/2019
* USD 10,250.00

This award provides travel support to ten student at U.S. instructions, enabling
them to participle at the 1st U.S. Semantic Technologies Symposium (US2TS), held
March 01-02, 2018 in Dayton, Ohio (http://www.us2ts.org). Semantic Web is an
inherently multi-disciplinary field. Yet, the division between computer science,
natural science and social science limits the formation of a coherent research
agenda for exploring emerging trends in Semantic Technologies. There is a need
to bring together the U.S. Semantic Web community and begin forming a research
network among Semantic Web practitioners in different domains. The increasing
demand of data-intensive research and the multidisciplinary characteristics of
Semantic Web applications make it crucial to maintain and expand the existing
workforce through outreach to students to foster future scientific innovation
across disciplines. Several activities will be organized for the student
participants during the symposium. The students, including underrepresented
groups (women and minorities) and undergraduates will have the opportunity to
network with each other and the experienced researchers attending the symposium,
gaining valuable experience that will enable them to foster long-lasting
interdisciplinary and national-wide collaborations among a new generation of
Semantic Web practitioners who will ultimately shape the future of Semantic Web
research and applications at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-
disciplinary and cross-sectoral communication and networking among Semantic Web
researchers, students and practitioners is the core of the US2TS. With an ever-
growing dependence on the web, and the continuously increasing importance of
large-scale data sharing, integration, and reuse, researchers in various
disciplines, there is a need to connect these efforts. US2TS has goal to
stimulate community consolidation and the building of a U.S.-based community
research network. The symposium will provide a forum by which participants can
share information and ideas, coordinate ongoing or planned research activities,
foster synthesis and new collaborations, develop community standards, and
advance science and education through communication and the sharing of ideas.
Student participation in US2TS is expected to improve understanding and skills
of open data and open science among the next generation scientists, as Semantic
Web technologies are closely relevant to those topics.