* 1815621
* SaTC: CORE: Small: MOSE: Automated Detection of Module-Specific Semantic Errors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kangjie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 495,277.00

System software such as operating system kernels, libraries, and application
frameworks provide the foundation for all of the functionality of computing
devices, from personal computers and servers to mobile and embedded devices.
Security vulnerabilities in system software are particularly serious because
they can undermine any of the software running on a device. The most common
vulnerabilities in system software are semantic errors such as missing security
checks. Semantic errors, if exploited successfully, can result in critical
system attacks such as privilege escalation, remote code execution, and
information leaks. For instance, vulnerable devices might come under the
complete control of an adversary and reveal users' private information. Despite
this importance, detecting semantic errors is challenging because semantic
errors do not have uniform patterns and often involve complicated code logic.
Previous research on detecting semantic errors mainly employs statistical
analysis or manual specification to create rules for semantic checking, and
often misses module-specific semantic errors involving the diverse functions and
variables that each has only a few uses. This project aims to automatically
detect such module-specific semantic errors in system software by developing
automated techniques for identifying module-specific functions and variables,
and generating concrete checking rules. This project will also develop a novel
detection system to precisely detect module-specific semantic errors. By
automatically detecting classes of common semantic errors in widely used system
software, this project significantly improves the security of ubiquitous
computer devices. The broader educational activities of this project include
integrating research with outreach, organizing Capture The Flag competitions
among universities and industries in Minnesota, and developing new
interdisciplinary courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to
detect module-specific semantic errors, a new and wide class of semantic error,
which have been otherwise missed by previous detection that employs statistical
analysis or manual specification to generate rules for semantic checking. First,
it develops novel techniques to automatically identify security-related
functions and variables, without requiring multiple uses of them. These
techniques include error-code analysis, usage analysis, and behavior analysis.
Second, it empirically analyzes identified functions and variables, and
categorizes them based on their security properties and contexts. For each
category, the research further develops meta-rules specifying how each category
should be correctly used. For example, a range check should be enforced if a
variable is used as a size parameter of memory allocation. Meta-rules are
general, and can be assembled and instantiated to generate concrete checking
rules for each module-specific function or variable. Third, the project develops
a staged approach and a set of static analysis and symbolic execution techniques
to precisely detect previously unknown module-specific semantic errors at scale
for system software. These techniques can be evaluated on widely used system
software such as the Linux kernel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.