* 1815495
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Hardening Systems Against Low-Rate DDoS Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 516,000.00

Low-rate denial-of-service (LRD) attacks deny access to services by depleting
some limited resource at the end host or a network device. This makes the device
unable to process legitimate clients' traffic. LRD attacks are very challenging
to detect and handle at the network level, since they are very low-rate. It
makes the attack traffic a needle in a haystack of legitimate traffic. On the
other hand, detecting LRD at the application would require changes to many
applications, and would only be effective against specific attack variants. All
online services are vulnerable to distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks,
and LRD attacks are especially challenging to handle today, because they can be
launched from smaller botnets and at lower rates than flooding attacks. This
project designs and builds an LRD defense, called Leader, which is application-
agnostic and can handle both current and future attack variants with the same
mechanism. Leader makes all online services robust against LRD attacks by
helping the services smartly manage their resources and identify and neutralize
misuse attempts. This in turn improves the security of the entire Internet, as
well as the security of our critical infrastructure. Where full mitigation is
not possible, the planned approach raises the bar for attackers, by forcing them
to recruit large botnets. The project will generate lecture modules and
practical exercises to be used in current courses and shared publicly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leader defense builds profiles that describe how external
requests, clients, applications and the entire device use system resources.
These profiles, called "connection life stages" contain information about the
type and the amount of the resource used, the order in which the use occurs and
the time that each chunk of resource is being held. Leader compares
instantaneous profiles to baseline profiles at connection, client, application
and device level to detect denial of service and identify the resources being
affected. Leader further uses connection life stages to perform anomaly
detection, which is used for attack diagnostics and mitigation. In rare cases
when the profiles do not show anomalous use of resources, or cannot attribute it
to specific connections or clients, Leader resorts to offline binary analysis of
affected applications. This analysis helps understand how code paths in the
application use system resources, and identify possible code changes to increase
robustness to LRD attacks. Leader's combination of system, network and
application-level monitoring of the patterns of resource use, and the accounting
of resource usage per each external service request, is a unique, novel feature.
Leader defense is implemented as an operating system (OS) module, and thus
protects the deploying device against all LRD attacks at the OS and the
application level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.