* 1815674
* III: Small: Towards Resolving Ad-hoc Concept Queries with Table Answers via Multi-source Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Huan Sun, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,001.00

Users often issue queries about certain concepts to gather information and make
decisions. The concepts concerned in such queries are usually ad-hoc and less
likely to be directly covered in a predefined schema. An ideal response to the
query would be a table with entities belonging to the queried concept as the
rows and relevant attributes being the columns. However, in most cases, no such
tables are readily available, and users have to collect relevant information by
themselves, which is a painful process, especially when users are exploring
unfamiliar concepts and do not know what information is critical for their
decision making. This project builds the first-of-its-kind framework to resolve
ad-hoc concept queries with table answers to save users tremendous efforts on
information gathering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework to be developed mines
multiple complementary data sources including knowledge bases, texts, and
tables, and proposes systematic methods to combine relevant knowledge to solve a
specific query. This project has the potential to build a practical and
transformative question answering system, by focusing on realistic ad-hoc
queries rather than simple encyclopedic questions. It can further guide the
construction of specialized question answering systems in various domains
including medical, social, education, and management. It will open up a series
of work on combining multiple sources based on the query need and in an ad-hoc
manner for many other tasks. This is critical in the big data age, when many
domains like healthcare have emerging complementary data sources such as texts,
databases, tables, and human networks. The project will actively participate in
outreach education programs, e.g., those to host underrepresented high school
students as summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.