* 1815247
* III: Small: Views of Data-Driven Business Processes: Foundations and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Victor Vianu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 506,000.00

In an organization governed by a complex business process, it is critical to
provide stakeholders with views of the workflow, customized according to their
role in the organization. Such views present the same workflow at various levels
of abstraction that expose only the information relevant (or authorized) for a
class of users. For example, an executive may require a high-level summary of a
business process while a logistics engineer might need fine-grained control over
actions involved in supply chain management. Workflow views are also needed to
specify interactions with external business partners, to integrate different
workflows, and to validate customizations of a workflow. The objective of this
project is to formally investigate specification mechanisms and semantics for
views of data-driven workflows, to study techniques for view analysis and
synthesis, and to develop view-based tools for the management of data-driven
workflows. The results of the project will benefit a wide variety of
applications ranging from e-commerce to digital government to health- care and
infrastructure for scientific applications. The project will contribute to the
development of human resources by training graduate and undergraduate students
in cutting-edge specification and static analysis techniques which are crucial
to business processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project presents significant
technical challenges. Analogously to database views, workflow views generally
consist of hiding and restructuring some of the data and actions of the
workflow. However, while database views are straightforwardly defined by
queries, views of data-driven workflows must deal simultaneously with data and
process. This requires operations whose expressivity goes beyond relational
algebra's operators and results in a much richer landscape of specification
mechanisms and semantics, which has not previously been explored. Moreover,
since the workflow specifications include the manipulation of data from an
infinite domain, analysis tasks involve infinite-state systems. Static analysis
of infinite-state systems is a notoriously challenging problem, to which
classical techniques from general-purpose software verification cannot be easily
applied, since these rely on finite-state abstractions. The project will bring
into play techniques from logic, automata theory, complexity theory, algorithms,
and automatic verification. It will develop formal foundations for views of
data-driven workflows, including syntax and semantics for view specifications
and consistency criteria connecting the view to the original workflow. It will
produce tools for checking consistency and synthesizing guaranteed-consistent
view specifications. It will yield a well-principled approach to integrating
workflows from different organizational units, by extending the well-known
local-as-view approach from data integration to workflow integration. Finally,
the project will explore the use of views as abstraction mechanisms in automatic
verification of business processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.