* 1815034
* Predictive monitoring of aperiodic sources
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Stanislav Djorgovski, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,873.00

Many studies of objects in the sky that vary in brightness look only at periodic
variation, with a regular and repeating change with time. However, most variable
astronomical sources are aperiodic, showing erratic and irregular changes. They
remain poorly studied in comparison to periodic sources, even though they can
play a key role in our understanding of complex dynamic physical environments,
from stars, to gas and dust flows, to galaxies. This work studies aperiodic
variability using the data from two NSF-supported projects, the Catalina Real-
time Transient Survey (CRTS), and the newly begun Zwicky Transient Facility
(ZTF). This is the first large-scale systematic study of these phenomena, and it
will be the definitive study, well into the next decade. It is an excellent case
study for data-intensive science, applying state-of-the-art machine learning
techniques to real data. It will expose students to cutting-edge data science,
and its products will contribute to projects that will train the next generation
in how to handle big astronomical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though the
majority of variable sources are aperiodic, they are poorly understood, and for
well-known examples like quasars and young stellar objects many fundamental
questions remain about the physical mechanisms behind their optical variability.
New sky surveys are enabling systematic studies of variability and discovering
many new phenomena, including sub-parsec separated quasar binaries, multi-year
long flares attributable to microlensing of explosive activity in the accretion
disk, and changing-state sources indicative of variable accretion rates. These
extreme behaviors should be easily discoverable with modern robust statistical
methods. This work will create generative data-derived models with novel non-
parametric discriminating features from CRTS data, and use the models to predict
the future behavior of aperiodic sources, which can then be monitored in real-
time using ZTF and other synoptic facilities. Prior work focused on robust
statistical characterization and identifying extreme variable classes. This will
be extended to more general aperiodic sources and more sophisticated non-
parametric generative models. The unprecedented sky coverage of ZTF joins with
the unequalled archival coverage of CRTS to make this the definitive study. In
keeping with the CRTS Open Data and ZTF alert policies, all transitioning
objects identified will be released to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.