* 1815322
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Covert/Secret and Efficient Message Transfer in (Mobile) Multi-Agent Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Joerg Kliewer, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,135.00

This project explores secret and efficient (preferably covert) communications by
harnessing the resources brought in by smart everyday devices in emerging
Internet of Things (IoT) environments. Reliability, efficiency, and secrecy are
essential requirements in communication networks. Hiding that communication is
even taking place is often crucial in adversarial environments and automatically
achieves the increasingly important societal goals of privacy and anonymity.
These indispensable features of today's networks are commonly obtained by
allocating a growing fraction of network resources which could otherwise be used
for communications. The last decade has seen a wide variety of novel networked
systems. For example, future 5G systems are supposed to host hundred times more
devices than current 4G networks. Rather than simply looking into how to
accommodate more communicating objects with limited communication resources
(energy, spectrum) and ask what the existing networks can do for them, this
project investigates what these new communicating objects can do for the
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on IoT scenarios in which
opportunistic and incremental addition of resources can result in large gains,
this project will develop both theoretical foundations and easily adoptable
practical algorithms that lead to substantial increases in covertness, security,
and reliability under limited energy and spectrum resources. The research plan
is organized in two central thrusts: The first thrust investigates a novel
covert, secure and efficient communication scheme between mobile nodes, which
has the main feature that any data transfer is only performed over short
distances, thus reducing exposure to adversarial actions as well as energy and
bandwidth requirements. The second thrust builds on the first one and devises
secure coding schemes for the case where an eavesdropper discovers that messages
are being exchanged and/or gets in possession of some helping IoT devices.
Rather than studying the performance of existing coding schemes in this
challenging environment, the goal is to find and study new coding strategies
that are tailored to these important IoT-based communication scenarios. This
project will offer technical solutions which are not present in previous
(predominantly high level systems) studies of opportunistic networking, such as
1) exploiting overhearing opportunities in diverse network geometries and under
various mobility patterns, 2) establishing covert communication via data storage
and retrieval in mobile environments, 3) using incremental redundancy (which can
be introduced at little cost in existing IoT network scenarios) for
communications in adversarial and non-adversarial transmission environments, and
4) designing low-complexity coding schemes to exploit this
redundancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.