* 1815458
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Final Frontier: Spectroscopic Probes of Galaxies at the Epoch of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Marusa Bradac, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2022
* USD 351,938.00

The cosmic Dark Ages (before the first stars formed) are thought to have ended
around 500 million years after the Big Bang when early light sources produced
enough energetic photons to ionize the neutral hydrogen. This era is referred to
as reionization. It is when the first galaxies formed. But when exactly did
reionization occur and how long did it last? What were the sources responsible
for ionizing the neutral gas? Was it the first galaxies or accretion onto black
holes? This project will answer these questions by using the best telescopes in
the world. The observations will include images and spectra of the first
galaxies, which enable a first glimpse of the chemical composition of this
important population. The project also includes a strong educational/public
outreach component. To help train tomorrow's scientists, the PI will develop an
observing course intended for K-12 students. The PI and co-PI are also
developing courses for non-science majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The epoch of
reionization, which signified the transformation of the universe from opaque to
transparent, is poorly understood. When did it start/end? Was it patchy or
smooth? How did galaxies reionize the universe (if they did)? What are the
properties of the earliest galaxies? To answer these questions, over the last
decades, several surveys have explored the high redshift universe at
progressively increasing depth. However, they still either lack the sample size
or depth (or both). What emerges from these surveys is that the answers to these
questions are likely tied to the properties of even fainter galaxies. This
project will address the problem by conducting a spectroscopic study of a large
sample of previously unexplored faint galaxy populations at redshifts z &gt; 6.
This will be achieved by using galaxy clusters that serve as cosmic telescopes
and by pre-selecting sources from deep ancillary imaging and low-resolution
spectroscopy data. This project will (1) provide the timeline of reionization,
(2) identify the exact role first galaxies played in this process, and (3) give
insight on the stellar properties of the earliest galaxies. The
educational/public outreach component of this project will include developing an
observing course for California State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS), intended for K-12 students. In addition, the investigators are also
developing new university courses entitled the "Physics of California'' and "The
physics of sustainable energy'' for non- science
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.