* 1815656
* CSR:Small:System Support for Petabyte Memories
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Mark Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 499,813.00

Computers have long separated working memory from permanent storage. Memory has
been managed via fixed-sized pages (like a page in a book) while storage gets
managed with large, variable-sized files (like a whole book). Especially for
computers that provide online services, memory is growing to mammoth size.
Equally important, new technologies will allow memory to be permanent like
storage. This project embraces these changes and will develop techniques to
manage memory more like files to speed access to huge data sets in a mammoth
amount of memory. The new techniques will be driven with new tools, data, and
analysis, all made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
five thrusts. First, the project will build and distribute new tools for
emulating computers with mammoth memories via virtualization and application-
specific compression. Second, the project will develop "file-only memory" to
support efficient management of the arbitrarily large regions that compose a
mammoth memory. Third, the project will analyze and mitigate memory
fragmentation that plagues old and new solutions to memory management. Fourth,
the project will development a full software-hardware stack for address
translation that scales efficiently to mammoth memory sizes. Fifth, the project
will engage undergraduates in both teaching of computer science generally, and
in the proposed research as assistants to graduate student researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project promises more efficient computers with
mammoth memories, leading to higher performance and fewer wasted resources.
Through the development and release of emulation tools, this work will allow
rapid efficient studies of mammoth memories not currently feasible. The study of
fragmentation will spur further research on new memory management techniques to
specifically address fragmentation of mammoth memories. The proposed system
enhancements will enable mammoth-memory systems at reduced cost and increased
efficiency and simplify management of large data sets. Finally, the
investigators will release all workloads, tools, and emulation platforms as open
source.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be available from the
research group home page (http://research.cs.wisc.edu/multifacet/) as well as
the investigators' home web pages. Emulation tools will be published to source
code repositories allowing collaborative development. Data sets will be
published in full on a web site hosted at the University of Wisconsin at Madison
or be provided via a query interface to large data sets. Papers and articles
will also be available on the research group web page.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.