* 1815491
* RI: Small: Learning to Discover Structure for 3D Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sharon Huang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,223.00

People are able to spontaneously perceive structure, that is, orderly, regular,
or coherent patterns and relationships, in images. When walking along a city
street, a human can instantly identify parallel lines, rectangles, rotational
symmetries, repetitive patterns, and many other types of structure. This project
develops a novel data-driven framework for structure discovery in computer
vision, leveraging the availability of massive data and recent advances in
machine learning techniques. The techniques developed in this project can be
applied to a wide spectrum of real-world applications such as 3D reconstruction
of man-made environments, virtual and augmented reality, and indoor rescue
robots. Further, the ability to understand 3D perceptual organization as humans
do can benefit other fields including (i) cognitive science, as it produces new
computational models which can be used to test and develop existing theories,
and to explore new details and aspects of the brain, (ii) human-robot
interaction, as it enables robots to reason in terms of geometric shape,
physics, and dynamics, and (iii) architectural engineering, as it facilitates
interactions with existing standards for construction and management of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is built upon a formal definition of
structure, consisting of (i) the constituent patterns, (ii) the domain of
replication or continuation of the patterns, and (iii) any change of the pattern
and domain over space and time (Witkin and Tenenbaum, 1983). The research has
three aims. The first aim lays the computational foundation by innovating
machine learning methods to detect the domain of the structure and its
constituent patterns, respectively. The second aim further establishes a unified
framework for structure discovery, going beyond the bottom-up scheme and
sequential processing. Here, the challenge lies in that structure often spans
large spatial extent, and is typically subject to pattern deformation and domain
distortion. In the last aim, the researchers incorporate the structure in
complex vision systems to demonstrate its advantage in real-world applications.
Ultimately, the project strives to significantly improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of 3D vision systems, and to enrich the general computer vision
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.