* 1815908
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Security Assurance in Short Range Communication with Wireless Channel Obfuscation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Hongbo Liu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2021
* USD 84,999.00

As the prevalence of mobile computing technologies and applications, short-range
communication over emerging aerial acoustic and visible light channel is
undergoing a fast rate of expansion with many promising benefits including low
power and peer-to-peer communication, without incurring complex network
infrastructure. Although those short range wireless channels have an inherent
and physical protection against many malicious attacks, the confidentiality of
the data transmission against eavesdropping remains a risk, motivating
considerable interest in the security of short range communication. Unlike
traditional cryptographic methods that rely on central security management
infrastructure to secure wireless links, this project proposes to obfuscate the
transmitting wireless signals by incorporating random channel dynamics to defend
against eavesdroppers. Specifically, based on specific wireless channel
characteristics, different channel obfuscation schemes are to be developed to
achieve information-theoretic secrecy with respect to aerial acoustic and
visible light channels. The proposed research will also contribute to
interdisciplinary education on wireless security for both graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to enhance
physical layer security for short range wireless communications over acoustic
and visible light channels. The research reveals that the unique characteristics
of different types of wireless channels can be exploited to perform channel
obfuscation for protecting secrecy against eavesdropping attacks. Particularly,
for acoustic channels, this project develops the channel obfuscation scheme
relying on self-jamming signals emitted by the legitimate receiver to secure
short-range communication. Moreover, a novel communication protocol based on
time-difference-of-arrival modulation is introduced to achieve accurate and
robust data transmission. For visible light communication, a channel obfuscation
scheme is developed for screen-to-camera channels to realize a secure secret key
distribution leveraging the color shift property of Liquid Crystal Display and
Light-Emitting Diode screens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.