* 1815406
* Hybrid Deterministic-Stochastic Methodology for Simulating Spatial Evolution in Large Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Natalia Komarova, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 399,976.00

The goal of this project is to develop new computational methods to study the
growth and spread of initially small mutant populations that drive biological
phenomena like spread of antibiotic resistance or development of treatment
resistant tumors. One notoriously difficult problem in evolutionary simulations
is the coexistence of very large and very small populations. This is a common
occurrence, because random mutations give rise to relatively small clones, which
could play an important role in evolution. For example, these small clones could
at some later time harbor further mutations that lead to the formation of a
'super-mutant,' which eventually takes over the population. It is the simulation
of such scenarios that presents serious computational problems, because the
larger the overall population, the slower the computational process. In many
realistic scenarios, further complications arise from spatial constraints.
Examples include solid tumors and biofilms--bacterial communities with complex
spatial structures, implicated both in public health and in industry. To
illustrate application of the computational techniques, the optimization of
melanoma (skin cancer) treatment will be studied in the presence of resistant
mutants that have developed 'addiction' to the drug. Mathematics can guide how
the on/off periods of therapy need to be timed to contain resistance. Similar
considerations apply to antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Complementing the
research will be efforts to introduce under-represented minority high-school
students to the process of scientific inquiry through a summer school, with the
opportunity to work on projects in computational biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the center of enhancing computational speed is the
development of a versatile technique capable of efficiently simulating large
heterogeneous stochastic populations. Spatial agent-based models of cellular
growth will be considered that are common to a wide variety of ecological and
evolutionary modeling endeavors. They take into account the processes of cell
division and death, as well as mutations and spatial interactions. Deterministic
(PDE) approximations of such spatial, stochastic processes generally do not
yield accurate time series. In this project, first, deterministic
representations of the agent-based models will be constructed by deriving the
stochastic master equation of the agent-based model and using the moment closure
techniques. This step will provide a fundamental correction to equations based
on mean-field behavior. Then, a spatial hybrid stochastic-deterministic
algorithm will be developed. The main problem is the 'stiffness' of typical
evolutionary systems, resulting from the existence of small, fluctuating
populations that can be essential to the final outcome. In traditional methods,
this leads to a dramatic decrease of the step size for large populations. Here,
a solution to this problem is proposed, by dynamically partitioning the
population into small and large subpopulations, with the assumptions that large
subpopulations are well described by deterministic laws and are decoupled from
the influence of small subpopulations, while the stochasticity of small
subpopulations is preserved (and the large populations still affect their
dynamics). These approaches will enable simulation of evolutionary processes in
large, multi-component, spatially structured evolutionary processes at
manageable speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.