* 1815251
* When are Disk Galaxies First Assembled?
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Susan Kassin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2024
* USD 403,034.00

Today nearly all galaxies that are actively forming stars are disk galaxies. Our
own galaxy, the Milky Way, is one example. Disk galaxies are composed of a thin
and symmetric rotating disk of stars and gas. This project will determine when
disk galaxies first formed in significant numbers. Researchers will measure the
fraction of disk galaxies over the last 10 billion years. These fractions will
be compared with two theoretical models for disk formation in order to
understand how disks form. In addition, simulated observations will be made of
theoretical models of galaxies. A large set of these simulated observations will
be used to train a classification algorithm to automatically distinguish between
disks and colliding galaxies, which are easily mistaken for disks. The resulting
algorithm will then be applied to existing observations of hundreds of galaxies
in order to identify the fraction of disks. This project will also establish an
"Astro Scholars" annual week-long intensive mini-course targeted at students in
local Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Scholars will
receive financial support. Monthly follow- up after the summer program will
extend the impact of the program for 6 months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
measurements of the fraction of disk galaxies are inaccurate. They do not take
into account that some colliding galaxies can appear to be disk galaxies. To
measure the fraction of disks over time, researchers will create disk criteria.
These criteria will determine if a given observation indicates a disk or
colliding galaxies. The criteria will be created with models of galaxies using
publicly available suites, VELA and FIRE, of computer simulations. Researchers
will simulate observations with mock catalogues that will be compared directly
to observations, taking into account the blurring effects of the Earth's
atmosphere. Researchers will create disk criteria by comparing the intrinsic
states of the simulations (disk or collision) with the simulated observations.
These criteria will indicate the probability an observation is a disk or
colliding galaxies. These criteria will be applied to KMOS3D integral field unit
observations of nearly 600 galaxies. They will measure the fraction of star-
forming galaxies which are disks over time. The disk criteria will serve as a
powerful tool for recent (and ongoing) large surveys of galaxy kinematics. They
will be key for next-generation surveys that will push observations of galaxy
kinematics to the very early universe, when the first galaxies formed, and
galaxy collisions were even more frequent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.