* 1815339
* CIF:Small:Collaborative Research: Energy-Aware Location Optimization in Emerging Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 263,104.00

Recent years have witnessed an unprecedented emergence of new applications of
wireless networks in different aspects of life. These new applications and their
corresponding opportunities have improved the quality of life, provided economic
growth, and facilitated the expansion of new businesses. Looking forward,
several key defining aspects stand out for emerging wireless networks. These
include energy efficiency as a central feature enabling large-scale networks,
prolonged network lifetime, and "green" (i.e., environmentally friendly)
operation. Networks will also be highly heterogeneous in nature, consisting of
nodes with different power, communication, and computational capabilities. Most
wireless nodes, in order to fulfill their functions, will be endowed with
sensing capabilities, connecting the physical world to the virtual information
world. Networks are to remain connected with high reliability so that
information from one node may be conveyed to another anywhere, and at any time.
The emerging wireless networks are often considered to be multi-tiered,
consisting of the nodes, their access points, and possibly higher-tiered
gateways, and endowed with mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The macro behavior of
a wireless network (in terms of its overall sensing capability, energy
efficiency, communication reliability, connectivity, and mobility) depends
heavily on the micro placement/locations of its constituent nodes. This project
explores the problem of energy-efficient node deployment in heterogeneous,
multi-tiered, and mobile wireless networks, taking into account connectivity and
autonomy. The innovative component exploits quantization theory, a seemingly
unlikely candidate that is originally developed for signal compression, as a
promising tool to address these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.