* 1815690
* CSR: Small: Toward a Scalable, Multi-Tenant, Edge-Cloud Infrastructure for Real-Time Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Gabriel Parmer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

Applications are increasingly cloud-connected, and are dependent on fast service
that is impossible if their requests must travel to a cloud data center. Edge-
computing places a smaller amount of computation on the network very close to
the applications themselves, providing fast servicing of requests. This enables
new application types such as virtual and augmented reality, which want to
display information to users with imperceptible
overheads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, current cloud computing systems
cannot support the density or diversity of applications found in edge-computing
deployments. Each connected device -- be it a cell phone, a smart building
sensor, or an autonomous vehicle -- may require different software to run in the
edge cloud, and mobile users may constantly be arriving and departing. Since
these software components cannot necessarily be trusted, resources must be
carefully isolated to provide security and prevent interference. This research
creates EdgeOS, which provides strong multi-tenant isolation while ensuring
quick response times, and efficient use of computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EdgeOS introduces a number of system
abstractions to enable multi-tenant edge-clouds: a new lightweight process
abstraction that enables a very large number of clients to be served
efficiently, and with isolation; controlled communication to ensure safe,
efficient coordination; and system support for controlling the service time of
various clients to ensure the timely processing of requests. These new operating
system abstractions will help edge clouds realize their potential in offering
low-latency services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EdgeOS research is paired with an
educational initiative that will deepen the systems curriculum, engage
undergraduate students in research, and involve a diverse body of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.