* 1815854
* CHS: SMALL: Stress Reflection Systems in Medical Team Training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Jenkins-Levy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 376,643.00

Medical personnel are frequently exposed to physiological stress which can
result in anxiety and other mental health issues. Indeed, stress is one of the
leading causes of errors and long-term health implications for medical personnel
such as emergency medical workers. Because of this, there have been efforts to
introduce stress training into medical personnel training programs. If a trainee
can identify, visualize, and reflect on specific events that trigger stress,
performance in future situations may improve. While there has been much work
focused on detecting stress from physiological response data of individuals,
less work has focused on questions of how to design interventions centered
around presenting stress data for an individual's comprehension, and even less
so in teams and groups. This project's goal is to design, develop, and evaluate
a Team Stress Reflection system, assessing its effect on stress discussions and
comprehension in medical personnel team training. Societal impact will be
realized through innovating new technologies that can be effectively used by
medical personnel for better performance in the field, as well as supporting
education and diversity through mentorship of STEM students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main
research thrusts. The first is to investigate the current stress discussion
practices that occur in paramedic team-based simulation training and the impact
these discussions have on stress comprehension. This will entail obtaining a
detailed transcription of videos recorded during training and performing an
ethnomethodologically informed, inductive data-driven analysis to find recurring
patterns of interaction. A result of this thrust will be a set of user needs to
inform the development of a Team Stress Reflection system and collection of a
dataset of trainees' physiological responses during typical training simulations
for use in evaluating the stress reflection display in the third stage of the
project. The second thrust is to design and develop the Team Stress Reflection
system that presents the trainees' physiological responses and situated video
for individual, dyad, or team review. In the third thrust, the team will
evaluate the effect of and reactions to the system on trainer-trainee stress
discussion and trainee stress comprehension in paramedic team-based simulations
through a series of experiments and measures comparing teams using the system to
teams not using it. The results will inform the problem space of stress
reflection displays as well as provide a firm basis for the feasibility and
benefit of stress display intervention on medical personnel
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.