* 1815584
* Collaborative research: Unravelling mechanisms of Fe oxidation using synthetic biology and biochemistry
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Gralnick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,993.00

Iron-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB) take advantage of Earth's abundant iron for
growth. They form iron oxides or rust that sequester toxic metals and nutrients.
By understanding how these microbes use iron in the environment and developing
tools to domesticate them, it would be possible to harness this power for
bioremediation of water, wastewater, and sediment. This research would develop
the ability to monitor iron oxidation in natural and engineered systems, and
furthermore optimize the process using in situ or engineered organisms. This
project will educate a diverse population in microbiology, biochemistry, and
synthetic biology, to develop scientific creative skills and help prepare them
to use microbiology to address environmental and biotechnical challenges.
Outreach activities include a "Making microbes work for us!" workshop for girls
in middle school, who are first-generation college-bound students, and a range
of public lectures, town halls, videos, and podcasts. The overarching message is
that microbes are useful, integral parts of ecosystems, which can be harnessed
to meet environmental and societal needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on two putative iron (Fe) oxidase systems, outer membrane cytochrome-
porins Cyc2 and MtoAB, from neutrophilic FeOB. The objective is to validate the
Fe oxidation activity and determine differences in function, providing
information required for applying these Fe oxidases in synthetic systems. Thus,
the project aims are to demonstrate and characterize Fe(II) oxidation by
purified Cyc2 and MtoAB; express Fe oxidases Cyc2 and MtoAB in an engineered
Shewanella oneidensis chassis strain to compare and optimize function in an
environmentally-relevant strain; and develop genetic tools in neutrophilic
autotrophic FeOB using synthetic biology. The Fe oxidase Cyc2 and MtoAB
sequences will be taken from a common freshwater FeOB, Sideroxydans
lithotrophicus ES-1, heterologously expressed, and characterized for redox
potential and activity under a range of environmentally-relevant conditions. In
addition, a novel chassis organism, Shewanella oneidensis, will be engineered to
express Cyc2 and MtoAB, then assayed for Fe oxidation activity under various
conditions. In parallel, the project will also develop tools and methods to
domesticate FeOB. Development of these genetic systems will enable this and
other research groups to query and verify otherwise recalcitrant pathways. This
work will substantiate Fe oxidase function of Cyc2 and MtoAB, and provide
insight into the biochemical mechanisms and the optimal conditions of
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.