* 1815508
* NSF/MCB-BSF:  Elucidating the transient contact-dependent molecular trade in multispecies bacterial communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ming Hammond, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Diverse bacteria are found everywhere outside, on animals and plants, as well as
in the gut. Thus, the behavior and activity of bacterial communities in these
varied environment affects many industries, including agriculture, wastewater
treatment, biotech, and medicine. This collaborative project focuses on the
recent discovery that two bacterial cells that touch each other can share some
materials. By deriving the rules and limits for this contact-dependent molecular
exchange, the investigators could learn to harness this process to make
bacterial communities work better. This NSF-BSF project will provide cross-
disciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as cross-
cultural opportunities to learn about the science community and research in
Israel. As outreach to the general public, the investigators will use striking
cell biology photos from the project to jump-start conversations about science
at informal events to discuss science with local adults and families. Finally, a
new part of a lecture course will provide younger students with practice in
science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria reside in multispecies
communities in the wild; however, the molecular consequences of interspecies
contact have been hardly explored. Accumulating data indicate that neighboring
bacteria can exchange proteins and metabolites in a contact-dependent manner.
This exchange is shown to elicit new phenotypes, but the scope and rules
governing this phenomenon are unrevealed. This NSF-BSF collaborative project
aims to provide the first comprehensive view of non-hereditary molecular
exchange occurring upon bacterial interspecies contact. First, researchers will
investigate whether RNAs are exchanged between neighboring cells, which would
expand the scope of this phenomenon. This aim also will lead to development of
novel synthetic biology tools for RNA tracking and tagging. Second, researchers
will perform global transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of recipient cells
from mixed-species cultures in order to determine the extent and identities of
RNAs and proteins that are delivered from one species to the other. The analysis
in this aim also will help to establish rules or sequence barcodes that govern
RNA and protein exchange. Third, researchers will use both systemwide and
targeted approaches to evaluate the effects of contact-dependent molecular
exchange on gene regulation and signaling. All these aims will be accompanied
with the study of the impact and the contribution of intercellular nanotubes to
these events. It is expected that the results and methodologies from this study
of model dual-species systems will provide a framework for elucidating more
complex communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project
is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.