* 1815475
* The Physics of Satellite Galaxy Quenching: Novel Analysis of Observations, and High-Resolution Simulations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Cooper, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2023
* USD 347,281.00

This project will study the physical mechanisms responsible for halting the
formation of stars in satellite galaxies. These galaxies, which orbit more
massive galaxies, represent a large segment of the global galaxy population.
They are poorly understood. The proposed research will combine analysis of
imaging and spectroscopic datasets as well as computer simulations to study the
physical mechanism for quenching of star formation in these satellite galaxies.
Dr. Cooper will also educate and mentor underrepresented students as part of the
new Cal-Bridge program, which is designed to increase the number of minority
students who successfully transition from Cal State Universities into graduate
school at UC campuses in astrophysics or physics. As a core member of the
program, Dr. Cooper will serve as a one-on-one mentor and research advisor to
individual Cal-Bridge scholars, while also developing day-long, program-wide
professional development seminars, focusing on topics ranging from scientific
coding to preparation for the GRE exam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite success at
modeling the evolution of massive galaxies over cosmic time, modern models of
galaxy formation fail to reproduce the properties of low-mass galaxies over
cosmic time. This shortcoming in our theoretical picture is largely driven by an
inability to understand the physics of satellite (or "environmental") quenching.
To address this shortcoming, the proposed research program employs observations
of satellite galaxies across a broad range in stellar mass and host halo mass at
z &lt; 2 in tandem with a focused semi-analytic modeling effort, to identify the
particular physical mechanisms at play once a satellite is accreted onto a host
halo. The proposed analysis will test a model whereby starvation and ram-
pressure stripping are the dominant quenching mechanisms above and below a
critical scale, respectively. Dr. Cooper will lead a targeted spectroscopic
campaign to catalog an unprecedented sample of satellite galaxies in groups at z
~ 1. This effort will be complemented by a statistical analysis of satellites at
z &lt; 2 using deep imaging in legacy extragalactic fields. This program will
significantly expand our knowledge of the physical processes that quench
satellites and drive the build-up of the quiescent galaxy population at z &lt;
2, directly addressing a major failure of current galaxy formation models. In
addition, Dr. Cooper will educate and mentor underrepresented students as part
of the new Cal-Bridge program, which is designed to increase the number of
minority students who successfully transition from Cal State Universities into
graduate school at UC campuses in astrophysics or
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.