* 1815780
* CSR: Small: ARTEMIS: Algorithm-Hardware Co-Design for Efficient Machine Learning Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Gauri Joshi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

With the increased popularity of machine learning algorithms deployed on a
variety of hardware systems, the problem of identifying the best model among
numerous possible configurations has drawn significant attention. The problem is
compounded by the need to select the right platform to run these applications,
under given power or latency constraints. This "hardware wall" forces machine
learning service providers to constantly redesign the underlying hardware fabric
to satisfy certain constraints. This project develops tools for automatic and
efficient co-design of machine learning algorithms and hardware platforms that
will result in significant cost and time-to-market reduction for machine
learning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces efficient meta-
learning for machine learning systems and algorithm-hardware platform co-design.
Specifically, the project will develop meta-learning algorithms for the
optimization of machine learning models under system hardware constraints and
formulate the hardware design of efficient machine learning systems as a machine
learning problem itself, that can be effectively solved by meta-learning
optimization algorithms. Finally, the project will develop multi-objective
algorithms for the co-design of machine learning applications and hardware
platforms they need to run on, and exploit domain knowledge from hardware
engineering and design schemes to substantially accelerate hardware-aware model
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project seek to change the
landscape of modeling, optimization, and design methodologies for efficient
machine learning systems. Furthermore, the work aims to have an important
educational and mentoring component by potentially changing how engineers are
trained in a multidisciplinary fashion for dealing with next generation
technological advances in general, and the problem of efficiently and
intelligently co-designing machine learning algorithms and the hardware
platforms they are running on, in particular. The project will involve a diverse
graduate and undergraduate trainee population, while expanding the project's
outreach to high-school and middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data, code, results, and simulators developed in this project will be made
available publicly throughout the duration of the project and for at least four
years after the end of the project. The location of the repository is on the
website of Carnegie Mellon University's Energy Aware Computing group
(www.ece.cmu.edu/~enyac).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.