* 1815796
* III: Small: In-memory, Distributed, and  Adaptive Spatio-textual Query Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Walid Aref, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 432,295.00

The widespread use of GPS-enabled smartphones along with the popularity of
microblogging and social networking, e.g., Twitter and Facebook, has resulted in
producing large amounts of text data. Typically, this text data, e.g., the
tweets, are geo-tagged by the location in which the text data has been produced.
Many applications make good use of this stream of geo-tagged text data (also
termed spatial-keyword or spatio-textual data), and provide services to users
based on the textual and the spatial components of the data. Applications need
to process large numbers of user queries against spatio-textual data. For
example, location-aware ad targeting publish/subscribe systems are required to
disseminate millions of ads and promotions to millions of users based on the
users' locations and textual profiles. This project will address the hurdles
that face these applications and their underlying systems in order to function
properly. More specifically, this project will address the following research
challenges that face spatio-textual servers: (1) the scalability challenge to
support large amounts of spatio-textual data streams and queries in real-time;
(2) the expressiveness challenge that is exemplified in the lack of mechanisms
that adequately express complex spatio-textual queries -- querying capabilities
need to match the growing sophistication and complexity of the continuously
evolving location services; and (3) the adaptivity challenge, where systems need
to adapt to changes in data distribution over time because in location services,
location-data distribution, users' interests, and hot keyword topics change over
time and a scalable spatio-textual server needs to continuously adapt to these
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address these scalability,
expressiveness, and adaptivity challenges when processing large numbers of
queries on continuously-streamed spatio-textual data. The project will
investigate how to support spatio-textual data and queries as first-class
citizens in an in-memory distributed data system. Scalable architectures for
handling large amounts of spatio-textual data and continuous queries will be
investigated. In contrast to tailored solutions, relational-like spatio-textual
building-block operators will be developed to express extended-SQL spatio-
textual queries along with costing, algebraic transformation rules, and query
optimization techniques. To address scalability and the variation in the
workload, adaptive and frequency-aware in-memory distributed indexing and query
processing techniques will be developed to dynamically organize and process the
continuously-evolving spatio-textual data. The spatio-textual indexing and query
processing techniques to be developed will dynamically account for the changes
and differences in the frequencies of keywords within the various spatial
regions to automatically choose the best spatio-textual data organization that
optimizes the system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.