* 1815697
* RI: Small: Learning discrete structure from continuous spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Yusu Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 10/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Science, medicine, business, and engineering are increasingly data-driven.
Hypotheses, diagnoses, decisions, and designs are made by gathering and
analyzing a wealth of data in search of meaningful patterns. It is the goal of
the field of machine learning to develop methods for inferring and reasoning
about patterns in the data. The research supported by this award addresses the
question of learning from unlabeled data, one of the more vexing problems of
data science. The PI's analyze and develop algorithms for problems such as
clustering, i.e., finding groups of similar objects, as well as understanding
continuously changing attributes in data. By integrating machine learning,
modeling and geometric data analysis, this work injects new ideas and
methodologies to modern data analysis, helps build practical algorithms for
unsupervised and unsupervised learning and analyze their properties and domains
of applicability. Students working on this project have a unique opportunity to
be exposed to a broad spectrum of topics including machine learning, statistics,
geometry and applied mathematics.

On a more technical level, the unifying perspective for the proposed research is
that many of these unsupervised learning problems can be viewed as recovering
structure or invariants of the underlying continuous space through the lens of
the discrete data. This work takes that point of view to consider a number of
important aspects of unsupervised learning including hierarchical clustering in
the density model, data quantization, graphon clustering and estimation, as well
as learning metric structure from data. The project also considers applications
of these ideas to supervised learning, particularly in helping to scale
algorithms to large data. While the work on this project concentrates on
theoretical analyses, these are developed with a view toward practical
algorithms, implementations and applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.