* 1815455
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Computational Methods for Argument Mining: Extraction, Aggregation, and Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Claire Cardie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,823.00

Understanding, evaluating and generating arguments are all crucial elements in
the decision-making and reasoning process. Not surprisingly then, a multitude of
arguments are encountered and constructed on a daily basis as decisions are made
at work and at home, in our social life and in our civic life. In spite of their
ubiquity in our lives, most people are not particularly skilled in the
interpretation or generation of arguments. At best, making sense of the often
massive amount of argumentative online text on a topic of interest remains a
daunting task. And while numerous tools exist for representing, modeling and
visualizing arguments and argumentative discussions, they are limited by the
substantial human effort required to input, organize and annotate arguments for
use by the tools. Thus there exists a pressing need for, and this project aims
to develop, automated techniques from the field of Natural Language Processing
to support all facets of argumentation. This project will have a wide array of
broader impacts, including providing other&lt;br/&gt;researchers with annotated
datasets and tools for the analysis and generation of arguments, enhancing
education through graduate and &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate mentoring, and promoting
STEM education diversity through programs for middle and high school girls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to break new ground in the
burgeoning area of argument mining. It develops a collection of computational
models that comprise the basis of an argumentation toolkit---methods that can be
combined and reused to support a range of argumentation applications. The
project focuses on inter-related threads of research covering three critical
areas of exploration for computational argumentation: (1) argument extraction---
making sense of argumentative text. Drawing upon recent developments in
structured learning, techniques are developed to identify the components and the
structure of an argument within a single document or single turn in an online
dialog. (2) Argument aggregation---clustering the components of argumentative
text (e.g. sentences, turns) drawn from multiple documents according to the
facets of the topic under discussion that they address. Representation learning
methods are proposed to better capture topical content and argumentative styles.
(3) Argument generation---constructing coherent arguments via rewriting. A
neural argument generation framework with key phrase extraction as an
intermediate representation is created to improve interpretation of sentences
from different sources. A discourse-aware neural generation model is also
investigated as an extension to improve the coherence of the generated
text.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.