* 1815896
* CIF: Small: Sequential and Compound Estimation for Computational Imaging Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Vivek Goyal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 490,462.00

The widespread use of imaging technologies across biology, chemistry, material
science, medicine, and other fields is motivated by the great innate human
ability for visual information processing. Imaging is often limited, however, by
the damage to a sample caused by the imaging process, such as sputtering due to
the incident ion or electron beam in scanned beam microscopy. With conventional
methods, a sample may be destroyed before enough information has been gained to
form a useful image. This project develops methods for reducing the necessary
dose in microscopy systems. This may make it possible to image molecular or
biological species not before imaged, or to increase the speed of imaging so
that new dynamic phenomena are revealed. The project also includes dissemination
of results to broad audiences through expository writing, general-audience
talks, cross-disciplinary training, and production of teaching
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Poisson models are often exploited when
measured signals are due to small numbers of detected particles. A major premise
of this project is to combine the Poisson modeling of such detection counts with
Poisson modeling of the numbers of interacting particles in low-current beams.
The project develops theory and methods for the resulting compound estimation
problems. The project explores the use of time-resolved sensing to reduce the
uncertainty due to the source shot noise in compound processes. Furthermore,
time-resolved sensing enables the decomposition of a data collection process
into a sequence of less-damaging steps, and the project will develop theory and
methods for sequential estimation and adaptive data collection. Analysis will
inspire and be informed by proof-of-concept experiments. The ultimate limit of
learning about a sample without damaging it is achieved with certain quantum-
mechanical interaction-free measurements. The project will develop theory for
sequential interaction-free measurements to establish when they may be superior
to conventional measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.