* 1815529
* RI: Small: Computational analysis of eye movements in reading: reader characteristics, cognitive state, and natural language processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Roger Levy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Reading is the most widely practiced skill in the world. It occupies many hours
of our daily lives and is crucial to functioning successfully in modern society.
When we read, our eyes move over the text in a way that reflects how we
perceive, process, and understand it. This project uses eye tracking to develop
a new approach to studying how our eyes move during reading and what eye
movement patterns can reveal about readers' linguistic knowledge and how they
interact with text. In particular, the researchers develop eye tracking-based
methods that automatically determine readers linguistic proficiency, how well
they understand the text, and how difficult they find it. The project improves
automatic text processing by machines, by taking into account information about
how humans read. This research program benefits society by advancing our
scientific understanding of language processing during reading and enabling new
technologies that support human readers from a wide range of backgrounds and
skill levels. It lays the foundations for future digital platforms that make it
easier for people to access textual information, improve literacy, learn new
languages, and personalize text content and complexity according to readers'
needs and goals.

The project introduces a novel conceptual and computational approach to studying
human reading with both native and non-native speakers, by leveraging broad
coverage eye movement patterns during reading of free-form text. It develops a
computational framework that connects eye movement in reading to linguistic
properties of the text, the readers' linguistic knowledge and their cognitive
state during reading. To realize this framework, the project first focuses on
using eye movement in reading to automatically predict readers' linguistic
proficiency and estimate their comprehension of specific parts of a text. These
and other related tasks help to characterize how language comprehension
manifests in gaze and unfolds over time, and also lead to the development of a
predictive computational framework for native and non-native reading. Its second
focus is on integrating data and representations from eye tracking in natural
language processing, with the aim of developing applications which support and
enhance human reading and language learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.