* 1815337
* RI: Small: Expressive Reasoning and Learning about Actions under Uncertainty via Probabilistic Extension of Action Language
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joohyung Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 363,799.00

Automated reasoning about dynamic worlds is an important capability for robust
intelligent systems. Action languages allow for the description of actions and
their effects in dynamic domains in a way that is based on natural language but
sufficiently formal for modeling in knowledge-based systems. Today's action
languages do not easily allow such systems to account for the probability and
uncertainty necessary to model human-like commonsense reasoning. Existing action
languages also assume full specification of a system in advance of one-shot
execution of the logic program, which does not easily operate with continuous
streams of data. This project will develop an action language based on the
mathematical foundation that combines logic and probability. The research will
join the representation and reasoning advantages of logical AI to the advantages
in statistical AI to compute and learn quantitative specifications from data.
The new action language will jointly address commonsense reasoning and learning
about actions in uncertain dynamic domains. Such a system allows us to
scrutinize and understand the system behavior, which is vital to the design of
systems that are explainable and interpretable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is to design and implement a novel action language that is highly expressive for
modeling various aspects of dynamic systems under uncertainty and which applies
to knowledge-rich diagnosis and stream reasoning. The formalism will be built
upon a recent probabilistic extension of answer set programs, called LPMLN,
which incorporates the weight scheme of Markov Logic into the language of answer
set programming. The formalism will enable probabilistic diagnostic reasoning
and counterfactual reasoning about dynamic domains. Inference and learning
methods for the probabilistic action language will be derived from the methods
in logic programming and statistical relational learning. The framework will be
further extended to integrate reasoning over observations given as streams of
data. The methods produced will be useful for several applications that require
integration of knowledge representation and other areas, such as robotics and
autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.