* 1815598
* RI:Small:Tractable Decision-Theoretic Planning Driven by Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 466,514.00

Automated planning is about finding a sequence of actions that is expected to
successfully complete the task at hand. Decision-theoretic planning approaches
automated planning as a sequence of decisions, each of which optimizes the
planner's combined immediate and longer-term preferences. This approach to
automated planning allows for realistic actions whose outcomes are often
uncertain and reasons with the planner's possibly inexact preferences in
addition to precise goals. However, decision-theoretic planning relies on an
accurate specification of the planning problem, which is often impractical and
is computationally very costly. This research is addressing these challenges by
investigating a new and meaningful planning problem representation that is
learned directly from data, which alleviates the need for tedious
specifications. The representation is designed to yield more efficient
computation of solutions. Consequently, this research has the potential to
transition automated planning to large pragmatic applications, such as in flow
routing in high-density computer networks, which will be demonstrated in this
project. The project will train graduate students for entering the workforce in
an important area of artificial intelligence, and it will facilitate an
international research collaboration between researchers in US and Canada. The
PI will use the outcomes of this research to inform his classroom instruction,
which will provide students with exposure to how automated planning can be
useful to the society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is merging
two threads of previous progress toward developing a new graphical model called
the dynamic sum-product-max network. In these previous threads, the PI
generalized sum-product networks, which allow efficient probabilistic inference,
in two directions. First, along the temporal dimension thereby allowing
inference over a sequence of variables, and second, enabling efficient non-
sequential decision making by including decision and utility variables. This
research is reconciling the fundamental hardness of decision-theoretic planning
with the efficiency of dynamic sum-product-max networks by studying which class
of planning problems can be compactly represented by the new model. As these
models can be directly learned from data, the research is also establishing the
appropriate schema for the data and creating an evaluation testbed of datasets.
A final thrust is developing a portfolio of methods for automatically learning
both the structure and parameters of dynamic sum-product-max networks from
appropriate data, with a focus on learning valid models. The research plan is
expected to yield a new graphical representation and associated methods that
allow efficient data-driven planning whose utility will be demonstrated by real-
world applications in collaboration with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.