* 1815922
* Analytic and Geometric Inverse Problems and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Katya Krupchyk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 229,094.00

The goal of the project is to develop new mathematical techniques to attack
central and challenging questions in inverse problems. Being at the core of
technological advances and modern scientific investigations, inverse problems
are concerned with determining properties of a medium from indirect, incomplete,
or noisy observations. Applications of inverse problems range over a broad
spectrum of geophysical, sonar, and medical imaging techniques, used for finding
location of oil and mineral deposits in the interior of the Earth, early
detection of pulmonary edema, as well as monitoring of lung function. A major
topic for this project is the fundamental Calderon problem, which forms the
basis of Electrical Impedance Tomography, an imaging modality with applications
in biomedical imaging and nondestructive testing of mechanical parts. The
Calderon problem asks whether the conductivity of a medium can be determined by
performing voltage and current measurements on the surface of the medium. The
specific focus of the project is on recovering the conductivity of a rough
medium by performing measurements along possibly small portions of the boundary
surface, a situation ubiquitous in practice, as well as on reconstructing the
conductivity of an anisotropic medium, such as the muscle tissue in the human
body, say. The investigator will also attack significant inverse problems
arising in fluid dynamics, elasticity, and anisotropic linear and non-linear
electromagnetism. The novel mathematical approaches to be developed in the
project may lead to important advances in medical and seismic imaging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the following four significant
research topics. The first one is inverse boundary problems with partial data in
the low regularity setting. In this class of problems one seeks to determine low
regularity coefficients of partial differential equations (PDE), representing
characteristics of a medium, from boundary measurements performed along small
portions of the boundary. Motivated by recovery of material parameters in
anisotropic media, the second topic is concerned with geometric inverse boundary
problems, where one wishes to recover also topological and differential
characteristics of the underlying Riemannian manifold. The third topic proposes
a broad and systematic attack on the phenomenon of increasing stability for
partial data inverse boundary problems for elliptic PDE in the high frequency
regime, driven by the need to design reconstruction algorithms with high
resolution. The investigator aims to develop the innovative approach of bringing
the powerful techniques of semiclassical analysis to bear on this important
class of problems. Inspired by the study of the stability of matter and non-
hermitian quantum mechanics, the fourth topic proposes to investigate the
distribution of complex eigenvalues for non-self-adjoint operators of
Schrodinger type, in the spirit of the classical Keller and Lieb-Thirring
bounds. This research is to be carried out in the general setting of non-compact
manifolds, whose structure at infinity generalizes the Euclidean one, relying
upon the powerful techniques of geometric microlocal analysis. While seemingly
quite independent of each other, the different parts of the project are in fact
intimately connected, there being a synergy amongst them, and tools developed in
one part, such as Carleman and resolvent estimates, say, can lead to progress in
the others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.