* 1815637
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Improving Spectrum Efficiency for Hyper-Dense IoT Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xiaoli Ma, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

The emerging Internet of Things (IoT) technology will enable a whole new set of
applications, imposing far reaching influence on many aspects of society,
including management of health, transportation, agriculture, safety and
emergency and disaster response. At the same time, the massive growth of IoT
deployments poses several grand challenges to the wireless industry for their
successful operation. This project aims to develop novel IoT architectures and
algorithms to enable large-scale IoT deployments. In particular, through close
collaboration of three academic institutions and industry, the proposed research
will make advances by introducing holistic, cross-layer design framework and
protocols for improving spectral/energy efficiency and latency of massive IoT
networks. The research outcomes will support emerging standardization activities
to enable IoT in next-generation wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims at tackling the following challenges: 1) System-Centric Waveform
Design for Massive IoT: The researchers will couple stochastic geometry
techniques and ambiguity functions of carrier waveforms to perform system-wide
capacity analysis, compare waveform candidates for deployment suitability,
develop joint equalizer and waveform designs for massive IoT deployments, and
propose new waveforms having a good spectral efficiency, interference
resilience, and latency characteristics. 2) Graph-based Radio Resource
Management: Judicious radio resource management is critical to the proper
functioning of hyper-dense IoT networks. The project will exploit weighted
partitioning and matching tools from graph theory to develop waveform-aware
dynamic resource allocation schemes to suppress mutual interference among a
diverse set of wireless IoT links and improve spectrum utilization efficiency in
single-hop and multi-hop massive IoT deployments. 3) Core network Connection
Efficiency: Rethinking the core network functions for connection of massive IoT
is required as they are not designed considering the IoT traffic
characteristics. The project will develop and rigorously study an aggregation
based connectivity model to manage multiple IoT device traffic using the same
resources (i.e., bearers). For efficient groupings of the IoT devices that will
share the same connection, researchers will use efficient evolutionary
clustering methods, while giving preference to the interference minimizing
groups obtained in earlier thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.