* 1815650
* SaTC: TTP: Small: Enhancing Container Security via Fine-Grained System Resource Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kun Sun, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 489,287.00

Linux containers have become a popular light-weight virtualization platform for
effective on-demand computing. Their use ranges from simple high-performance
computing (HPC) clusters to fully orchestrated enterprise systems. As such they
have become attractive targets for attackers. This project aims at improving the
trustworthiness and reliability of the Linux containers and their applications.
With the substantial security enhancement against malicious attacks, it could
promote the adaptation of the light-weight container platform, particularly, in
the HPC community to satisfy the needs on mobility of compute. In addition, the
developed techniques are generic and can be easily ported or extended to protect
other Linux platforms that have the basic security primitives
enabled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a novel and practical
framework to enhance container security via enforcing dynamic system resource
constraints based on the lifecycle phases of a particular container platform.
Particularly, since the same operating system (OS) kernel is shared among all
containers on a host, when one malicious container escapes from the user-level
process into the OS kernel, all other containers are compromised too. The
project can dramatically reduce the attack surface of the host OS by smoothly
integrating dynamic filters with the existing security primitives (e.g.,
seccomp, capabilities, and cgroups) in Linux kernels. Moreover, the combination
of these enhanced security primitives provides more power and flexibility on
attack mitigation. This security enhancement is user-transparent and has a
minimal overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.