* 1815978
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the physics of galaxy clusters with comprehensive cosmological simulations
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Lars Hernquist, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 425,000.00

Galaxy clusters are some of the largest known structures in the universe.
Modeling their growth over the age of the universe will give us insight on how
matter, energy, and the laws of physics influence the universe that we see
today. This project will add some more details to the computer modeling to
provide better approximations to the physics governing the behavior of the gas
in galaxy clusters. The results of these new models will be simulations that can
be used by other researchers who are studying galaxies and galaxy
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy clusters are some of the largest
structures in the universe. Modeling their growth over cosmological time scales
gives us insight on how dark matter, ordinary matter, and the laws of physics
influence the universe that we see today. The proposed project will add more
detailed physics in the form of magnetic fields, anisotropic thermal conduction,
and radiative feedback from active galactic nuclei (AGN). The project will use a
moving mesh code known as AREPO to perform these simulations. The simulations
will follow the IllustrisTNG cosmological models with the added physics. Zoom-
ins of clusters will be used to compare the effects of the new physics models
and to make observational predictions for future ground and space-based
observatories. At the end of the project, the data and simulations will be made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.