* 1815616
* SHF: Small: Soft-FET: Phase Transition Material Based Soft Switching Field Effect Transistor for Energy Efficient CMOS
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Sanjay Banerjee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

With the rapid advances in computing systems spanning from billions of IoT
(Internet of Things) devices to high performance exa-scale supercomputers,
energy efficient design is an absolute must. In a modern System-on-a chip (SoC)
design, supply voltage scaling is the primary driver to reduce the energy
consumption. Voltage droops caused by the peak switching current as well sudden
changes in current activity of various logic blocks requires larger voltage
guard-bands, thereby degrading the system level energy efficiency. Thus, there
is a critical need to develop circuit topologies to reduce the peak switching
currents as well as sudden current fluctuations to reduce the voltage droops and
to realize a compact and energy-efficient power delivery network. Principles
underlying the research in this project can be readily transferred to existing
SoC designs benefiting the integrated chip design industry, and ultimately the
consumer society. The students engaged in this research will be trained in
device fabrication, integrated circuit, test-chip design, and heterogeneous
system integration issues, thus contributing to the much needed workforce
development in chip design industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
envisions a novel soft-switching transistor architecture named as Soft-FET for
realizing energy-efficient CMOS circuits. The targeted efficient operations can
be realized by utilizing abrupt phase change behavior in transition metal
oxides. The project will fabricate and demonstrate Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) based
Soft-FET integrated circuit prototype by heterogeneous integration with baseline
CMOS technology. Various Soft-FET architecture circuit blocks such as digital
logic, SRAM bitcells/arrays, I/O buffers, power gates, and power converters will
be investigated to realize energy efficient CMOS designs. If successful, this
research can improve the energy efficiency of integrated circuits by lowering
the voltage droop guard bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.