* 1815645
* Collaborative Research: Placing High-Redshift Quasars in Perspective: a Gemini Near-Infrared Spectroscopic Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Adam Myers, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,753.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shining brighter than a trillion suns,
quasars are the most luminous persistent&lt;br/&gt;sources in the universe.
These cosmic powerhouses form when gas is funneled&lt;br/&gt;toward giant black
holes at the centers of galaxies. Since quasars are thought&lt;br/&gt;to shape
the growth of their galaxies, better understanding these sources is
one&lt;br/&gt;of modern astronomy's major goals. This project makes new
telescopic&lt;br/&gt;observations over several years to improve estimates of the
most basic&lt;br/&gt;properties of quasars, enhancing a wide range of
astronomical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some 350 hours of infrared
observations of 400 distant quasars with the&lt;br/&gt;Gemini-North telescope in
Hawaii will produce the best and largest data set of&lt;br/&gt;its kind.
Studying the infrared light will lead to better estimates of
the&lt;br/&gt;masses of the quasars' black holes, their fueling rates, and their
distances&lt;br/&gt;from Earth. These results will, in turn, help to develop
improved equations for&lt;br/&gt;these properties in the larger quasar
population. Comparison with nearby quasars&lt;br/&gt;will also show how these
sources change over time, indicating how the galaxies&lt;br/&gt;surrounding such
quasars change as well. This project represents a stepping&lt;br/&gt;stone in
understanding quasars which, in turn, will enable more in-depth
projects&lt;br/&gt;at the forefront of modern
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quasars are the most
powerful objects in the universe. They greatly outshine all&lt;br/&gt;the stars
in the galaxies in which they reside. They consist of growing
black&lt;br/&gt;holes, millions to billions of times more massive than the sun.
Better&lt;br/&gt;understanding these most energetic of objects, their
properties, their effects&lt;br/&gt;on the galaxies that surround them, and how
they grow over time are important&lt;br/&gt;questions in modern astronomy. This
project will use one of the world's largest&lt;br/&gt;telescopes to better
understand some of the most powerful and distant quasars in&lt;br/&gt;order to
help answer these questions. Additional related areas at the
forefront&lt;br/&gt;of modern astronomy will benefit as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to substantially
improve how we measure the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental properties of distant quasars.
These properties include the black&lt;br/&gt;hole mass, fueling rate, and
distance. Another goal is to see how these&lt;br/&gt;properties have changed
over time. To achieve these goals, the investigators&lt;br/&gt;will use the
Gemini-North telescope in Hawaii to observe the infrared light
from&lt;br/&gt;more than 400 distant quasars, thereby creating the largest and
best such data&lt;br/&gt;set to date. This effort will take 350 hours of
telescope time over several&lt;br/&gt;years. Analysis of certain features in the
light of these sources will provide&lt;br/&gt;the best measurements yet of key
quasar properties. The results of this project&lt;br/&gt;will yield new
calibrations for quasars in general, and enable a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;follow-up studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.