* 1815746
* Complex Amphiphilic Structures and the Functionality of Biomaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Shibin Dai, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 217,087.00

Complex amphiphilic structures are closely related to phase transitions,
materials science, and mathematical biology. This project concentrates on the
influence of nanoparticles, proteins and hydrophobic surfaces on the morphology
of amphiphilic structures. This research greatly advances the understanding of
the functionality of nanoparticles, bio-inspired materials, and biological
membranes. It helps us understand essential processes like protein
transportation, drug encapsulation, and drug delivery. It also provides new
methods and techniques for the modeling and analysis of properties of other
complex structures in polymeric materials. The educational activities include
the supervision and training of graduate research. The educational goal is for
graduate students to be trained in mathematical modeling, and in the analysis
and numerical simulation of partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project concentrates on
interdisciplinary research that combines applied mathematics and science,
technology, and engineering. The PI is an applied mathematician, and the co-PI
is a chemical experimentalist. The investigators model the encapsulation of
nanoparticles in bilayer liposomes and polymeric micelles, the coating of
biomaterials by amphiphilic copolymers, and the change of morphology caused by
proteins, in the framework of the functionalized Cahn-Hilliard (FCH) energy,
coupled with proper strong and weak anchoring conditions. This new mathematical
framework translates the materials system into nonlinear PDEs coupled with
proper boundary conditions. It has wide applications in the modeling of other
physical, materials and biological systems. The PIs apply existing and new
mathematical tools for the study of nonlinear PDEs. These tools lie in three
areas: asymptotic analysis, variational methods, and numerical simulations. They
are very useful in the study of other problems in applied mathematics related to
nonlinear PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.