* 1815143
* Seismology- and Geodesy-Based Inverse Problems Crossing Scales, with Scattering, Anisotropy and Nonlinear Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Maarten de Hoop, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 319,999.00

The investigator and his collaborators study inverse problems in seismology and
geodesy crossing many scales. These inverse problems are associated with systems
of partial differential equations describing elastic waves and elastostatics.
Their key advances in these problems pertain to reaching real earth material
properties and their complex heterogeneities through the consideration of
scattering, anisotropy and nonlinear elasticity. The application goal is
rigorous reconstruction, hierarchically mapping Earth's interior, locally and
possibly globally, honoring these material properties, in conjunction with
dislocations and fault shapes encoded in co-seismic deformation. The
investigator exploits important developments in novel sensor design and data
acquisition. Differentiating the features representing the observed hierarchical
data complexity, expected to be associated with different scattering regimes,
the investigator distinguishes different types of nonlinear inverse problems.
The research promises to lead to innovative technologies for interpreting the
rich information contained in seismic and geodesic (Global Positioning System)
data crossing scales on the one hand, and new directions in the analysis of
inverse problems underpinning modern data science on the other hand. The studies
benefit natural resources management including hydrofracking and geothermal
energy, hazard analysis and, moreover, provide possible approaches for planetary
exploration with very few sensors. They also provide keys for important further
insight on how processes at the surface are coupled to processes in Earth's deep
interior. The research program offers a unique interdisciplinary educational
experience for the students involved giving them a much broader appreciation of
the importance of novel techniques and real-life implications. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his collaborators develop a composite analysis
of seismology and geodesy based inverse problems. Following the hierarchical
data complexity, they (1) analyze spectral rigidity of spherically symmetric
planets, and then include angular variations through perturbation and
semiclassical analysis, as well as inverse problems for (Rayleigh and Stoneley)
waveguide coupling at and near phase boundaries; (2) study geometric inverse
problems for the local mixed geodesic ray transforms on rank-4 tensors in
Riemannian geometry, (broken) geodesic ray transforms in Finsler geometry and
then boundary rigidity, and with visible orientable geodesic spheres as well as
the geometric inverse problem with microseismicity data; (3) analyze hyperbolic
inverse boundary value problems with piecewise smooth stiffness tensors (with
associated interfaces or domain partitions), partial data and improved stability
estimates using unbalanced, complex optimal transport for optimization-based
reconstruction; (4) study uniqueness and conditional stability for the recovery
of a heterogeneous dislocation and fault shape from geodesy boundary data; and
(5) develop and analyze inverse problems in nonlinear elasticity in sedimentary
rocks in the presence of discontinuities using paired Lagrangian distributions
and Strichartz estimates. The implicit connections between these inverse
problems come into play as they probe one planet, while contributing to a deeper
understanding of information content in the exponentially growing data volumes
that are available through modern data enters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.