* 1815354
* Understanding Highly Heterogeneous Biological Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Carlos Baiz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 596,588.00

Biological membranes are more than barriers between cell compartments. These
highly complex environments play a central role in a wide range of functions,
including energy production, sensing, and communication. Structure on every
length scale is a hallmark of biology, and cell membranes are no exception.
Membranes contain hundreds of unique lipids organized on a nanometer length
scale, and this organization is critical for cellular function. Abnormal lipid
distributions have been linked to cell diseases. This project will investigate
the local geometries, environments, and dynamics that dictate the membrane
architecture and how membrane architecture relates to biological function. The
PI is actively involved in undergraduate and high school student researcher
programs: NSF REU, Moncrief Summer Internship, and Welch Summer Scholars
Programs and will embark on a recruiting campaign to increase the number of
underrepresented students enrolled in the graduate program at UT-Austin. This
project will provide an excellent platform for training visiting students who
join PI's research group. This will involve visits to Hispanic-serving
Institutions in Texas and across the Southwest to advertise the program, network
with faculty, and advise students on assembling competitive graduate school
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team will
investigate multiple aspects of heterogeneous membranes using a combination of
vibrational spectroscopy and enhanced-sampling molecular dynamics simulations.
The following aspects of membranes will be the primary focus of the project: 1.
The team will characterize how individual lipid species sample a different range
of local environments in a mixture with other lipids, as opposed to single-
component, uniform bilayers, which are commonly used as biophysical models. For
these reasons, this project seeks to establish a molecular-level view of lipid
interactions to inform the importance of membrane diversity, and what specific
interactions are not captured by the models. 2. The team will determine how
membranes are perturbed by biologically-relevant ions such as Ca2+, and Mg2+.
Negatively-charged lipids are known to interact strongly with these ions. Cells
have multiple mechanisms to tightly control ion concentrations. These ions are
predicted to disrupt the balance of local interactions among lipids and alter
membrane properties. 3. This project will examine the role of protein crowding
in perturbing lipid-lipid interactions. Biological membranes are packed with
proteins. Up to 20% of the membrane area is occupied by proteins, which implies
that lipids not only interact with other lipids but also with protein
sidechains. The team will investigate how lipid-lipid interactions are modified
by the presence of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.