* 1815306
* NeTS: Small: A Wireless Backhaul for Multi-Gigabit Picocells Using Steerable Free Space Optics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jon Longtin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,087.00

It is widely expected that our need for data access and consumption will
continue to grow rapidly; some projections estimate a 1000-fold increase in
network demand within a decade. To keep pace with this increase, there is a
pressing need to develop network infrastructure and technologies that can bring
high data rate access to most geographies. This project proposes to address that
challenge by developing a wireless network architecture that facilitates easy
deployment of short range cellular networks which can provide very high data
rates (up to multiple Gbps) coverage. Such ease of deployment is particularly
useful for temporary-use applications such as natural disasters, wartime zones,
etc. The proposed network architecture is based on free-space optical (FSO)
technology and is designed to provide both high bandwidth and high availability
networks through the use of novel optical technologies and a richly-connected
set of short range links. This work has the potential to impact design of future
cellular (e.g., 5G+) networks, which will enable a rich new set of services and
applications for end-users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that next
generation cellular networks will use picocells with ranges around 100 m and
with multi-Gbps capacity. This project considers design of backhaul networks for
such picocells to connect them to remote gateways. Unfortunately, known RF based
backhaul solutions are unlikely to be able to provide the required data rates at
desired ranges. This project explores a backhaul architecture based on free
space optical (FSO) links, which can wirelessly deliver high data rates at long
ranges, without creating any wireless interference, and thus enable a high-
capacity network. To design an FSO-based picocell backhaul network that can
effectively handle the outdoor effects, the project employs two strategies,
viz., use of many robust short (&lt;100m) links that can handle most weather
effects, and use of 'steerable' FSO links to embed sufficient network redundancy
with minimal node interfaces. The project will design and prototype outdoor bi-
directional steerable links of varying range (100-500m) and develop a novel
tracking and pointing mechanism based on received power strength to handle
misalignments due to deployment platforms or atmospheric turbulence. The project
addresses area coverage, connectivity to hubs, and tolerance of weather effects
by developing efficient algorithms with provable guarantees building upon the
researcher's preliminary heuristic-based work, and design techniques to estimate
non-trivial upper-bounds for evaluation of developed techniques in practice. For
the runtime problem of dynamic network reconfiguration, the project proposes to
develop a theoretical framework which will be used to investigate design of
provably efficient algorithms for various settings and objectives. Finally, the
project will build and evaluate an end-to-end simulation of the proposed
architecture, conduct a thorough comparison with other viable approaches, and
perform requirements and cost-performance analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.