* 1815070
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: 3D Printing for High Fidelity Image Reproduction Capturing Texture, Spectral Color, Gloss, and Translucency
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Szymon Rusinkiewicz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: 3D Printing for High Fidelity Image
Reproduction Capturing Texture, Spectral Color, Gloss, and
Translucency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D printing can exploit fine-scale
interleaving of multiple materials to enable fabrication of objects that have
not been possible to make with other technologies. In particular, a novel
research area enabled by multi-material additive manufacturing is the
fabrication of objects with desired appearance properties. This project will
develop technology for ultra-high fidelity reproduction of texture, spectral
color, gloss, and translucency. While consumer-grade printers typically use 4
ink colors, our system will employ 10 different inks in order to accurately
reproduce color across the spectrum, including regions that are at the edge of
visibility. The use of these 3D printers will enable not just the reproduction
of color, but also the recreation of gloss, translucency, and fine-scale detail
such as brush strokes. Our testbed for this work is painted fine art images.
This domain provides technical challenges that will push the state of the art
for high-fidelity reproduction in general, as well as immediately benefiting
cultural heritage preservation efforts. Fine art objects are inherently subject
to degradation or damage from light and air when on display for long periods of
time. Ultra-high quality facsimiles of these cultural treasures can be exploited
in place of the originals in many applications, including restoration practice,
conservatory studies, education in museums, and enjoyment at home. Collaboration
with local museums in Boston and Princeton will enable strong outreach with
curators and the general public. Project outcomes will have additional broad
impact by enabling accurate appearance reproduction with 3D printing in support
of a wide range of applications in rapid prototyping and the manufacture of end-
user products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the project will
investigate several key methods and technologies. First, there is the question
of how to use advanced camera systems to capture the properties of the original
paintings. This involves measuring the full spectrum of light refracted by each
point on the painting, as well as how shiny or opaque the surface is. Moreover,
it involves the use of high-resolution 3D scanners to measure the fine bumps on
the surface left by brushes or other tools. A second component of the project is
to characterize the full capabilities of multi-material 3D printers, and to
incorporate the measured ink properties into computer simulations that can
predict exactly how the print-outs will look. The final components of the
project are to perform computer optimization to determine the exact type,
number, and concentration of printing materials that should be used, and how the
printing process should be tweaked to achieve maximum reproduction
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.