* 1815461
* Collaborative Research:  Globular Cluster Formation in Hierarchically Collapsing Clouds as an Origin for Multiple Stellar Populations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Mordecai-Mark Mac Low, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 367,024.00

Many of the oldest stars ever discovered are found in globular clusters. These
are the biggest star clusters known, with millions of stars in a small region.
The clusters are fossils of the time early in the history of our universe when
stars formed far more often than they do today. The chemical elements that form
our planet, and all living beings, were formed during the lives and deaths of
such ancient stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stars in smaller star clusters are
observed to all have almost the same abundances of elements. However, this is
not true for globular clusters, which have a spread in abundances. This could
give an important clue to how they formed. In the end this will help us to
understand our own origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will test
their new model for how the clusters formed: not as one large cluster, but
rather as many smaller clusters that then fell together. Each of the little
clusters had its own uniform abundances of elements. When they fell together to
make a big cluster, it was a mixture of all the little clusters, so it had a
spread of abundances. Observations of globular clusters have recently
demonstrated the presence of multiple or spread main sequence populations with
varying elemental abundances in virtually every object examined with sufficient
care. This is in distinct contrast to less massive open clusters and even
observed young massive clusters, which have comparatively uniform elemental
abundances. Multiple proposed explanations, which rely on time variability in
the star formation rate, contradict current
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing software
tools to model the spread in abundances. These models will run on NSF
supercomputers. They will model the gas from which the stars form, and the stars
themselves, in separate programs coupled together at every time step. They are
building in an adaptive mesh program to model the gas. This innovative method
will have many other applications in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Their work has broader impacts in the following areas. In
education, it will directly support research by a graduate student, and three
undergraduates participating in Drexel's exemplary cooperative education
program. It will also provide intellectual foundations for the American Museum
of Natural History's innovative, residency-based Master of Arts in Teaching
Earth (and Space) Science, and for a widely used undergraduate textbook. In
outreach, it will provide the foundation for the curation of Hayden Planetarium
Space Shows, which are seen by a million visitors a year at the Planetarium, and
are licensed to 40 institutions worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.