* 1815699
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: LDPD-Net: A Framework for Accelerated Architectures for Low-Density Permuted-Diagonal Deep Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Bo Yuan, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 11/30/2018
* USD 224,997.00

Deep learning has emerged as an important form of machine-learning where
multiple layers of neural networks can learn the system function from available
input-output data. Deep learning has outperformed traditional machine-learning
algorithms based on feature engineering in fields such as image recognition,
healthcare, and autonomous vehicles. These are widely used in cloud computing
where large amount of computational resources are available. Deep neural
networks are typically trained using graphic processing units (GPUs) or tensor
processing units (TPUs). The training time and energy consumption grow with the
complexity of the neural network. This project attempts to impose sparsity and
regularity as constraints on the structure of the deep neural networks to reduce
complexity and energy consumption by orders of magnitude, possibly at the
expense of a slight degradation in the performance. The impacts lie in the
formulation of a new family of structures for neural networks referred to as
Low-Density Permuted Diagonal Network or LDPD-Net. The approach will enable the
deployment of deep neural networks in energy-constrained and resource-
constrained embedded platforms for inference tasks, including, but not limited
to, unmanned vehicles/aerial systems, personalized healthcare, wearable and
implantable devices, and mobile intelligent systems. In addition, the design
methodology/techniques developed in this project can facilitate investigation of
efficient computing of other matrix/tensor-based big data processing and
analysis approaches. These approaches may also find applications in data-driven
neuroscience and data-driven signal processing. In addition to graduate
students, the project will involve undergraduates via senior design projects and
research experiences for undergraduates. The results of the project will be
disseminated to the broader community by publications, presentations, talks at
various industries and other academic institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main barriers to wide adoption of deep learning networks include computational
resource constraints and energy consumption constraints. These barriers can be
relaxed by imposing sparsity and regularity among different layers of the deep
neural network. The proposed low-density permuted-diagonal (LDPD) network can
lead to orders of magnitude reduction in computation complexity, storage space
and energy consumption. The LDPD-Net will not be retrained by first training a
regular network and then only retaining the weights corresponding to the LDPD-
Net. Instead, the proposed network will be trained from scratch. The proposed
LDPD-Net can enable scaling of the network for a specified computational
platform. The proposed research has three thrusts: 1) develop novel resource-
constrained and energy-constrained inference and training systems; 2) develop
novel efficient hardware architectures that can fully exploit the advantages of
the LDPD-Net to achieve high performance; and 3) perform novel software and
hardware co-design and co-optimization to explore the design space of the LDPD-
Net. Using these, the efficacy of the proposed LDPD-net will be validated and
evaluated, via software implementations on high-performance systems, low-power
embedded systems, and a hardware prototype on FPGA development
boards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.