* 1815349
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing GNSS-based infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Pau Closas, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2020
* USD 160,000.00

This project develops novel anti-jamming techniques for Global Navigation
Satellite Systems (GNSS) that are effective, yet computationally affordable.
GNSS is ubiquitous in civilian, security and defense applications, causing a
growing dependence on such technology for position and timing purposes,
particularly in critical infrastructures. The threat of a potential disruption
of GNSS is real and can lead to catastrophic consequences. This project studies
methods to secure GNSS receivers from jamming interference, and doing so within
size, weight, and power (SWAP) requirements. Existing solutions are either bulky
and not cost-effective, such as those based on antenna array technology, or
specifically adapted to an interference type. In addition, most of these
solutions require the detection and classification of the interference before
mitigating its effects, which constitutes a single point of error in the
process. This project will investigate GNSS receivers that are resilient to
interference without requiring detection and classification, by leveraging
robust statistics to design methods that require few modifications with respect
to state-of-the-art receiver architectures, keeping SWAP requirements comparable
to those from standard GNSS receivers. The findings will be implemented and
validated on an end-to-end GNSS software-defined radio receiver, successfully
transitioning research into practice. Educational activities are closely
integrated with this research agenda, including a course developed by the
principal investigator and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research advances knowledge of how robust statistics can be leveraged to design
cost-effective and efficient mitigation techniques for anti-jamming GNSS. The
main premise of the project is that most interference sources have a sparse
representation, on which they can be seen as outliers to the nominal signal
model. Tools from robust statistics are then used to discard those outliers in a
sound manner, identifying and substituting specific critical operations in GNSS
processing. This approach avoids the need for detecting and estimating
interference, processes which can cause errors. The project envisions a
lightweight, yet robust, GNSS receiver that can be easily adopted in
substitution of current GNSS receivers that are supporting operation of critical
infrastructures. It will enable reliable and precise anti-jamming technology
with drastic SWAP and cost improvements. Particularly, the project will provide
a GNSS receiver solution that can cope with common jamming interference. The
development of such receiver enhancements, along with their validation in a
software receiver, will allow for large-scale deployments of GNSS receivers that
are more resilient and reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.