* 1815216
* Modeling and Stochastic Simulation of Close-Contact Dynamics in Immune Recognition
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Lindsay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 397,611.00

The project supported under this award will use mathematics to understand how
the immune system is able to locate and fend off threats. White blood cells
known as T cells are a key component of the immune system. Their responsibility
is to search for relatively rare molecular signatures of pathogens. Autoimmune,
immunodeficient diseases and cancer arise from a failure of this mechanism. The
basic principles of how T cells efficiently discriminate between rare foreign
cells and abundant host cells is not completely understood. This project will
develop a new generation of theoretical and computational tools to massively
accelerate the random sampling of T cell activation times. Working with
experimental collaborators, the project will explore (through mathematical
modeling, stochastic analysis and large scale computational simulations) the
role that the cell-to-cell contact topography plays in immune recognition. This
award will support undergraduate and graduate student researchers to work on
this project. This project will reach the broader mathematical community through
mini-symposia at upcoming conferences and thematic workshops hosted by the
American Mathematical Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When T cells encounter a
cell of interest, they scan its surface for rare diffusing signaling molecules.
This search is conducted in a bustling and noisy environment and so T cell
activation is a stochastic process described mathematically as a first passage
problem. Previous mathematical models of this process assumed the interface
between the cells was large and contiguous. Recent experimental work has
revealed that T cells extend numerous finger-like projections called microvilli
to sculpt a highly transient and distributed interface. This project will build
new models of T cell activation that incorporate the recently discovered role of
stochastic topography arising from microvilli sampling. Much existing first
passage theory has focused on determination of the mean of the distribution.
Owing to the sensitivity of T cell activation, this project will require the
development of new probabilistic tools to obtain the full distribution of
passage times in a variety of narrow escape problems. To complement these
theoretical results, the proposal will develop a new suite of computational
(deterministic and Monte-Carlo) tools for studying stochastic processes in
dynamic and heterogeneous environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.