* 1815485
* III: Small: New algorithms for genome skimming and its applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Vineet Bafna, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,987.00

Anthropogenic pressure and other natural causes have resulted in severe
disruption of the global ecosystems in recent years, including loss of
biodiversity and invasion of non-native plants and animals. A particular problem
is that it is not enough to simply determine the population of various species;
it is also important to determine whether there exists enough genetic diversity
within a species to ensure its survival. It is therefore necessary to estimate
the genetic biodiversity of various areas in order to decide where and which
plants and animals are in most need of protection, and to predict the outcome of
proposed interventions. However, current algorithms for computing biodiversity,
which are based on taking on computing the genetic "distance" between samples of
organisms, are too computationally intensive and slow to be applied at large
scale. This project will overcome the problem by developing new, highly
efficient algorithms for computing biodiversity. As a result, this work will
provide tools needed to improve our knowledge of ecosystems and make better
decisions for managing plant and animal natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In place of the currently popular technique of
isolating and sequencing specific phylogenetically informative regions, the PIs
propose a low-pass whole genome sequencing (genome skims) and alignment-free
methods for barcoding. To enable this approach, the PIs will develop algorithms
and tools to identify all genome-skims in a given library, use them for
phylogenetic reconstruction and use meta-barcoding and genome-skims as a
mechanism for examining populations of organisms. The proposed activities will
allow the estimation of genomic bio-diversity for a fraction of the current
costs of labor and genome sequencing. The proposal uses a number of innovative
and novel algorithmic and statistical techniques and describes the first
systematic study of the feasibility of computing the genomic distance using only
a small, random fraction of the genome. The project will advance the field by
providing a simple and inexpensive protocol for measuring biodiversity with
higher sensitivity than is currently
achievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will allow
the estimation of genomic bio-diversity for a fraction of the current costs of
labor and genome sequencing. The proposal uses a number of innovative and novel
algorithmic and statistical techniques and describes the first systematic study
of the feasibility of computing the genomic distance using only a small, random
fraction of the genome. If successful, the project will advance the field by
providing a simple and inexpensive protocol for measuring biodiversity with
higher sensitivity than is currently achievable. The investigators have a strong
history of prior research in related fields, but have complementary expertise,
in evolution and phylogenetic reconstruction and computational population
genomics. There are three aims: given genome-skims of two organisms, estimate
the hamming distance and use that to search a given library; use genome-skims
for phylogenetic reconstruction; and given a meta-barcoding query (genome-skims
of a mix of organisms), identify the constituent organisms and their relative
abundance in the sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.