* 1815054
* III: Small: Combining Stochastics and Numerics for Improved Scalable Matrix Computations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Data are often modeled as matrices. As a result, linear algebraic algorithms,
and in particular matrix decompositions, have proven extremely successful in the
analysis of datasets in the form of matrices. RandNLA (Randomized Numerical
Linear Algebra), which integrates the complementary perspectives that
theoretical computer science and numerical linear algebra bring to matrix
computations, has led to nontrivial theory and high-quality implementations, and
it has proven useful in a range of scientific and internet applications. This
project will addresses statistical properties of RandNLA algorithms, and how
these algorithms are used in downstream convex and non-convex optimization
pipelines. This project will facilitate the development of algorithmic methods
for the extraction of knowledge from large genetic, medical, internet,
financial, astronomical, and other scientific data sets, and it will also focus
on broader interdisciplinary educational opportunities, including undergraduate
courses on the mathematics of data science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of
technical challenges of interest include that the randomness inside the
algorithm can lead to implicit regularization, and that it can also lead to
usefulness in downstream applications that is not captured by existing theory.
These and other challenges will be addressed in several complementary ways.
First, by developing bootstrapping methods for core RandNLA algorithms. Second,
by developing improved statistical analysis of core RandNLA algorithms. Third,
by developing non-linear leverage scores for more general statistical
objectives. Fourth, by developing methods to combine in a principled manner SGD
and RandNLA. And fifth, by providing implementations addressing scientific data
analysis applications, and also by considering longer-term directions of
interdisciplinary interest. In each case, there will be a focus on complementary
stochastic and numerical aspects of RandNLA algorithms, as well as on how
RandNLA primitives are used in realistic convex and non-convex machine learning
pipelines. This will lead to new insights in algorithmic and statistical theory,
as well as more useful algorithms in practical implementations and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.