* 1815583
* SHF:Small: OSCARS:  Optimizing Self-Configurable Analog ICs for Reliability and Security
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Edgar Sanchez-Sinencio, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The production of computer chips, specifically analog designs, has largely moved
offshore in recent years, reducing design complexity and fabrication cost,
because the foundries and the manufacturing process have become expensive. Such
chips suffer from two problems: imprecise manufacturing of devices at physical
limits and attacks from the untrusted foundry. This project develops solutions
that can solve both the problems at once. The project also will engage with and
teach the next generation of cybersecurity experts using puzzle-, challenge-,
and competition-based educational and outreach activities at the high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to develop a versatile analog IC design platform that can achieve
simultaneous resiliency attacks from the untrusted foundry and improve
performance in the presence of imprecise manufacturing. The main approach is
built-in self-configuration enabled by efficient circuit implementation of
power-on optimization, which is enhanced by logic locking, and systematic
design-time optimization. The approach entails identifying the optimal tuning
values to make the analog design perform as desired; these tuning knob values
are kept as a secret to prevent attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.