* 1815254
* AF: Small: Scalable Algorithms for Data and Network Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Shanghua Teng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Data-based decision-making involving big input data sets require a lot of time
for algorithms to process them. In computer science, efficient algorithms are
generally considered to be the ones whose running time does not increase "too
fast" when input size grows. "Scalable algorithms" are among the most efficient
algorithms, because their running time is required to be nearly linear or even
sub-linear with respect to the problem size. In other words, their complexity
scales gracefully when the input size scales up. In the age of Big Data,
efficient algorithms are in higher demand now more than ever before. While big
data takes us into the asymptotic world envisioned by the pioneers of computer
science, the explosive growth of problem size has also significantly challenged
the classical notion of efficient algorithms: Algorithms that used to be
considered efficient, according to the traditional polynomial-time
characterization, may no longer be adequate for solving today's problems. It is
not just desirable, but essential, that efficient algorithms should be scalable.
Thus, scalability, instead of polynomial-time computability, should be elevated
to the central complexity notion for characterizing efficient computation, and
this will be the focus of algorithm design for network sciences and big data.
This project will focus on the design and analysis of scalable algorithms. One
of its primary objective is to build bridges between the area of algorithm
design and the fields of network sciences and machine learning. If successful,
the project will help to provide a rigorous algorithmic framework for designing
new scalable data and network analysis algorithms. By focusing on notions of
algorithmic efficiency --- such as scalability --- that respect the
sensibilities of researchers in these disciplines as to what constitutes a
practical algorithm in the age of big data, this project aims to increase the
value of theoretical analyses to researchers in these fields. As this project
combines ideas from many disciplines within one coherent research effort,
lectures and tutorials presented on the fruits of the project will help cross-
fertilize the disciplines within its scope. The development of theoretical
algorithms that might have practical applicability should simplify education in
algorithms for students beyond theoretical computer science, and allow
discussion of practically important heuristics at early stages of computer
science education. The interdisciplinary nature of this research will enable
broader engagements with PhD students and researchers in network sciences,
machine learning, numerical analysis, and social science and hence will enhance
the chance to be successful in supporting and working with women and minority
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to
systematically extend the family of algebraic, numerical, and combinatorial
techniques from the recent breakthroughs in Laplacian linear solvers and max-
flows/min-cuts, to a wide-range of problems that arise in network analysis, data
mining, and machine learning. This project aims to show that these techniques
--- including advanced sampling, sparsification, and local exploration of
networks --- will play increasing roles in improving algorithmic scalability. It
contains several open questions and conjectures ranging from network analysis to
distribution sampling to social influences towards this goal. By providing new
algorithmic insights into various dynamic processes over graphs, the project
also aims to improve the understanding of network facets beyond static graph
structures in order to develop better algorithmic theory for network
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.