* 1815428
* CIF: Small: Fundamental limits of interactive communications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Natasha Devroye, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,996.00

The proposed research aims to understand how interaction affects the fundamental
performance of communication systems. "Interaction" denotes when current
decisions such as what to input to the channel may be altered based on past
decisions, for example through feedback or access to channel outputs. To assess
the impact of interaction, this project uses the technology-independent
formalism of information theory, which quantifies the fundamental limits of data
compression and transmission. This provides upper bounds and benchmarks for
real-world performance of interactive communication systems, which will be more
realistic than current bounds which consider idealized notions of feedback. This
is expected to refine the design of communication systems in the noisy feedback
and two-way settings of relevance in many existing and future communication
paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of interaction in one-way channels with
noisy feedback and two-way channels will be looked at using three information
theoretic metrics: 1) the somewhat crude capacity viewpoint; 2) a more refined
error exponents angle; and finally 3) the even more refined second order coding
/ finite-blocklength context. One-way channels with noisy feedback highlight the
potential utility or futility of adapting current inputs to past noisy channel
outputs, extending the understanding from the current state of the art which for
the most part considers noiseless / perfect output feedback. Two-way channels
where two users wish to exchange messages over a common channel and do so
interactively take this understanding one step further by capturing not only the
impact of interaction / feedback, but also the tension between using a common
channel to send data in one direction versus feedback in the other. The outcomes
of the proposed research will provide a comprehensive understanding of
interaction in two more realistic and relatively unexplored interactive
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.