* 1815047
* CSR: Small:Collaborative Research: Decentralized Real-Time Machine Learning Systems on Near-User Edge Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Hyesoon Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2022
* USD 282,000.00

The ever-increasing number of Internet of Things (IoT) devices generate large
quantities of raw data that need to be processed and analyzed in real time.
Since conducting computationally expensive tasks, such as computer vision and
natural language processing, is often a challenge for IoT devices, most of their
computations are currently offloaded to cloud servers. However, this offloading
leads to an increased risk for privacy as well as a dependency on network
connectivity. To solve this challenge, the project utilizes the distributed
computing power of already connected IoT devices to perform high computing power
applications in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is composed of three
tasks. First is the development of distributed machine learning (ML) systems for
multiple IoT devices. The project will involve studying how to communicate
between nodes with reliable connections and how to dynamically change the job of
each node at run-time with little overhead. Second is the development of optimal
task assignment and scheduling algorithms. Here, a machine learning approach
will be used to generate a recognition model architecture optimal for each
distributed system configuration. Third is the development of low-resolution
deep neural network (DNN) systems to utilize low-power computing nodes. The
development of these DNN systems will involve identifying multiple low-
resolution filters that are optimal for varying
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technical work will advance
the state of the art in implementation of parallel and decentralized DNN
systems, thereby benefiting all scientific fields of endeavor that rely on
computing. The decentralized DNN system will offer new opportunities in power
constrained mobile platforms for applications including surveillance and
automotive. The research results will lead to new materials/courses for computer
architecture and systems. The proposed infrastructure will also be used to guide
undergraduate students' research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software
infrastructure will be maintained as an open source project, which can be found
at https://github.com/parallel-ml. It will be updated periodically as new
outcomes become available. The results will be published in conferences,
journals and technical reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.