* 1815069
* Mathematical Studies of Magnetohydrodynamics with Hall Effect
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mimi Dai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 188,828.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process in highly conducting plasmas,
which allows for rapid changes in the configuration of the magnetic flux lines,
with the conversion of magnetic to kinetic energy. Solar flares, violent events
with significant impact to telecommunications and the electric grid, may involve
magnetic reconnection in a large scale. Magnetic reconnection is inherently a
multi-scale process and causes difficulties in laboratory experimental study,
satellite observations, and computational simulations. During magnetic
reconnection, the magnetic force can create thin localized region wherein the
elevated voltage difference generates intense electric currents and dissipation
- the Hall effect. The Hall Magnetohydrodynamics (Hall MHD) model has recently
received increasing attention because of its improvements in predicting the
fast-changing nature of magnetic reconnection compared to other models.
Nevertheless, the mathematical theory of this model is far from being complete.
This project will address fundamental mathematical questions for the Hall MHD
model and provide theoretical insights for experiments and numerical
simulations. The project will involve a graduate student in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hall MHD model is mathematically challenging due to
the usual convective nonlinearities and the additional source term given by the
Hall effect. The main objectives are: 1) Explore the largest possible space of
well-posedness corresponding to the major scalings in the system. 2) Search the
optimal Sobolev spaces in which the model is well-posed. 3) Examine ill-
posedness of solutions in some physically relevant spaces. 4) Seek minimal
conditions for weak solutions to satisfy energy identity. 5) Study the
asymptotic behavior of solutions and stability of the steady state. The project
will combine known tools from harmonic analysis and partial differential
equations, and develop new methods to study these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.