* 1815876
* NeTS: Small: De-Mystifying and Hardening the Domain Name System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 508,000.00

One does not need to look beyond many real-world advertising campaigns to
appreciate that naming is one of the foundational elements upon which most
higher layer Internet services are built. For example, we use names as
rendezvous points between users and services: www.twitter.com, www.youtube.com,
www.google.com, to name a few. Yet, names are not directly used to move traffic
across the Internet; rather, names are turned into Internet addresses via the
Domain Name System (DNS). Internet addresses are then used to direct traffic
around networks around the world. A DNS lookup is therefore a prerequisite for
most Internet transactions. This means that the DNS is not only crucial to the
operation of the Internet, but DNS is in fact a single point of failure for most
Internet transactions. Unfortunately, the DNS ecosystem has slowly evolved from
a simple system at its inception to a vastly distributed, complex, brittle and
at times insecure system today. When the DNS does not respond to a query due to
overload, or returns incorrect data, this can impact large amounts of Internet
traffic. This project aims to address this critical problem by (i) developing a
stronger empirical understanding of the operation of the current DNS ecosystem
and (ii) developing new mechanisms to harden the system against both benign
issues that inevitably crop up and malicious attacks on the DNS. If successful,
this research would significantly improve the robustness of the DNS system, and
thus the resilience of the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
accelerate the process of hardening the DNS ecosystem in several ways. First, it
will make use of the wealth of DNS data collected at myriad points in the
system, from the clients to the authoritative DNS servers, to concretely
understand the weaknesses of the system. For example, this project has access to
DNS-Operations Analysis and Research Center data, DNS Scanning Data, and CCZ
traffic (Case Western's Case Connection Zone of 100 homes). As with much
Internet technology, measurement is key to driving the evolution of protocols,
services and operations. The second thrust involves proactively adding
robustness to the DNS. The approach in this thrust is to design innovative
mechanisms that anticipate problems by identifying where and when to share more
information with more actors in the ecosystem. The final thrust leverages
insight from previous measurement efforts and design mechanisms to improve
intrinsic system robustness. As an example, the project considers restructuring
the ecosystem by removing reliance on recursive DNS resolvers. New mechanisms
developed in this project will be released to the community as extensions to
current DNS tools (e.g., the bind DNS server).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.