* 1815467
* SHF: Small: Parallel Algorithms and Architectures Enabling Extreme-scale Graph Analytics for Biocomputing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Partha Pande, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 509,676.00

Graph-theoretic modeling of biological data has a rich history of delivering
foundational scientific knowledge and breakthrough discoveries. As data sets
continue to explode both in size and complexity, the combination of graph
analytics and scalable (parallel) computing has a critical role to play in
shaping the future of data-driven discovery in many biological applications
including national health. Yet, implementing such graph computations at scale
continues to be a daunting challenge despite the growing availability of high-
end parallel architectures. The goal of this project is to design efficient
parallel algorithms and architectures that would enable extreme scaling of graph
computations in biological applications. Other project activities integrate and
leverage upon the research outcomes of this project, while preparing the next
generation scientific workforce. The project is also leading to the development
of curricular modules in parallel algorithms and applications, and related
hardware design, and conference tutorials for broader
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on developing core
techniques in two problem spaces: i) performing graph analytics at scale for a
host of generic graph operations that find prevalent use-cases in biological
applications and also in many other data-driven domains; and ii) performing
graph construction at scale using biological raw data. Taken together, the
proposed effort embodies a systematic and holistic approach to enhance the reach
and impact of parallel computing on large-scale graph applications and, in the
process, usher in new generic data-driven design techniques and paradigms into
parallel applications design. While the emphasis will be on biological
applications, as a space for drawing scientific motivation and to demonstrate
utility through validation and testing, it is expected that many of the
developed techniques will extend beyond this realm and impact a broader class of
applications that need extreme-scale processing of
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.