* 1815983
* SHF: Small: Rigorous Synthesis and Verification of Decisions Using Data-Driven Models
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,01/31/2023
* David Bortz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 01/31/2023
* USD 499,570.00

This project develops data-driven mathematical models to synthesize and verify
control/decision-support algorithms for autonomous systems that operate under a
variety of environments, involving various users. The research investigates the
inference of models from data and reasoning over these models to provide
guarantees for the overall system. The project focuses on artificial pancreas
systems that deliver insulin to people with type-1 diabetes. Such systems must
adapt to the specific physiological and behavioral patterns for each individual
user. To this end, the project infers data-driven models for specific
individuals to verify and synthesize personalized control/decision support
algorithms. Additionally, on-board data collected from unmanned aerial vehicles
under windy conditions are used to check for collision avoidance in real-time.
The project reaches out to high school students through workshops on data
analysis, and to the general public through curated wikipedia articles that
explain the principles underlying artificial pancreas
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates systematic inference of
data-driven models with uncertainty quantification and model selection. The
resulting models are incorporated into verification approaches such as model
checking and invariant synthesis to provide probabilistic correctness guarantees
for key temporal properties. The evaluation is carried out using clinical trial
datasets for artificial pancreas systems and on-board flight data for ground and
unmanned aerial vehicles. The project formally defines, identifies and
eliminates harmful biases in the data, to assure the integrity of the
verification and synthesis results. The project develop assurance cases that
support the use of data-driven models in the formal verification and synthesis
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.