* 1815073
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Geometric Realizations and Evolving Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Michael Goodrich, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 481,892.00

This project involves an integrated study of geometric realizations and evolving
data. Geometric realizations are structures that realize relationships combining
combinatorial and geometric constraints, and evolving data captures ways in
which data changes over time. Of particular interest are algorithmic challenges
arising from geometric realizations and evolving data applications in society,
including physics, data visualization, and on-line servicing of fast-changing
data. A vital component of the project involves the involvement of students in
research; hence, this project has the potential of bringing expanded educational
and research opportunities for developing the next generation of information
technology researchers. In addition, this project involves a collaboration
between researchers in the United States and Israel, which is expected to foster
further ties between these two countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics
of interest in this project include the following:&lt;br/&gt;* Stable-matching
Voronoi diagrams, which are planar subdivisions determined by combining
geometric constraints determined by distances involving a given set of points
and combinatorial constraints based on matching preferences among these
points.&lt;br/&gt;* Polyominoes, which are connected cells in an orthogonal
lattice. These are often used to model percolation networks in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;* Geometric graphs, which are representations of graphs using
points for vertices and straight lines for edges.&lt;br/&gt;* Reactive data
structures, which are efficient data representations that support data enable
and disable operations along with queries.&lt;br/&gt;* Approximate
representations, which are data configurations that provide good approximate
solutions for data sets that are changing at a rate commensurate with the speed
of the algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;For each of these and related topics, the goal of
the research is to develop fast and efficient algorithms and data structures,
based on exploiting methods from graph drawing, computational geometry, and
theory of computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.