* 1815832
* Collaborative Research: Branching in RNA Secondary Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Svetlana Poznanovikj, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 116,235.00

This project will develop mathematical tools to better understand the structure
of biomolecules with important cellular functions. RNA, a single-strand molecule
derived from DNA, is essential in various biological roles. Besides converting
the information stored in DNA into proteins, some RNAs control vital cell
processes. RNA chains must fold into specific shapes to serve these roles.
However, despite the series of refinements to the commonly-used energy model for
predicting RNA structure, the accuracy of folding predictions for longer RNA
sequences is not satisfying. This project will use geometric combinatorics to
gain insights into the stability and accuracy of predictions from the current
energy model. Addressing these biologically relevant questions leads to
important mathematical problems which intersect with active research areas in
polyhedral geometry and discrete optimization. Results from this project will be
used to improve software predicting RNA folding and assist molecular biologists
studying RNA function. Additionally, as part of the project, the investigators
will train graduate and undergraduate students in research at the interface of
mathematics and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance
biological understanding and mathematical knowledge within the developing field
of discrete mathematical biology at the juncture between geometric combinatorics
and molecular biology. The affine energy function which governs the entropic
cost of branching is a known shortcoming of the current nearest neighbor
thermodynamic model. However, this coarse approximation to biochemical reality,
which is highly constrained by computational efficiency, is well-suited to
mathematical modeling and analysis. Methods from geometric combinatorics
(polytopes and their normal fans) will be used to give the first parametric
analysis of the branching of biological RNA sequences. Biologically relevant
questions, including the accuracy and stability of the current branching
parameters in thermodynamic optimization methods for RNA secondary structure
prediction, will be addressed using methods from geometric combinatorics. The
similarities and differences of these RNA branching polytopes will then be
delineated by addressing the challenges of characterization, comparison, and
approximation. This will provide new insight into the inability of current
prediction methods to distinguish native branching characteristics from the
large number of suboptimal structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.