* 1815930
* CAREER: Solar-Powered Unmanned Aerial and Ground Vehicles for Long-Term Operation in Dynamic Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/25/2017,07/31/2021
* Ran Dai, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 327,430.00

Current technology in solar-powered robotic systems is limited to homogeneous
robots that act independently within the constraints of their design and are
subject to power limitations and inability to intelligently adapt to changeable
situations. These limitations prevent the widespread adoption of solar robots in
applications. This career project proposes a transformative approach to the
development of next generation solar-powered robotic systems that overcome these
limitations. An innovative strategy will integrate heterogeneous aerial and
ground vehicle operations in order to accomplish long-duration high-efficiency
missions, improve adaptability to dynamic environments, and enable the effective
use of environmental but variable energy sources. Results of this work will
enable societally-important technological advancements in environmental
monitoring, search and rescue, surveillance, and agriculture, which will
contribute to U.S. economic vitality, public health, and security. This research
also provides necessary insights into general robotics applications pertaining
to alleviating the dependence of robotic missions on non-renewable energy
sources during long-duration operations. The use and application of solar-
powered robots increases the demand for high-quality photovoltaic products,
which will subsequently boost development in related technologies. This work
will incorporate a hierarchy of educational activities appropriate to different
groups of students, from the general public to more advanced scholars. These
activities include a synergy-based education platform, industry-oriented
training projects, and educational open-source software for a solar robot. In
collaboration with the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
team at Iowa State University, the PI will provide public visitors, especially
community college and K-12 students, with access to robotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to a novel paradigm
enabling experimentation on energy-aware long-duration autonomous multi-platform
systems. Establishing advanced autonomy in solar-powered robotic systems will be
accomplished by leveraging interdisciplinary methodologies in the fields of
dynamic networks, distributed control, and convex optimization, and by
developing novel strategies for coordinating and controlling heterogeneous
aerial and ground vehicles toward mission accomplishment. These
multidisciplinary methodologies will be consistently integrated to yield a new
paradigm for modeling, optimization, and distributed control of solar-powered
robotic systems. The project will systematically infuse solar energy into a
demanding technological area, namely robotic systems, with specific applications
to wide-area long-duration operations. The proposed optimization and control
schemes will address fundamental problems of multi-agent dynamical systems whose
performance can be improved by cooperation among internal agents.