* 1815883
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Domain Informed Techniques for Detecting and Defending Against Malicious Firmware
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Tuba Yavuz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 333,328.00

Embedded systems play a large role in our daily lives. They are found in
everything from computers and consumer electronics to appliances and
automobiles, and represent a market estimated to be worth almost $160 billion.
Many of them, however, use inexpensive microcontrollers that cannot easily be
analyzed, so it is unclear how well they operate in practice. This work seeks
improve the safety and security of these systems by developing techniques to
analyze their firmware, particularly with regards to the popular Universal
Serial Bus (USB) and Bluetooth protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve development of a platform for allowing firmware analysis of these common
but overlooked microcontroller architectures. The goal is to validate the
security of critical communications on these embedded devices. The project
builds on three research thrusts: 1) Formal modeling of the USB and Bluetooth
protocols and their sub-classes and automatic exploration of possible attack
scenarios, 2) A firmware analysis framework with a novel query language and an
analysis back-end, 3) A dynamic enforcement infrastructure that allows runtime
vetting of devices prior to allowing machines to use them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create techniques and systems that can
be broadly deployed in consumer, enterprise, government and military
environments. The lessons learned from building frameworks in the USB and
Bluetooth environments can serve as a larger goal towards developing integrity
frameworks for general-purpose embedded and internet-of-things (IoT)
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The products of this project will be
maintained for at least the duration of the project. Data and code from this
project will be stored on the website www.firmware-
analysis.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.