* 1815932
* Collaborative Research: Bound-Bound and Bound-Free Opacities of Heavy Lowly-Charged r-Process Ions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joan Marler, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 267,943.00

This research project is a collaborative effort between three major universities
in the southeastern United States. The research team will undertake a combined
theoretical and experimental study of heavy elements that are produced in
neutron star mergers, which have recently been shown to be gravitational wave
sources. The researchers will calculate the optical and infrared signatures of
these elements and measure them in the laboratory to high accuracy. Data on
these elements are so limited that it is difficult to interpret observations of
neutron star mergers. Results from the study will allow astronomers to
accurately interpret spectroscopic observations of neutron star mergers and to
understand how heavy elements are formed in such mergers. The project will
provide students with research training, as well as opportunities to work on
diverse but related topics at the three institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will study the so-called "second peak" elements --- Re, Os, Ir,
Au, and Pt --- because these are predicted to be formed at relatively high
abundances in neutron star mergers. They will first calculate the atomic energy
levels and transition probabilities of these elements using highly accurate and
sophisticated quantum methods. They will then measure the optical and infrared
spectra of the elements to benchmark the calculations. The result will be
reliable properties and accurate spectral line lists, which can be used for the
identification of these elements and determination of their abundances in the
spectra of neutron star mergers. This will also help shed light on the rapid
neutron capture process --- or "r-process" --- involved in the synthesis of
heavy elements in space. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in theoretical and experimental atomic physics, as well as
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.