* 1815613
* Liquid Crystal Films Across Scales: Dewetting and Dielectrowetting
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lou Kondic, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 345,758.00

The investigators will study problems of direct relevance to industrial
applications of Nematic Liquid Crystals (NLCs), as well as of fundamental
mathematical and scientific interest. The project will first focus on developing
new approaches to model and accurately simulate the complex dewetting phenomena
that have been observed in ultra-thin films of NLCs. The investigators will then
model the phenomenon of dielectrowetting, driven by carefully-tuned applied
electric fields. The spreading and dewetting problems to be considered are
directly applicable to various industrial processes that rely on coating thin
films of NLC onto substrates, such as the manufacture of NLC-based microdisplays
for electronic devices, for which the development of robust predictive models
would be very valuable. The work will also inform the use of dielectric fluids
as optical shutters and as controllable lenses, and of NLCs in various
biosensing applications. Establishing a firm theoretical framework for the
experimentally-observed dewetting phenomena, and establishing models for
controllable dielectrowetting, will be of significant interest both to
researchers in industry and to a large class of academic researchers from the
mathematics, physics and engineering communities. Both investigators are
actively involved in teaching and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students
at NJIT, within both mathematics and the engineering and physical sciences. A
significant portion of the research for this project will be carried out by
graduate students, who will receive an excellent introduction to research and a
thorough training in research practices. The investigators will continue their
involvement with undergraduate education under the present project, with the
development of a new dielectrowetting experimental module for NJIT's Capstone
Course in Applied Mathematics, providing the involved students with a unique
educational and research experience that will ready them to join the U.S.
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new
approaches to model and accurately simulate the complex dewetting phenomena
observed in ultra-thin films of NLCs and model the phenomenon of
dielectrowetting, driven by electric field gradients. The proposed work will
combine careful mathematical modeling with a broad range of analytical
approaches, such as matched asymptotic analysis, multiple scales analysis, local
analysis of singularities, stability analysis of PDEs, marginal stability
analysis, and regularization techniques. In parallel, numerical methods will be
refined and developed for 4th order nonlinear parabolic PDEs arising from the
free surface film-spreading models (ADI methods), and for the coupled elliptic
models that will arise from the electric field. The codes will be implemented in
a GPU computing environment for maximum efficiency and speed. Significant
challenges include the derivation of physically-appropriate yet mathematically
tractable models, necessary to gain insight into the problems considered;
understanding the mechanisms leading to NLC film breakup; and dealing properly
with the coupling between an applied nonuniform field and a moving NLC film,
particularly in the case where the electric field is significant throughout the
NLC layer. Wherever possible, the results will be compared either with existing,
or new experiments that will be carried out in coordination with the theoretical
and computational work on which this project centers. In addition to the
potential industrial impacts, the project will provide both graduate and
undergraduate students with significant educational and research training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.