* 1815328
* AF: Small: Approximate Counting, Stochastic Local Search and Nonlinear Dynamics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Alistair Sinclair, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Theoretical Computer Science (TCS) is concerned with core questions in
algorithms and complexity theory, and also with many questions in other
scientific disciplines viewed through the so-called "computational lens." This
refers to the study of many scientific phenomena that are fundamentally
computational in nature and can therefore benefit from a TCS perspective. This
project addresses both core topics and connections with other disciplines,
notably statistical physics and population genetics. A unifying theme in the
project is techniques for the analysis of random and physical processes arising
in all of these fields. The project will engage as collaborators experts in
fields such as complex analysis, applied probability and statistical physics to
work on these interface areas. The project affords many opportunities for
graduate student and postdoctoral training and ideas from this research will
find their way into course curricula. The investigator also maintains a strong
interest in undergraduate and K-12 teaching, the latter through his involvement
with the Berkeley Math Circle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level,
the project contains three broad themes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Approximate
counting: the development of approximation algorithms for counting problems,
with special emphasis on the emerging technique of "geometry of polynomials" and
its connections to the more classical techniques of Markov chain Monte Carlo and
correlation decay. Applications include generating functions in combinatorics,
partition functions in statistical physics, the computation of volumes, and the
analysis of graphical models in machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Stochastic local search algorithms: the study of a novel framework, arising from
recent advances on the algorithmic Lovasz Local Lemma, for the design and
analysis of stochastic local search algorithms, which search for combinatorial
structures with desired properties by successively eliminating "flaws". The new
framework is based on matrix norms and is inspired by linear time invariant
analysis in control theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Nonlinear dynamics: the
study of computational aspects of two distinct, but related nonlinear dynamical
systems: mass action kinetics and the "red-queen" dynamics. Mass action kinetics
is a standard model for chemical reaction networks, and also captures other
processes such as the Boltzmann equation in statistical physics, genetic
algorithms and recombination in population genetics. The more speculative red-
queen dynamics is a novel model for the evolution of multiple species under
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.