* 1815046
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Revisiting Network QoS in the Cloud-based Era
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Fahad Dogar, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,526.00

Today's Internet is increasingly expected to support resource-intensive
interactive applications, exemplified by the emerging wave of virtual,
augmented, and mixed reality applications. Unfortunately, today's public
Internet offers a best-effort service, which often falls short of meeting the
unprecedented resource requirements and desired goals of these applications.
This project aims to achieve high Quality of Service (QoS) for these and other
applications by judiciously combining existing Internet resources with
additional resources drawn from the cloud, while also being cost-effective for
end users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators will revisit the
QoS problem in the context of the emerging cloud infrastructure: the global
footprint of data centers (DC) hosted by major cloud providers. These DCs have
good network connectivity (both between data centers as well as to the end-
users) but are costly to use. Using extensive network measurements, this project
will first quantify the potential benefits of using the cloud as an overlay for
wide area communication. Further, it will investigate how best-effort Internet
paths can be judiciously combined with cloud overlays to provide bandwidth and
latency guarantees to applications, using appropriate and economically efficient
pricing mechanisms. The project, if successful, will empower the delivery of
high QoS to typical, cost-sensitive end-users, potentially enabling
transformative networked applications in areas like healthcare and education.
Measurement and protocol insights from this project have the potential to
benefit network service providers and network researchers, while students will
benefit from new course material and hands-on programming
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.