* 1815701
* III: Small: Automatic Learning-based Services for Distributed Data Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Olga Papaemmanouil, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,913.00

The distributed nature of most database management systems (DBMSs) brings about
new challenges to the daily tasks of database administrators. Apart from
database tuning, today's administrators are often responsible for: (a) adapting
data partitioning and replication schemes; (b) managing dynamic workloads to
meet query prioritization and performance goals; as well as (c) provisioning
computing resources on demand. Unfortunately, the complexity of these tasks
often exceeds engineers' abilities to scientifically model them. To address this
challenge, this project will couple existing learning-driven theory with
distributed data management systems to have significant impact on the design of
DBMSs. By leveraging advanced learning algorithms from machine learning and game
theory, the project will allow DBMSs to move away from "hard-coded algorithmic
intelligence," rigid data structures, and algorithms that are based on informal
intuition. Instead, DBMSs will be able to incorporate "learning-based
intelligence" that provides reasoning on numerous decisions based on pattern
recognition capabilities and mathematically proven insights. Leveraging
information to learn and adapt could unleash tremendous potential as databases
evolve to systems capable of automatically tuning themselves. The results of
this project will also reduce the human effort of database administrators as
they will be offered predictive models, decision tools and insight to the
interplay between data distribution, workload management, and query performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide solutions to some of the key
technical challenges that arise when tuning the performance of dynamic workloads
on distributed data management systems. This research will lead to the design of
new algorithms and learning-based frameworks for supporting data distribution,
replication, query dispatching, query scheduling, and performance prediction
without human intervention. These techniques will be automatically customized to
application-level performance goals and user-defined query priorities and will
allow distributed DBMSs to naturally handle dynamic workloads, changing data
access patterns, and varying resource availability. By coupling
unsupervised/supervised learning, deep learning and game theory to data
management tasks the project will transform data management systems to "database
science" tools through which system administrators will be able to explore and
derive insight on the factors that affect the performance of a database and its
deployed applications. As a result, the project will deliver complex predictive
and correlation models between query, data, resource-related features and system
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.