* 1815496
* SHF: Small: Concurrency with Specified Orders
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jens Palsberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 396,028.00

The need for concurrent programming is growing, especially after the multi-core
revolution. This project aims to help concurrent programmers be more productive
and produce software of higher quality. This will be of paramount importance for
society's software infrastructure. The project will develop general techniques
that are easily applicable to many mainstream programming languages such as C++,
Java, and Scala. The project's novelties are a notion of specified orders along
with a program logic and machine-checked proofs of well-known concurrent
algorithms. The project's impacts are approaches to concurrent programming that
allow programmers to write once, prove once, and run efficiently anywhere. The
investigator will work with a PhD student on the project and will teach the
results to students in an undergraduate course and a graduate
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For concurrent programs, programmers often face a
mismatch between their assumptions about execution and the memory model of a
specific architecture. For example, a programmer may need two instructions to
execute in order for the program to be correct, yet most architectures execute
out of order. This project will enable programmers to specify such assumptions,
prove correctness, and run efficiently on a wide variety of architectures.
Specified orders are easier to understand, reason with, and optimize than
existing mechanisms such as barriers (assembly language), atomic orderings
(C++), and volatiles (Java, Scala).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.