* 1815696
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: A novel paradigm for detecting complex anomalous patterns in multi-modal, heterogeneous, and high-dimensional multi-source data sets
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Feng Chen, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 11/30/2019
* USD 249,989.00

One of the greatest challenges in modern data analysis is to identify subtle,
complex anomalous patterns (subsets of a data set that are novel or unexpected)
within ubiquitous multi-modal, heterogeneous, and high-dimensional multi-source
data sets in the current big data era. The detection of such salient patterns is
an indispensable tool for knowledge mining and discovery in important
applications across many fields of science, engineering, and business, including
the early detection of infectious disease outbreaks, crime hotspots, network
intrusions, false advertising, cyber botnets, customer activity monitoring and
user profiling, and fraudulent medical claims, among others. The project
research goal is to develop a new and innovative paradigm for discovering
complex and subtle anomalous patterns in ubiquitous multi-modal, heterogeneous,
and high-dimensional multi-source datasets in the current big data era. The key
idea is to generalize the idea of meta-analysis from the statistical community
and to reframe the problem as a search over all subsets of nonparametric
statistical tests that are conducted on individual record-level features, in
order to find the subsets (anomalous patterns) that are jointly significant. The
project is focused on real-world problems related to biosurveillance and
cybersecurity with two challenging applications: early detection of rare and
infectious disease outbreaks (e.g., foodborne, Hantavirus, yellow fever) and
Sybil attacks (e.g., spammers, fake users, and compromised normal users). The
integrated education plan includes the development of new courses offered at the
Master of Science program in Computer Science and Informatics and outreach to
underrepresented groups. The outcomes of this project will be widely
disseminated to broader audience via tutorials and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are: (1)
the development of nonparametric tests for modeling anomalous information of
multi-source datasets; (2) learning heterogeneous dependencies among
nonparametric tests; (3) detecting anomalous patterns from an extremely large
set of nonparametric tests; and (4) making the detected anomalous patterns
interpretable in the context of multi-modal, heterogeneous, and high-dimensional
data. The research approach includes the development of (1) nonparametric tests
on individual record level features that provide consistent representations of
anomalous information from multiple heterogeneous input modalities, such as
image, text, video, and multiple sensor streams; (2) deep structured and
adversarial methods capable of learning robust hierarchical dependency
structures of nonparametric tests using unlabeled training data; (3) fast,
scalable combinatorial optimization methods capable of accurately detecting
salient anomalous patterns from billion-size nonparametric tests; and (4)
transparent and interpretable methods capable of explaining the predicted
anomalous patterns by identifying training instances and features that are most
responsible for the predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.