* 1815506
* CHS: Small: Simulating Activities of Daily Living for the Assessment of Fall Risk in Older Adults
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Andrea Mason, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

Every year, about a third of adults aged 65 years or over fall at least once,
and for many of these individuals' falls result in mild to severe injuries. For
this reason, identifying older adults who are at risk of falling before their
first fall is an important healthcare priority. Many screening tools exist for
the identification of adults at risk of falling; however, these tools often rely
on paper and pencil questionnaires, or the performance of simplistic tasks that
do not represent the breadth and complexity of common daily activities that lead
to falls. These fall assessment tools are inadequate, because they do not
realistically represent environmental factors at play during activities of daily
living (ADLs), especially those that influence walking and balance. While it is
not feasible to recreate the vast assortment of "real-life" ADL scenarios in
clinical or residential settings, immersive Virtual Reality (VR) is a tool that
can produce myriad environmental constraints, cognitive demands, and assessment
scenarios that are rich, customized and easily varied, while only taking up a
small footprint. This project will capitalize on recent technological advances
in immersive VR to develop an objective fall risk assessment tool that reliably
quantifies performance in a variety of real-world scenarios. The long-term
outcomes of this multi-disciplinary research will have a broad and
transformative impact on how fall risk is identified, will lead to more
successful and targeted fall prevention programs, and will significantly reduce
the healthcare costs associated with falls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this research is to create normed and validated VR fall-risk assessment
scenarios capable of simulating everyday activities. To generate these
scenarios, the project will first determine how whole-body movement patterns
within VR and natural environments are influenced by the visual information
available to users of the system. This knowledge will then be used to create
ecologically valid fall assessment scenarios that will immersively simulate one
environment where older adults are known to be at high risk of falls. Finally,
the scenarios will systematically be validated both on healthy older adults and
on adults at risk of falling, to determine how to most effectively and
efficiently characterize fall risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.