* 1815291
* RI: Small: Demographic-Aware Lexical Semantics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Carmen Banea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

A central challenge in natural language processing is to develop methods for
determining how meanings of words relate to one another. This task is called
"lexical semantics", because "lexical" means "word" and "semantics" means
"meaning". Traditional dictionaries do not solve the problem of lexical
semantics, because definitions are often circular or incomplete, especially for
the most common words. Instead, models of lexical semantics are computed by
processing large bodies of text, using the principle that pairs of words that
often appear in the same contexts must have meanings that are similar along some
dimensions. For example, the words "man" and "boy" would be inferred to have
similar meanings along the dimensions of "human" and "gender". However, a
limitation of current models is that they assume that the meaning of words is
the same for all speakers of a language. This is plainly false: we know, for
example, that English speakers use words differently depending, among other
factors, their age, gender, field of work, and geographic location; that is, on
the basis of their demographics. This project will overcome this limitation by
developing methods for demographic-aware lexical semantics, where people-centric
information complements language-based information. This work will help improve
systems for natural language communication between people and computers, such as
Siri or Alexa, as well as improve systems for automatically translating between
different languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have witnessed
significant progress in research in lexical semantics using corpus-based
approaches such as distributional vector-space models and word embeddings. At
the same time, the growth of Web 2.0 has led to tremendous volumes of texts,
most of which are rich in explicit or implicit demographic information, such as
the age, gender, industry, or location of the writer. The goal of this project
is to take the next natural step at the confluence of these two trends, and
develop methods for demographic-aware lexical semantics, where people-centric
information complements language-based information for enhanced linguistic
representations that explicitly account for the demographics and traits of the
people behind the language. The project targets the following three main
research objectives. First, it develops novel demographic-aware word
representations models that account not only for contextual knowledge but also
for people-centric information. Methods that are explored include distributional
vector-space models that can be composed to create demographic-aware vector-
space representations for various demographic profiles, and joint word
embeddings that combine generic context-based embeddings with specialized
embeddings that reflect the specifics of given demographic dimensions. Second,
building upon extensive previous work in behavioral studies targeting the
identification of systematic heterogeneity across groups, lab studies are
devised to validate the findings from the computational models. Third, the
application of these novel people-centric word representations to three core
tasks in natural language processing are explored, ranging from simple to
complex, namely: word associations, text similarity, and diversified
news.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.