* 1815875
* CHS: Small: Systematic Comparative and Historical Analysis Framework for Social Movements
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ceren Budak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,942.00

This project will develop methods for studying online social movements that are
playing increasingly influential roles. Despite its promise, research using
social media data has suffered from a number of shortcomings including lack of
representativeness, incompleteness, and the difficulty of identifying relevant
outcome variables. Such shortcomings are widely acknowledged, yet their
solutions have proven elusive. This project makes intellectual contributions to
these issues at both the data collection and data labeling steps. this project
will improve our understanding of how online movements are formed, how they
evolve over time, how the participants coordinate, and how movements change
their participants and the broader public. This study will inform community
organizers and citizens of strategies that result in desirable outcomes in civic
participation, the designers of online platforms that aim to support such civic
engagement about which design choices lead to what type of civic engagement, and
journalists that aim to provide accurate narratives of online social movements.
The project will also have educational impact, as the datasets will be used in
data science courses and will be shared with the broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this research are to propose
methods for optimizing data collection strategies; present methods for
optimizing data labeling; analyze the development, coordination, and success for
social movements of varying scales under different data collection and labeling
schemes; and model determinants of protest participation and movement success
using curated data. At the data collection step, the project will contribute: a
systematic evaluation of the social media data collection methods used in
related work; the formulation of topology-based and content-based data
collection strategies; and the development of methods to perform effective
iterative data collection given a set of possible strategies, through modeling
to maximize the expected reward earned through a sequence of choices made in a
system of learning problems. At the data labeling step, the project will
contribute the development of cross-domain text classification methods to
perform cost-effective data labeling through crowdsourcing platforms, and new
insights about the potential for transfer learning across popular social media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.