* 1815095
* Dynamics and Evolution of Virus and Immune Response Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Cameron Browne, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,641.00

This research develops new mathematical and computational methods to understand
the competition between evolving viruses (like HIV) and the immune system, which
seeks to eradicate them. The dynamics of virus and immune response within an
infected host can be viewed as a complex ecosystem. During HIV infection, an
extensive repertoire of immune cells target the virus, while HIV can rapidly
evolve resistance to multiple immune responses. The ensuing battle precipitates
a dynamic network of interacting viral strains and immune response variants.
Understanding the main factors shaping viral resistance pathways and immune
dynamics is crucial for designing effective vaccines and immunotherapies.
Mathematical modeling can help elucidate patterns of viral escape from immune
attack, however overall system complexity challenges the analysis of such
models. This project develops mathematical models and analytical techniques for
understanding the dynamics of multiple virus and immune response populations
within infected hosts. This research uses dynamical systems and computational
methods to characterize persistent structures of the evolving virus-immune
response network. Potential HIV vaccine and treatment strategies will be
investigated utilizing the mathematical models. Furthermore, the models will be
connected to Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) data in collaboration with
biologists. Also significant are the educational impacts arising from the
interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students in this
research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly evolving pathogens, such as SIV
and HIV, can evade the host immune responses via mutations at several targeted
epitopes (viral proteins). The concurrent interaction of diverse virus and
immune populations necessitate considering a complex system in order to
understand viral escape at multiple epitopes. This project develops and analyzes
mathematical models for virus and immune response variants interacting in a
network. Stability and persistence of viral/immune populations will be
characterized in terms of threshold quantities and the structure of the
underlying interaction network. An important question is to determine what
mechanisms cause the virus to win this battle in most drug-naive HIV infected
patients, and alternatively what leads to long-term viral control in a small
percentage of drug-naive HIV infected individuals known as Elite Controllers.
Results from the differential equation models and stochastic counterparts will
inform upon viral escape of immune response at multiple epitopes, along with the
more complex scenario of virus-antibody coevolution. From a broader perspective,
the methods will be applicable to other predator-prey ecological networks, for
example phage-bacteria communities. Extensions relevant to HIV biology, such as
incorporating heterogeneous immune recognition kinetics during the infected cell
lifecycle, latent cell infection and different vaccine/immunotherapy strategies,
will be investigated. Results will be linked to data, in particular through
interdisciplinary collaboration connecting the models with viral genomic and
immune cell data from SIV infection experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.