* 1815886
* RI: Small: Coordination in tightly coupled domains: Stepping stone rewards to induce the correct joint actions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kagan Tumer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project introduces a new multiagent learning approach that leads to
coordinated behavior in tightly coupled domains, that is, in domains where all
agents must do the right thing at the right time for the team to achieve its
goals. For example, getting a team of agents to lift and move an object heavier
than the payload capacity of any single agent requires a sufficient number of
agents to perform the correct action at the correct time. Unfortunately, most
current learning methods fail in such situations because they rely on
reinforcing the correct agent behavior only after the agents stumble upon the
right actions. But what if the agents never jointly find the right actions? This
project addresses this issue by introducing "stepping-stone rewards" that
incentivize agents to perform the right actions even if their teammates have not
yet found the correct complementary actions. The impact of this project will be
to create larger and more capable multiagent teams that can be deployed in
industry (such as factory robots that are not limited to a single task), in the
field (such as autonomous search and rescue systems), in education (such as
interactive learning via online gameplay) and in the home (such as networks of
smart appliances).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical contribution of this
project is to shift the learning problem faced by an agent from "did I take the
correct action?" to "would my action have been correct had other agents taken
the complementary action?" In tightly coupled multiagent domains, the first
question results in very little positive feedback, creating a difficult to
impossible learning problem. The new stepping stone rewards leverage
hypothetical partners (partners that are surmised by an agent to explore the
joint-action space) to overcome this difficulty by assessing the potential
benefits of a particular action. Intuitively, stepping-stone rewards create a
gradient for the agents to follow to enable fast and efficient learning in
tightly coupled domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.