* 1815676
* NeTS: Small: Optimizing Network Control and Function Virtualization in Internet of Things Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Leandros Tassiulas, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 537,739.00

Part 1: The Internet of Things (IoT) is expected to have a multifaceted impact
on economy, industry, society, and everyday life. Scaling, performance and
complexity of management are among the key challenges in IoT and will largely
determine its success. This project aims to leverage Software Defined Networking
(SDN) and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) in IoT to address those
challenges. SDN and NFV facilitate innovation in network control, lowering the
barrier to entry for new and advanced functionality in the network. However, so
far, the research on these technologies has been primarily focused on
centralized systems such as cloud-based telco and enterprise networks. There are
major challenges in applying them to IoT networks because of the large number of
heterogeneous and resource-constrained devices and services in IoT (e.g. for
health, home, environmental, and transportation monitoring). This project seeks
to address that challenge by developing new approaches for the design of IoT
network control, specifically in the SDN control plane and the deployment and
management of NFV functionality in data plane, in order to support the large and
expanding number of IoT applications that are becoming more critical in everyday
life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: In this project, a hierarchical
decentralization of the SDN control plane is proposed along with an optimization
framework for the dynamic balancing of data transmissions and virtual function
processing allocations. First, this project will explore a decentralized SDN
control plane optimized specifically to meet IoT needs. Second, it will provide
a systematic methodology for optimizing the deployment and management of NFV
functionality in the data plane based on a solid conceptual foundation. Cutting-
edge theoretical methodologies will be pursued for addressing the above issues,
in parallel with network prototyping and experimentation, leveraging ongoing
network experimentation efforts at Yale. This will verify the efficacy of the
proposed solutions, and will facilitate further development the SDN/NFV-enabled
IoT architectures under consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.