* 1815514
* CHS: Small: Establishing Action Laws for Touch Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Xiaojun Bi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 315,478.00

Theoretical action laws and quantitative models are foundational to any field.
In human-computer interaction and ergonomics, Fitts' law is one of the
theoretical foundations for interface and input device development and research.
It has served as a theoretical framework for evaluating input devices, a tool
for computational interface design, and a logical basis for modeling more
complex HCI tasks. However, ample empirical evidence has shown that Fitts' law
and other existing action laws encounter problems, or even fail, when modeling
touch interaction, primarily because they do not account for the imprecision of
finger touch in interaction. This research will establish robust new action laws
for touch interaction, including both pointing and trajectory-based gesturing
(steering), which will guide the design and evaluation of touch interfaces and
serve as cornerstones for modeling complex tasks, computational interface design
and optimization. Given the ubiquitous adoption of mobile devices where touch
input is dominant, project outcomes are expected to have broad impact that will
reach millions of users. To demonstrate the practical value and effectiveness of
the new touch action laws, they will be used to quantify the touch capacity of
older adults, thereby laying the foundation for designing touch interfaces well-
suited for that user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point for this
research will be the principal investigator's Finger-Fitts (FFitts) law derived
from the Dual Gaussian Distribution Model and Fitts' law. This preliminary work
will be expanded to model 2D target selection and gesturing tasks. The research
will be carried out following standard practices in Human Computer Interaction
(HCI), first deriving candidate models from existing models, hypotheses, and
rational assumptions, and then conducting rigorous user studies to evaluate the
new models. The experimental results will in turn be used to refine the new
models, which again will be evaluated via studies. Project outcomes will include
the following theoretical and empirical intellectual contributions: action laws
for touch pointing, including both the task form of the FFitts law which will
predict touch pointing time with nominal task parameters (i.e., finger travel
distance A and target width W), and the bivariate FFitts law which will model 2D
pointing tasks on rectangular targets such as buttons, check boxes and
hyperlinks; action laws for trajectory gestures (Finger-Steering laws),
including a basic form for steering along straight paths and a generic form for
other paths; and a touch action law based understanding of older adults' touch
interaction capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.