* 1815011
* AF: Small: Foundations for Collaborative and Information-Limited Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Avrim Blum, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 324,884.00

Machine learning increasingly is being used throughout society, and in a wide
range of applications. Businesses use machine learning systems for decision
support, internet sites use machine learning to better interact with users, our
personal devices use machine learning to adapt to our needs, and our cars are
beginning to use data-trained systems to improve safety. These applications
bring up new opportunities as well as new concerns. Opportunities include the
potential for systems to more rapidly learn and adapt through collaboration, and
concerns include privacy and the fairness of algorithmically-made decisions.
This project is aimed at developing new foundational understanding of these
opportunities and concerns, to help guide the development of more efficient,
more adaptive, and fairer, machine learning methods. This project additionally
will support educational workshops on these issues, and more broadly will
support the education and training of young scientists on these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project has the following four
main thrusts: (1) Collaborative Machine Learning. How can devices with related
learning tasks best collaborate to learn efficiently from only a modest amount
of data, and how can privacy and related concerns be addressed? (2) Property
Testing and Error Extrapolation. This thrust aims to develop methods that, from
a small amount of labeled data, can reliably estimate how well a given learning
algorithm or representation class would perform if given a much larger labeled
data sample. (3) Semi-Supervised Learning. Semi-supervised learning refers to
methods that combine labeled and unlabeled data, to learn well even when labeled
data is limited. This work aims to develop theoretical foundations for an
approach based on explicitly learning regularities within the unlabeled data and
then using these to guide how learning is performed over the labeled data. (4)
Fairness in Learning. There has recently been substantial concern about
algorithmic decisions (such as whether to offer an applicant a loan) that could
unfairly discriminate against certain classes of people. This work aims to
develop improved theoretical understanding, tools, and guarantees for tackling
these kinds of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.