* 1815585
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: 3D Printing for High Fidelity Image Reproduction Capturing Texture, Spectral Color, Gloss, and Translucency
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Fine art objects such as paintings form a key part of our social and cultural
heritage, but are inherently subject to degradation or damage. Conservation of
these precious works incurs a huge cost, yet is vital if future generations are
to have an opportunity to enjoy them and learn from them. Fortunately, high
quality facsimiles of these cultural treasures can be exploited in place of the
originals in many applications, including restoration practice, conservatory
studies, education in museums, and enjoyment at home. This project will explore
how to exploit an emerging generation of high-quality 3D printers to produce
reproductions of fine art paintings that are of unprecedented quality by using
not just a small number of inks (as with consumer-grade printers) but as many as
10 di&amp;#64256;erent inks to reproduce colors such that they are
indistinguishable from the original to the human eye under various lighting
conditions. Moreover, the use of these modern multi-material 3D printers will
enable not just the reproduction of color but also the recreation of gloss,
translucency, and &amp;#64257;ne-scale detail such as brush strokes. By creating
the &amp;#64257;rst complete pipeline for realistic reproduction of
&amp;#64257;ne art (with a focus on paintings), this project will lay the
foundations for how &amp;#64257;ne art reproduction, in general, should be done
using computational processes and 3D printers. This will lead to enabling
technologies for reproduction and preservation of cultural heritage, allowing a
wide population to enjoy favorite paintings in a form that is indistinguishable
from the originals. Collaboration with local museums in Boston and Princeton
will enable strong outreach with curators and the general public. Project
outcomes will have additional broad impact by enabling accurate appearance
reproduction with 3D printing in support of a wide range of applications in
rapid prototyping and the manufacture of end-user
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the project will
investigate several key methods and technologies. First, there is the question
of how to use advanced camera systems to capture the properties of the original
paintings. This involves measuring the full spectrum of light
re&amp;#64258;ected by each point on the painting, as well as how shiny or
opaque the surface is. Moreover, it involves the use of high-resolution 3D
scanners to measure the &amp;#64257;ne bumps on the surface left by brushes or
other tools. A second component of the project is to characterize the full
capabilities of multi-material 3D printers, and to incorporate the measured ink
properties into computer simulations that can predict exactly how the print-outs
will look. The &amp;#64257;nal components of the project are to perform computer
optimization to determine the exact type, number, and concentration of printing
materials that should be used, and how the printing process should be tweaked to
achieve maximum reproduction quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.