* 1815486
* CHS: SHF: SMALL: Collaborative Research: Scaffolding skill acquisition to onboard OSS ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anita Sarma, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 282,000.00

This research aims to develop broadly applicable principles and methods to
scaffold the newcomers' skill acquisition as they onboard into an Open Source
Software (OSS) project, which in recent years has become an integral part of
software development. Although the long-term sustainability of OSS projects
depends on the availability of a diverse, passionate group of volunteers, it is
quite difficult to become a successful OSS developer. During the onboarding
period, newcomers face several barriers such as: steep learning curve, setup
misconfiguration, reception problems, and expectation breakdowns. These barriers
result in many newcomers giving up, meaning the field may be losing many
potential software developers. This research will lead to new insights that can
radically improve how newcomers onboard to software projects and to open source
communities, which can broaden participation and increase retention. This
project's empirical studies and infrastructure design pay particular attention
to the fact that differences exist in how people problem-solve and use software
features, and that these often cluster by gender. Therefore, broadening
participation requires that tools and processes support different problem-
solving styles, such that one group is not disproportionately
impacted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, skills are defined as the
capability of performing an activity; skills can refer to knowledge about the
contribution process, programming concepts, or about a class of data, an
application programming interface, a library, or the domain. The project
objectives are: (1) create a model of skills that pertains to how to be
successful in OSS, (2) design and evaluate approaches to extract these skills
from open tasks in OSS projects, (3) scaffold skill acquisition of newcomers by
matching developers' skills (and their goals) to available tasks in an OSS
ecosystem, (4) investigate strategies and design solutions that promote gender
inclusiveness, and (5) assess the approach through the design and evaluation of
an infrastructure built in this research and made available to the OSS
community. The intellectual merit of the work is threefold. First, it will
generate a deep understanding of skill models for software development tasks
that is anchored and carefully validated in the context of tasks in an OSS
ecosystem. Second, the researchers will design approaches that scaffold skill
acquisition of developers to create a development trajectory that matches their
current skill levels as well as their goals. Finally, a novel infrastructure
will be designed and shared, that scaffolds the skill acquisition of newcomers,
thereby, mitigating the effects of onboarding
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.