* 1815636
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Side-channel Attacks Against Mobile Users: Singularity Detection, Behavior Identification, and Automated Rectification
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* GUAN-HUA TU, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,976.00

Side-channel attacks have been proven effective to infer sensitive information
(such as user activities) that should not be disclosed to unauthorized users.
Owing to the closed nature of the cellular network infrastructure, adversaries
cannot easily capture encrypted mobile network traffic, thus protecting against
side-channel information leakage of mobile users. However, with the recent
proliferation of software defined radio platforms and emerging Internet
Protocol-based cellular network services over public networks (including Wi-Fi
calling), mobile phone users are now exposed to more serious side-channel
information leakage than before. This project aims to conduct a comprehensive
investigation of side-channel attacks against mobile phone users by collecting,
labeling, mining, and analyzing mobile users' encrypted mobile data. The success
of this research will not only contribute new techniques to discover security
vulnerabilities that can be exploited from side-channel information leakage, but
also develop novel automated rectification mechanisms to safeguard users. The
proposed activities may contribute to the upcoming 5G technology standardization
and train a new generation of engineers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project makes three technical contributions: (1) New techniques for mobile data
collection and labeling: Cellular network control-plane signals indicate a
variety of cellular network events (such as changes in a user's Quality-of-
Service profile or location) which may be exploited to invade user privacy.
However, the current-generation cellular sniffers cannot distinguish well
between control-plane signals and data-plane data packets when they are
transmitted over the same physical channel. This project will develop new
techniques to collect encrypted mobile network traffic including control-plane
signals and data-plane data packets and label them with user behaviors and
network events; (2) Advanced Singularity Detection and Behavior Identification
mechanism: This project will study and develop end-to-end frameworks that can
perform singularity detection and behavior identification simultaneously. This
involves processing limited labeled data and mining frequent patterns for
emerging behaviors; (3) Mobile/cellular-friendly automated rectification
mechanisms: The state-of-the-art security defenses for side-channel attacks are
not designed for mobile networked systems. For example, mobile users pay a
performance penalty for the noise added to their data packets. This project will
develop mobile-friendly (meaning low memory usage) and cellular-friendly
(meaning compatible with standards and operators' charging model) automated
rectification mechanisms to secure a variety of mobile
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.