* 1815022
* EAGER: High throughput inhibitor discovery for dissecting serine hydrolase function
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* James Van Deventer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Enzymes are directly involved in every aspect of human health, from digestion
and nervous system signaling to bacterial infection. Understanding the role that
each enzyme plays requires the ability to specifically alter each enzyme?s
activity without affecting enzymes with similar structural features. This
project will evaluate a new strategy that, if successful, would enable
researchers to quickly identify molecules capable of this extremely selective
function. Such a capability could revolutionize our understanding of diseases
and our ability to formulate effective treatments. This project will also
contribute to the development of a diverse biotechnology workforce through the
involvement of female and underrepresented minority graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate a potentially robust
platform for the design of specific, potent enzyme inhibitors through fusion of
small molecules with antibodies through noncanonical amino acid (ncAA) yeast
display. Rather than chemical conjugation, which can be tedious and results in
bulky moieties, the project will use genetic incorporation of noncanonical amino
acids (ncAAs) into a hybrid antibody as a potentially transformative approach to
produce these antibody-small molecule hybrids. This project will first develop
the platform to efficiently incorporate these ncAAs into the antibodies and then
use the resulting system to identify potent inhibitors.