* 1815347
* CHS: Small: Robust Eye Tracking and Facial Context Sensing for Mobile Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Deepak Ganesan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 516,000.00

Virtual and Augmented Reality headsets may soon become a major mass-market
mobile consumer electronics device. However, there are challenges in making
these headsets more portable and less power hungry, and in enabling a more
immersive user experience by increasing awareness of the user's attention and
emotional state. This project's goals are two-fold. The first goal is to enhance
systems' ability to track the eye in a low-power yet robust manner by exploring
new eye tracker designs combined with machine learning approaches. The second
goal is to study methods to infer facial expressions and user emotion from
wearable headsets by combining multiple sensing modalities including facial
muscle activity and cameras. The project will also have educational impact on
middle-school students and under-represented students through workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves activities and innovations in several
areas. On the eye tracking side, the project will explore new hardware designs
with stereo cameras and machine learning approaches to enhance robustness to
face and eye shapes as well as eyeglass movements. On the facial expression
sensing side, the team will explore multimodal sensing methods that combine
electrooculography (EOG) and multiple camera views to infer expressions as well
as to reduce power consumption. On the networked systems side, the project will
look at leveraging eye tracking and facial expression sensing to enable wireless
offload of rendering to a nearby compute node. The techniques to be researched
can significantly lower the power consumed by AR and VR systems, enhance their
ability to sense human expressions to enable more immersive experience, and
reduce computational complexity by enabling predictive pre-fetch from a
wirelessly connected edge cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.