* 1815434
* AF: Small: Spectral and SDP Techniques: Average-Case Analysis and Subexponential Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Luca Trevisan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This project involves the design and analysis of algorithms for combinatorial
problems using techniques from linear algebra and convex optimization. The
project bridges pure mathematics and data science, allowing new applications of
mathematical ideas to the practice of computing, and from the activities on
dissemination, exposition, outreach and mentoring. The project will create open-
access lecture notes, surveys and blog posts, making highly technical results
accessible to a broader audience. This project will play a key role in the
training of graduate students, including two students belonging to
underrepresented groups in computer science, and in the design of a new graduate
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves novel approaches to
fundamental problems, such as certifying the unsatisfiability of random
constraint satisfaction problems, efficiently certifying properties of sparse
random graphs and sparse random matrices, understanding the power of sub-
exponential size relaxations in the sum-of-squares hierarchies, developing new
construction of graph sparsifiers and finding new ways to analyze certain
probabilistic distributed processes. Some of the problems in the scope of this
project are not believed to admit algorithms that perform correctly and
efficiently on all inputs. For this reason, the project will focus on: (a)
algorithms whose running time scale "sub-exponentially" and that outperform
brute-force combinatorial search, and (b) algorithms that may perform poorly on
a few inputs but that perform well on average on random inputs. The second goal
depends on how the inputs are distributed, and a key focus of this project is to
generalize past results that apply to certain specific distributions to broader
classes of distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.