* 1815559
* NSF-BSF:CIF:Small: Searching for the Rare: an Active Inference and Learning Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Qing Zhao, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 490,078.00

This project addresses the problem of searching for a few rare events of
interest among a massive number of possibilities. The rare events may represent
opportunities with exceptional returns or anomalies associated with high costs
or potential catastrophic consequences. This problem arises in a broad range of
applications, ranging from communications and infrastructure systems, cyber-
security, to social-economic networks, and is particularly relevant in the era
of increasing network size and abundance of data. The multidisciplinary nature
of this project also provides a rich research experience for both undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective is to
develop general design methodologies for detecting rare events quickly and
reliably when the total number of hypotheses is large, the observations are
noisy, and the prior knowledge on the rare events may be as little as "they are
different from the nominal." The project consists of three steps that represent
a logical progression in scope and level of difficulty: (i) achieving optimal
sample complexity with respect to detection accuracy through active hypothesis
testing; (ii) achieving optimal sample complexity with respect to the dimension
of the search space by exploiting inherent hierarchical structures; (iii)
tackling unknown models by integrating online learning with active inference.
The holistic treatment within a principled theoretic framework draws
inspirations from and contributes to fundamental theories of active hypothesis
testing and statistical and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.