* 1815139
* AF: Small: Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Network Learning with Applications in Computational Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jing Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,964.00

Heterogeneous networks have been widely used in modeling real-world complex
systems and have been a powerful tool in studying complex biological problems.
Link prediction in heterogeneous networks has been one of the key computational
problems in this context. However, research on efficient and effective
algorithms for link prediction in heterogeneous networks is still in its
infancy, especially for networks that integrate multiple data sources. The
overall objective of this project is to develop efficient, robust, effective and
integrative algorithms as well as software tools for the link prediction problem
in heterogeneous networks, and to apply the algorithms on real biological
applications with practical significance. The project will also help in
promoting teaching and training of a new generation of computational
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators of the project will solve the
link prediction problem in heterogeneous networks by proposing two computational
approaches: one is based on a kernel regularized least square framework with
multi-view learning for data incompleteness, and the other one is to utilize a
weighted nonnegative matrix tri-factorization approach that provides a unified
framework for link prediction and data imputation. Both approaches will be
applied to the problem of drug combination prediction, which is formulated as a
link prediction problem in heterogeneous networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.