* 1815757
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Models and Measurements for Website Fingerprinting
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Hopper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,659.00

Many private interactions between individuals and their friends, families,
employers, and institutions are now carried out on the Internet; disclosure of
the contents of these interactions or even the mere associations between these
parties can expose people to real financial or physical risks. As a result,
encryption and services such as virtual private networks or the Tor project that
conceal the connection between a user and the websites they visit are growing in
popularity. Website fingerprinting attacks use information that is not concealed
by these techniques, such as file sizes and download times, to re-identify the
websites a user visits, but while these attacks work in a lab environment, it is
a challenge to evaluate them in practical settings and develop effective
protections against them. This project will apply statistics and machine
learning to develop new probabilistic models of the "fingerprint" of a website,
metrics of the amount of information these models reveal, and privacy preserving
algorithms and datasets to test these models. The results of these models and
tests will be used to assess the threat posed by website fingerprinting and
inform the design of new defense mechanisms. As a result, users will benefit
from improved protection techniques, while other researchers can use the
resulting models, datasets, and metrics to study the effectiveness of website
fingerprinting defenses. The work and data will also be used to support both
undergraduate and graduate education through both courses and research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to address three key
challenges in website fingerprinting research -- privacy-preserving
characterization of background traffic, maintaining fingerprint databases, and
evaluation and comparison of defenses -- by developing new representations of
website fingerprints that can assign a likelihood to any fingerprint being
generated by a specific type of download. Using these representations, the
project will pursue four main thrusts. First, the project will use these models
to determine the extent to which website fingerprints can directly infer
identifying features of a download without requiring a database of all possible
web pages, moving from existing closed world approaches to website
fingerprinting toward more broadly applicable open world approaches. Second, the
project will develop algorithms to train the models on live traffic while
preserving the privacy of individual users using concepts from differential
privacy. Third, using the trained models, the project will provide the first
assessment of attacks and defenses on realistic data, and use metrics from
information theory to compare those attacks and defenses on an equal footing.
Finally, the project will use the results of these evaluations to develop new
defensive techniques that can be applied directly to the content of privacy-
sensitive sites and to systems designed to protect users' downloads such as the
Tor network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.