* 1815145
* AF: Small: Approximation Algorithms for Learning Metric Spaces
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Anastasios Sidiropoulos, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 399,899.00

The analysis of large and complicated data sets is a task of increasing
importance in several brunches of science and engineering. In many application
scenarios, the data consists of a set of objects endowed with some information
that quantifies similarity or dissimilarity of certain pairs. Examples of such
inputs include statistical distributions, user preferences in social networks,
DNA sequences, and so on. A natural way to interpret such data sets is as metric
spaces. That is, each object is treated as a point, and the dissimilarity
between two objects is encoded by their distance. The successful application of
this data-analytic framework requires finding a distance function that
faithfully encodes the ground truth. The project seeks to develop new algorithms
for computing such faithful metrical representations of data sets. The
underlying research problems lead to new connections between the areas of
computational geometry, algorithm design, and machine learning. The project aims
at transferring ideas between these scientific communities, and developing new
methods for data analysis in practice. The project will be part of the
investigator's curriculum development, teaching, and educational and outreach
activities. The main research problems that the project seeks to study will form
the basis for the training of both undergraduate and graduate students. The
investigator is committed to working with minorities and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This metrical interpretation of data
sets has been successful in practice and has lead to a plethora of algorithmic
methods and ideas, such as clustering, dimensionality reduction, nearest-
neighbor search, and so on. The area of metric learning is concerned mainly with
methods for discovering an underlying metric space that agrees with a given set
of observations. Specifically, the problem of learning the distance function is
cast as an optimization problem, where the objective function quantifies the
extend to which the solution satisfies the input constraints. A common thread in
many works on metric learning is the use of methods and ideas from computational
geometry and the theory of metric embeddings. Over the past few decades, these
ideas have also been the subject of study within the theoretical computer
science community. However, there are several well-studied problems in metric
learning that have not received much attention in the algorithms and
computational geometry communities. Moreover, there are many metric embedding
tools and techniques, that where developed within the algorithms community, that
have not yet been used in the context of metric learning. The project aims at
bridging this gap by a systematic study of algorithmic metric learning problems
from the point of view of computational geometry and approximation algorithms.
The major goals of this effort are transferring algorithmic tools to the metric
learning framework, as well as providing theoretical justification for metric
learning methods that are successful in practice but currently lack provable
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.