* 1815417
* Collaborative Research: From Dark Matter Halos to Supermassive Black Holes in the Most Massive Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jenny Greene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 09/30/2021
* USD 266,813.00

A key question for scientists is how galaxies - the building blocks of our
Universe - were assembled. They must understand both how the various components
of galaxies are physically organized currently, and how they have changed over
time. This proposal seeks to understand the assembly of the most massive
galaxies. The scientists are surveying the 100 most massive nearby galaxies to
measure the detailed chemical composition and physical properties within each
galaxy. They will create three-dimensional maps of the locations of stars and
gas in each galaxy, how they are moving, and what their composition is. The
velocities of the stars and gas will further enable the scientists to measure
the amounts of invisible mass in black holes and dark matter in these galaxies.
The combination of all this information provides important clues to when the
galaxies started to form and how they changed over time. In addition, one PI is
mentoring talented high school students and exposing them to cutting-edge
science research. The other PI teaches inmates in New Jersey State Correctional
Facilities through the Prison Teaching Initiative, providing basic math and
science training to underserved incarcerated
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to elucidate the assembly
history of massive galaxies. To achieve this goal, the proposers will
investigate (1) the relationship of massive galaxies and their black holes and
the possible black hole feedback; and (2) the stellar population properties, in
particular the spread in initial mass function among the most massive galaxies.
A robust way to study both questions is through stellar dynamical mass modeling.
Existing uniform kinematics measurements from wide-format and sub-arcsec
integral-field spectrographs will be used to model all of the dark components of
the galaxies: their central black holes, dark matter halos, and low-mass stars.
Additional extensive sets of multi-wavelength data will be used to study the
galaxy profiles and their molecular gas, hot gas, and accretion onto the central
black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.