* 1815840
* AF: Small: Data Stream Algorithms with Application to Linear Algebra
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* David Woodruff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2023
* USD 433,978.00

Many important problems in machine learning, scientific computing, and
statistics benefit from fast procedures for solving numerical linear algebra
problems. At the same time, many large-scale datasets, such as internet search
logs, network traffic, and sensor network data, have been studied in data-stream
literature. Surprisingly, a number of fast procedures used in numerical linear
algebra have been made possible by exploiting tools that were originally
developed in the data-stream literature. These developments are based on a
technique called sketching, which is a tool for quickly compressing a problem to
a smaller version of itself, for which one can then afford to run a much slower
procedure on the smaller problem. A major goal of this project is to study
foundational problems in the data-stream domain, and develop their connections
to problems in numerical linear algebra. The algorithms developed here will be
accessible to graduate and undergraduate students from computer science, machine
learning, and mathematics, and the investigator plans to integrate the results
of the project into a graduate course on algorithms for big data, as well as
undergraduate algorithms courses. The investigator is actively working with
underrepresented minority and undergraduate researchers on topics directly
related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first main thrust of this
project is to develop new techniques for fundamental problems in data streams
where the goal is to use minimal amount of memory while running algorithms over
one pass on a data stream. Such problems include statistical problems - such as
estimating the variance, moments, most frequent items, heavy hitters - for many
of which optimal memory bounds are still unknown. Another challenge in this
domain is that of processing massive streams for real-world graphs, such as
geometric intersection graphs, which arise in cellular networks and scheduling
theory. By studying a breadth of problems in different corners of data streams,
the investigator plans to develop new techniques and build unexpected
applications. The second main thrust of the project is to develop new algorithms
and hardness results for fundamental problems in numerical linear algebra,
connecting such problems to the study of data streams. CountSketch, which is a
low-memory heavy hitters algorithm, paved the way for obtaining time-optimal
algorithms for regression. This project will continue to push forward such
connections, for example, by studying CountSketch in the context of tensors,
which is a new application domain. The project will also investigate many
deterministic (instead of randomized) data stream algorithms, and understanding
their role in linear algebra. A major goal is to understand the limitations of
speedups to linear algebra problems. One particular problem of interest here is
to obtain low rank approximation with spectral norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.