* 1815108
* AF: Small: Computation of Functional Relations among Solutions of Difference and Differential Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Carlos Arreche, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 203,416.00

The pull of Earth's gravity on a satellite produces acceleration, which affects
the satellite's velocity and position, making its orbit an ellipse. This is just
one example of a mathematical phenomenon that arises from constraints on a
physical system that can be modeled by differential or difference equations.
This project will develop algorithms to automatically uncover the algebraic
properties of functions defined by differential or difference equations by
looking for symmetries. It will produce publicly-available implementations that
will be useful to researchers in different areas, such as physics, number
theory, and combinatorics. Key components of this project include the fostering
of interactions with other scientific fields and the advancement of
international collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to this project's
approach for discovering the functional relations among the solutions of
differential or difference equations is that these relations are encoded in the
algebraic structure of a corresponding Galois group. This project will develop
algorithms that determine, 1) for a linear differential equation with continuous
or discrete parameters, which additional functional equations are satisfied by
the solutions; 2) for a linear difference equation with respect to a shift,
q-dilation, Mahler, or elliptic curve addition, which differential equations are
satisfied by the solutions; and 3) for a linear difference equation with respect
to a q-dilation or Mahler p-operator, which additional difference equations with
respect to a q'-dilation or Mahler p'-operator, respectively, are satisfied by
the solutions. In each of these three situations there is a Galois theory that
encodes the sought properties of the solutions. Algorithms to compute the
corresponding Galois groups lead directly to procedures to compute the
functional relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.