* 1815115
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Multi-tier Service Architecture in IoT-Edge-Cloud Paradigms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Wenjun Hu, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 467,175.00

Edge computing is an emerging paradigm in which computing and storage are placed
at multiple locations between the endpoint Internet of Things (IoT) devices and
the cloud. This is seen as a driving force behind the next wave of advances in
IoT solutions. Edge services are predicted to become the next multi-billion
dollar technology market and disrupt the current cloud computing based industry.
Active industry-wide development and standardization efforts for edge computing
are under way to define related architectures. Against this backdrop, this
project designs and implements a system architecture to optimize multi-tier
service orchestration across IoT devices, edge servers, and the cloud. In
contrast to the typical per-application optimization approach, this project
takes a unique view of joint, concurrent optimization of multiple applications.
This architecture encourages the development of new distributed algorithms for
decomposing the processing semantics of IoT applications. Further, the project
contributes techniques and reference models to industry standardization
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harnessing edge capabilities to transform the IoT
service landscape requires novel distributed algorithms and system
architectures. This goes far beyond existing approaches for application code
partitioning and computation offloading for individual applications. To that
end, this project aims to build a system runtime that abstracts away the
infrastructure complexity while automating the optimization of application
processing. On the compute path, the project highlights new types of correlated
computation, where the corresponding input and output are similar but not
identical. Eliminating this holds the key to simultaneously optimizing for the
computation latency and results quality. The techniques developed further
provide primitives to restructure the processing pipelines of these
applications. On the control path, the project departs from the existing server-
centric control in a single client-server tier, and instead proposes client-
centric control in a nested server model to leverage multiple tiers of computing
capabilities. Finally, the above techniques are integrated into a system
runtime, which further provides simple APIs (application programming interface)
and generic system level support such as scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.