* 1815619
* CSR: Small: Towards Efficient Deep Inference for Mobile Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiangnan Kong, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 515,723.00

An ever-increasing number of mobile applications are using deep learning models
to provide novel and useful features, such as language translation and object
recognition. These features are supported by passing input data, for example a
photo or an audio clip, to complex models in order to generate meaningful
output. However, mobile applications that use deep learning models currently
need to choose between prediction accuracy and speed at development time. This
can lead to poor user experience due to reasons such as running state-of-the-art
models on older mobile devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed MODI (MObile
Deep Inference) project outlines new research in designing and implementing a
mobile-aware deep inference platform that combines innovations in both algorithm
and system optimizations. The proposed work will address mobile deep inference
performance problems by enabling flexible, fine-grained model partition and
layer-based inference execution, as well as mobile-specific model designs. In
addition, MODI enables a scalable mobile deep inference paradigm with efficient
model management both on-device and in the cloud. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will empower deep learning to provide useful features for mobile
applications with significantly improved performance. Consequently, this project
will open doors to allow running optimized deep learning models on much more
resource-constrained devices such as embedded devices. The MODI project can be
used as a standalone cloud system or integrated with existing general inference
serving platforms by incorporating its mobile-specific optimizations, thereby
increasing adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
will include graduate and undergraduate courses that incorporate research
results, outreach to expose undergraduates and K-12 students to research in both
computer systems and deep learning. In addition, project related source code and
other resources will be released to the research community through the project
website at http://tianguo.info/projects/modi.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.