* 1815528
* III: Small: Reliable and Generalizable Neural Search Engine Architectures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,659.00

Scientists need to frequently search the scientific literature on the subject
they are studying. Despite the availability of papers and citation databases on
the Web, the enormous growth of scientific publications in all disciplines makes
this a daunting task. Traditional commerical search engines, such as Google,
often fail to include the most important documents in the first few pages of
returned results - in other words, they do not do a good enough job of ranking
scientific papers for a given query. Recently, new algorithms for search based
on artificial neural network techniques have emerged as an alternative to
traditional search architectures. These new neural search architectures are more
accurate, but must be first trained with millions of example queries and answers
from user interactions; this limits their usefulness for many tasks. This
project will overcome this problem by developing new methods of training neural
search engines that reduce the need for training examples by integrating
explicit knowledge resources for a given discipline. The new techniques will be
disseminated in freely available open-source search software for both university
and industry researchers, thus broadly benefiting scientific advancement. In
addition, the project will broaden participation by under-represented groups by
creating research opportunities for female and undergraduate students and
technology transfer opportunities for industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops new methods of training neural ranking architectures when a
massive amount of training data is not available for the target application;
integrates external knowledge resources to provide more information for making
accurate ranking decisions; and applies the architecture to a domain-specific
search task such as retrieving tabular data from scientific documents. This
collection of problems is chosen to increase the practicality of neural ranking
architectures outside of high-traffic commercial search environments, and to
investigate and exploit the strengths of neural ranking architectures at using
attention mechanisms to manage evidence, soft-matching across different types of
evidence, and learning sophisticated nonlinear decision models. This research
furthers the development of neural ranking architectures that are generally
applicable and more reliable than current systems due to their ability to
integrate a broader range of evidence in a predictable manner. Neural ranking
architectures have generated much excitement and skepticism during the last
several years. This research extends a recently-developed neural ranking system
that is already able to beat strong learning-to-rank systems under specific
conditions. It addresses one of the main obstacles to wider use of these models
-- the availability of large amounts of training data. It integrates information
from external semi-structured knowledge resources, because such information is
effective in other ranking architectures and because it is likely to benefit
from how neural ranking architectures manage and use diverse evidence of varying
quality. Finally, it stress tests the architecture by applying it to a domain-
specific task such as table retrieval from scientific documents, that requires
the search engine to use several parts of the document selectively, rather than
the entire document. These activities are designed to produce a neural ranking
architecture capable of managing diverse evidence and document structure so as
to provide greater knowledge about the particular strengths and weaknesses of
neural ranking architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new
methods of training neural ranking architectures when a massive amount of
training data is not available for the target application; integrates external
knowledge resources to provide more information for making accurate ranking
decisions; and applies the architecture to a domain-specific search task such as
retrieving tabular data from scientific documents. This collection of problems
is chosen to increase the practicality of neural ranking architectures outside
of high-traffic commercial search environments, and to investigate and exploit
the strengths of neural ranking architectures at using attention mechanisms to
manage evidence, soft-matching across different types of evidence, and learning
sophisticated nonlinear decision models. This research furthers the development
of neural ranking architectures that are generally applicable and more reliable
than current systems due to their ability to integrate a broader range of
evidence in a predictable manner. Neural ranking architectures have generated
much excitement and skepticism during the last several years. This research
extends a recently-developed neural ranking system that is already able to beat
strong learning-to-rank systems under specific conditions. It addresses one of
the main obstacles to wider use of these models -- the availability of large
amounts of training data. It integrates information from external semi-
structured knowledge resources, because such information is effective in other
ranking architectures and because it is likely to benefit from how neural
ranking architectures manage and use diverse evidence of varying quality.
Finally, it stress tests the architecture by applying it to a domain-specific
task such as table retrieval from scientific documents, that requires the search
engine to use several parts of the document selectively, rather than the entire
document. These activities are designed to produce a neural ranking architecture
capable of managing diverse evidence and document structure so as to provide
greater knowledge about the particular strengths and weaknesses of neural
ranking architectures. The project website
(http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~callan/Projects/IIS-1815528/) describes recent
activities and provides access to research publications, experimental results,
datasets, and open-sources software produced by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.