* 1815546
* SaTC: CORE: Small: On the Power of Preprocessing and Non-Uniformity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Yevgeniy Dodis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 380,000.00

Today, hash functions are ubiquitous in that they are widely used in almost
every cryptographic application. Thus, accurately analyzing their security is of
paramount importance. Unfortunately, traditional analyses of hash functions do
not take into account the ability of the attacker to perform (possibly expensive
but only one-time) preprocessing attacks, which might dramatically speed up the
time to repeatedly attack the respective application in real time. For example,
the famous rainbow tables preprocessing attack is the most successful and
practical approach to crack passwords. Motivated by this serious shortcoming,
this project develops a novel theory of how to assess security of hash functions
against such powerful preprocessing attacks, and designs rigorous yet practical
counter-measures against them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
traditional analyses of applications utilizing hash functions are done in the so
called Random Oracle Model (ROM), where the hash function is modeled as truly
random. In contrast, this project studies an extension of the traditional ROM
where the attacker is allowed to obtain some arbitrary but bounded information
about the hash function in question. This extension is referred to as Random
Oracle Model with Auxiliary Input (AI-ROM). Security bounds in this new model
provably protect against a much wider class of sophisticated attackers than the
traditional ROM, including preprocessing attacks. This project develops a firm
theoretical foundation of AI-ROM, including: (1) deriving tight AI-ROM security
bounds for a variety of important applications of hash functions; (2) studying
the effects of common countermeasures against preprocessing, such as salting and
hardness amplification; (3) developing novel applications for AI-ROM, such as
proofs of space; (4) extending the auxiliary-input model to other idealized
models of security, such as the ideal-cipher, the random-permutation and the
generic group models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.