* 1815764
* Modeling Multi-Host Multi-Pathogen Infectious Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 209,894.00

Many pathogens - human and animal alike - act in tandem. The effects of two or
more pathogens on the same host might not be easy to predict based on the known
effect of each pathogen acting alone. Actually, many disease systems are
composed of multiple hosts and multiple pathogens. The behavior and changes of
pathogen and host populations in time are of interest to scientists and the
public, when population conservation and management or contagion containment are
considered. However, mathematical models of such systems become high-dimensional
and contain many parameters that need to be determined from existing data. Their
mathematical analysis is also not straightforward. As a study system, two
Daphnia hosts (waterflea) and four of their pathogens will be considered. The
two hosts also act as competitors for food resources and are subject to
predation. Hence, they consist a suitable eco-epidemiological system for the
development of new models and techniques. Progress made in terms of modeling and
mathematical analysis will be applicable to other disease systems, such as those
of pollinators, like bees and butterflies. This work will also create
opportunities for the interdisciplinary training of students, both graduate and
undergraduate. The investigators will partner with local high-schools and a
children's museum to disseminate their findings and engage and train younger
generations, with emphasis on underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through data-theory coupling, biologically
realistic models will be generated. The diversity of hosts and pathogens under
consideration will allow the investigation of a wide range of interactions among
them. The resulting mathematical models will be highly nonlinear. They will be
used to form testable hypotheses and to reveal the mechanisms that shape the
epidemics. Besides models based on differential equations and discrete dynamical
systems, coarse grained approximations will also be developed. Moreover,
information theoretical techniques will be used as measures of the complexity of
observed and simulated time-series and to reveal any existing patters, as well
as chaos. This integrated approach will be used to reveal insights into the
drivers of epidemics and facilitate their prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.