* 1815691
* SaTC: TTP: Small: STINGAR - Deployment of highly automated, reliable, and fast cybersecurity threat response systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* John Board, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2020
* USD 499,692.00

Modern cybersecurity attacks are often carried out through automated "bots" or
agents that systematically attack networks, at scale and in a matter of minutes.
This has left organizations scrambling to respond with defenses that must first
be validated or enacted by humans, and so take time to mount. Institutions can
no longer afford to combat these powerful and rapid digital attacks with our
slower and sometimes error-prone analog (human-based) responses. Instead, this
project utilizes its own distinctive form of digital protections - which are
both automated and scalable - to implement real-time blocks of incoming
malicious traffic. The project team seeks to extend a system that has been used
successfully for two years at Duke University to other universities, colleges
and regional networks with special attention on usability by minority-serving
and smaller colleges and universities, where Information Technology (IT) and
security personnel may lack the time or expertise to develop similar protections
or purchase expensive commercial tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The suite of tools
that the project has already developed utilizes a series of "sensors" and
"actuators," which automatically block certain types of malicious traffic and as
a result improve the speed, scale, and reliability of cybersecurity threat
responses. This project transitions these tools from Duke to production use at
North Carolina Central University (NCCU), with the intention of confirming their
usability and ensuring the value derived at Duke is reproducible elsewhere.
Then, the project expands coverage to other universities, colleges, and regional
networks. The project includes mechanisms to share data among participating
universities, thereby "crowdsourcing" awareness of an active attack on any one
campus, so that all other campus may proactively enact protections before they
fall victim to the same attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.