* 1815101
* CIF: Small: Structured High-dimensional Data Recovery from Phaseless Measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,041.00

Phase retrieval (PR), or 'signal recovery from phaseless measurements', is a
problem that occurs in numerous signal/image acquisition domains, such as
Fourier ptychography and sub-diffraction imaging, in which only the magnitude
(intensity) of certain linear projections of the signal or image can be
measured. While PR is a classical problem, in recent years there has been
renewed interest in PR with the goal of developing provably correct and fast
algorithms. Much of this work, however, does not assume any structure on the
signal, and as a result necessarily requires more measurements than the unknown
signal's length. This can be a challenge when moving to very high resolution
imaging because it implies a proportionally higher cost of data acquisition (in
terms of time, number of sensors, or power consumption). Dynamic imaging of
time-varying scenes, e.g., live biological samples, poses an even greater
challenge. We address this limitation by exploiting two common classes of
structural assumptions - sparsity and low-rank -- to enable fast and low cost
high-resolution imaging. A diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students
is involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the
first set of provably correct, fast, and low-sample-complexity algorithms for
phaseless low rank matrix recovery in two settings. The first involves recovery
from phaseless linear projections of each column of the matrix. This finds
applications in phaseless dynamic imaging when the (vectorized) image sequence
is well approximated by a low rank matrix, e.g., slow changing dynamic scenes.
The second setting involves recovery from phaseless linear projections of the
entire matrix. This is useful when the image itself can be modeled as being low
rank. This project also develops provably fast and statistically efficient
sparse PR algorithms and explores extensions to learning generalized linear
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.