* 1815507
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Structured Data Peer Production: Addressing Challenges and Leveraging Opportunities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Darren Gergle, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

This project will illuminate and advance the critical new phenomenon of peer-
produced structured data. In the past two decades, peer production has emerged
as a new means of knowledge production, such as the prime success story of
Wikipedia. Recently, peer production communities have begun producing a new kind
of data that is structured and machine-readable, with Wikidata and OpenStreetMap
being two major examples. These structured data peer production communities
differ from traditional peer production in key ways: (1) For the data produced
by these communities to be machine-readable, it must follow strict syntactic and
semantic rules; this contrasts with traditional peer production communities'
fundamental ethos of contributor freedom; (2) The data produced by these
communities is intended primarily to be consumed and processed by algorithms
before becoming visible to end users and, thus, the ultimate consequences of
contributors' edits are mostly invisible to them; and (3) instead of offering
different language versions, Wikidata and OpenStreetMap both opted to produce a
single, worldwide dataset intended for use across languages and cultures. This
research will address numerous issues of significant social and economic impact,
notably helping to improve the transparency, accuracy, and fairness of
algorithms that affect millions of people's lives on a daily basis, and the
relevance and utility of structured data across multiple applications and
linguistic and cultural barriers. It will quantify the value important
algorithms derive from the volunteer effort of people distributed across the
globe. It will show the extent to which peer produced structured data serves as
a global lingua franca - or whether, on the other hand, it embodies culturally
specific assumptions that limit its applicability. It will lead to the creation
of software tools that improve data production processes and thus the data
produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to produce this
understanding by focusing on three themes related to the structured data peer
production process and data products: (1) Motivation of members of the
communities. The ability to edit what one wants is a powerful motivating factor
for peer production contributors. This research will investigate how contributor
behavior changes when this motivating factor is blunted by the stringent rules
necessary for the creation of structured, machine-readable data. (2) Value of
data produced by the communities. There are several ways to estimate the value
of contributions in Wikipedia. However, Wikidata and OpenStreetMap data
typically are processed by algorithms - perhaps even by multiple algorithms for
different purposes - before being delivered to humans. This makes it difficult
to assess the value of these data. The research will investigate the value of
structured data by identifying where it is used and how it contributes to
algorithmic outputs; it also will create tools to make this information visible
to editors and the community as a whole. (3) Data production in a language-
independent context. The research will analyze the consequences of the ambitious
decision by both Wikidata and OpenStreetMap to do their work in a language-
independent way. Specifically, it will examine the extent to which this decision
results in undesired effects in the data this
generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.