* 1815487
* CIF: Small: RUI: Low Correlation and Highly Nonlinear Structures for Communications and Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Daniel Katz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 330,887.00

Many communications and remote sensing systems require modulation protocols that
are described by digital sequences, which may be regarded as words composed of
symbols from a prescribed alphabet, such as the binary alphabet with symbols 0
and 1. The efficiency of the system will often depend on producing sequences
that are as uncorrelated as possible: they should not resemble shifted (time-
delayed) versions of each other, nor even of themselves. Lack of resemblance
between a sequence and shifted versions of itself aids in synchronization and
timing, which is useful in radar and sonar. Lack of resemblance between two
different sequences (no matter how they are shifted) prevents confusion between
different users in communications networks. Random sequences are not ideal for
these applications, as even random sequences are expected to have occasional
repetitions. It is more advantageous to use pseudorandom sequences that avoid
repetition to a greater degree than random sequences do. These pseudorandom
sequences and related mathematical structures, such as Boolean functions, are
also significant in other information-theoretic problems, such as in
cryptography, where one seeks to design permutations that have a simple
underlying mathematical form (to ease encryption and decryption) but avoid
resembling easily detectable patterns (to resist cryptanalysis). Pseudorandom
sequences find further applications in error-correcting codes, antenna arrays,
scientific instrumentation, and acoustic design, and thus science and technology
benefit both from the analysis of known digital sequences and the discovery of
new ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create and
investigate digital sequences and related mathematical structures with good
correlation properties. This project considers both periodic and aperiodic forms
of correlation, as both are important in applications. In periodic correlation,
the shifting of the sequences is cyclic, and the maximum length linear feedback
shift register sequences (m-sequences) are a common building block in the design
of digital sequences with low periodic correlation. Finding pairs of m-sequences
with low mutual correlation is equivalent to finding highly nonlinear
permutations of finite fields, which can be used to make cryptosystems resilient
to linear cryptanalysis. This project will investigate m-sequence pairs with
exceptional correlation properties, which translate into exceptional
nonlinearity properties of the corresponding permutations. Extremal properties,
such as exceptionally high nonlinearity or exceptionally few correlation values,
are sought out, and this project will investigate bounds and limitations on
these extremes using tools from abstract algebra, combinatorics, and number
theory, as well as empirical computational explorations. In aperiodic
correlation, the shifting of sequences is a non-cyclic translation, and various
families of sequences whose correlation properties make them superior to random
sequences are known, but their analysis has been difficult and many open
questions remain. This project will analyze the performance of these sequences
both empirically and theoretically, and will seek new families of sequences with
good correlation properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.