* 1815971
* CIF: Small: Learning on Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Francois Meyer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 426,527.00

Not unlike road networks, significant disruptions in the pattern of connections
between brain regions have profound effect on brain function. International
projects, such as the Human Connectome Project and the Autism Brain Imaging Data
Exchange initiative, provide open access to massive datasets that can be used to
learn the association between brain connectivity and psychiatric or neurological
diseases. This award responds to the current lack of analytical and
computational methods to quantify changes in the organization of brain
functional networks. This project proposes to design novel machine learning
algorithms that will lead the way toward precision medicine in psychiatry and
neurology. The award will train several graduate students to work on big-data
challenges in precision medicine. The source code that will implement the
algorithms will be made publicly available in the form of open source
toolboxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of large datasets composed of
graphs creates an unprecedented need to invent tools in statistical learning to
study "graph-valued random variables". The first goal of this project is to
develop theory and algorithms to estimate the mean and variance of a set of
graphs. This basic problem is at the core of several statistical inference
problems about population of graph ensembles. The second aim is to develop
statistical methods that can detect significant structural changes (e.g.,
alteration of the topology and connectivity, etc.) in a time series of graphs.
The third aim is concerned with the question of learning functions defined on a
graph ensemble. The proposed approach relies on the ability to equip a graph
ensemble with a metric, effectively turning the learning problem into the
question of extending functions defined on a metric
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.