* 1815653
* EFFICIENT TESTING AND POST-MANUFACTURE TUNING OF BEAMFORMING MIMO WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS: ALGORITHMS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 12/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Efficient Parallel Testing and Tuning of Beamforming MIMO Wireless
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a revolution in the use of multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) wireless communication systems over the last
decade. It is expected that mobile data traffic will increase by up to 1000X by
2020 as compared to 2010. Future 5G wireless systems (communication data rates
&gt; 50Gbps) will deploy massive MIMO systems with large numbers of transmit and
receive antennas and novel RF transceiver architectures that admit RF
beamforming. Research on 5G massive MIMO systems is moving forward at an
electrifying pace. It will be possible to point electromagnetic beams towards
moving targets while simultaneously communicating at extremely high speeds and
minimizing interference with other users. Downloading a high definition film
will be possible in less than a second. However, with the dramatically
increasing levels of circuit complexity and higher operating speeds, the
underlying electronics will be highly susceptible to manufacturing process
variations, electrical degradation and defects. At high data rates of
communication, the effects of device non-idealities on RF system performance can
be dramatic. Power consumption will be a major issue since a large number of
transmitter and receiver chains will be involved. Such massive MIMO systems will
need to be tested extensively and tuned for quality prior to sale. In the
extreme, such systems will need to possess built-in self-testing and self-tuning
capability to automatically compensate for field wear and tear due to
electrical, thermal and mechanical stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
problem to solve is efficient low-cost manufacturing production test of a range
of MIMO systems with the capacity to handle 5G systems with 10-100 RF chains.
State of the art test methods require that test signals to individual RF chains
have frequency separation for the individual RF chain non-linearities to be
assessed independent of nonlinearities in other chains. Conversely, given a set
of frequencies that can be generated, only a certain maximum number of RF chains
can be tested in parallel. A key goal is to design "frequency-efficient" tests
and back-end response analysis algorithms that do not require such frequency
separation allowing large numbers of RF chains to be tested in parallel. A
second key goal is parallel gain and phase tuning of as many RF chains as
possible using intelligent testing and response-analysis algorithms. One way to
speed up the tuning procedure is to use the parallel testing procedure described
above, to perform parallel tuning of the MIMO system well. Such parallel tuning
can be supported by machine learning algorithms that predict the best tuning
knob configurations for each chain based on specific time and frequency domain
response features extracted from parallel testing techniques. To enable testing
and tuning, high-speed signals need to be captured and analyzed for signal
fidelity. To this end, the use of proposed incoherent undersampling for
acquisition of test response signals provides a significant avenue for reducing
testing costs by significantly simplifying the hardware required for high-speed
device testing and characterization. Overall, the use of the proposed techniques
will allow massive MIMO systems to be tested and tuned, post-manufacture and in
the field, without the need for complex test instrumentation in 10s of ms test
time, significantly reducing test cost while increasing product yield and field
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.