* 1815882
* SHF: Small: Deep Neural Network Inference on Energy-Harvesting Devices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Brandon Lucia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Intermittently powered, energy-harvesting computers are sophisticated computing,
sensing, and communicating systems that do not need a battery or tethered power
source. These energy-harvesting devices will form the foundation of the next
generation of internet-of-things (IoT) applications, ranging from wearable and
implantable medical devices, to environmental and atmospheric monitoring, to
tiny ChipSat-scale satellites in deep space. Realizing the value of these
applications requires intelligent devices that can frequently make decisions
locally and autonomously (i.e., without help from other nearby computers). For
example, a device may need to decide whether to turn on a battery-draining
camera to detect a person of interest, to decide which sensors embedded in
concrete to enable to collect the most useful data about an aging bridge, and to
decide when and how much data to send from these sensors back to the cloud. In
recent years, statistical inference and machine learning using deep neural
networks has proven the most successful method for such decision-making. Machine
learning is a crucially important feature for future IoT devices, but today's
resource-constrained energy-harvesting systems do not support the high-intensity
computations required by deep neural network inference. This project builds the
software computer systems and hardware computer architectures required by
future, intermittent IoT devices to enable autonomous, intelligent decision-
making using machine learning. This project produces software systems with novel
algorithms that enable today's energy-harvesting IoT devices to efficiently make
intelligent decisions. This project will then design novel parallel computer
architectures that are designed specifically for efficient operation of machine
learning computations with intermittent input power. These architectures further
increase the efficiency of intermittent decision-making by 10s or 100s of times,
enabling a new class of intelligent IoT applications that are not possible using
today's architectures. The sum of these software and hardware components
addresses the existential question of deep machine learning on intermittent
systems, demonstrating its viability and realizing its benefits to academia,
industry, and in applications important to society, such as defense, healthcare,
and civil infrastructure. This project contributes towards a diverse future
workforce, through integration with course curricula, mentoring of students from
under-represented minority groups, and technical high school outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge overcome by this project is to
make deep neural network inference viable on a resource-constrained,
intermittent device. This task requires architecture and software support to
tolerate frequent, intermittent power interruptions and to operate with hundreds
of microwatts of power instead of the tens or hundreds of milliwatts required by
today's machine learning accelerators. This project develops approximate,
intermittent partial re-execution techniques to efficiently tolerate
interruptions without the need to unnecessarily checkpoint and restore software
state. The project develops the first intermittence-safe data-parallel
architecture, integrating non-volatile memory with an array of simple compute
elements. The project includes an immediate path to software and hardware
prototypes and lays the groundwork for a future silicon hardware implementation
of the architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.