* 1815412
* CSR: Small: Data Parallel Frameworks for Large-scale Machine Learning through Sync-on-the-Fly
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 489,999.00

The advances in sensing, storage, and networking technologies have led to the
collections of high-volume, high-dimensional data. Making sense of these data is
critical for companies and organizations to make better business decisions, to
bring convenience to our daily life, and even enable better health through
biological information and drug discovery. Recent advances in machine learning
have led to a flurry of data analytic techniques that typically require an
iterative refinement process. However, the massive amount of data involved and
potentially numerous iterations required make performing data analytics in a
timely manner challenging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design and
implement a data parallel programming framework called Sync-on-the-fly. The
framework enables machine learning computations within cloud computing
environments to establish synchronization barriers during the execution of the
computations. Since synchronization barriers are established for building
consistent model parameters, they do not need to be predefined. The barriers can
be established during the computation based on the progress of the computation.
This data parallel programming model preserves the semantics of machine learning
algorithms. The goals are to build theoretical foundations and create efficient
distributed frameworks for a series of well-known machine learning algorithms,
and establish the programming models for these
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technologies developed from this project
will have immediate important applications on road traffic prediction,
biological information discovery, online marketing, and computer forensic
analysis. This project will bring fast, accurate, and cost-effective processing
of massive data to users. This project will also train new graduate engineers in
distributed framework design, machine learning algorithms, and big data
analytics. All of these skillsets are in broad demand in US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data and software codes produced for the
distributed framework and distributed machine learning algorithms will be made
publicly available at the research website
http://rio.ecs.umass.edu/html/research/index.html. The website will be retained
for at least three years after the conclusion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.