* 1815784
* Connecting Magnetic Fields From Molecular Clouds to Protostellar Systems: The Multiscale Behaviors in Star-Forming Regions
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zhi-Yun Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,320.00

The investigators will simulate the effect of magnetic fields on the stars
forming in interstellar clouds. These clouds are the birthplace of stars. The
investigators will compare their theoretical results with recent observations,
with the aim of understanding the importance of magnetic fields in controlling
the birth of stars. Their results will also help us understand origin of our
solar system. The team plans a range of educational and outreach activities. For
example, they plan to animate movies of their star formation models, for use in
public talks and astronomy classes. This program will also support and train
women scientists during the early phase of their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will carry out a series of
three-dimensional magneto-hydrodynamic simulations to follow the evolution of
the magnetic field structure on a range of scales, from the interstellar clouds
to proto-stellar systems. They will make theoretical predictions of the dust
polarization based on the simulations. They will compare their predictions to
observational data from the several experiments, including the Balloon-borne
Large Aperture Submillimeter Telescope for Polarimetry (BLASTPol), and the
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), and future data from NSF-
funded TolTEC instrument on the 50-meter Large Millimeter Telescope (LMT). The
goal is to determine the strength of the magnetic field in the interstellar
clouds and its role in the formation of stars. A salient feature of the proposed
program is the close collaboration between theorists who perform cutting-edge
computer simulations and observers who are leading the effort to produce the
most detailed polarization maps of star-forming clouds using BLASTPol and TolTEC
on LMT. Through the most comprehensive comparison between theory and
observation, the team will test their models for the role of magnetic fields in
star formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.