* 1815607
* AF: Small: Group Theory and Representation Theory in Matrix Multiplication and Generalized DFTs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Christopher Umans, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses faster solutions to two prominent algorithmic problems:
matrix multiplication and the generalized Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). In
both cases, the challenge is to obtain fast algorithms. Matrix multiplication is
a central problem in theoretical computer science, both because of its intrinsic
mathematical appeal, and because improved algorithms for this fundamental
problem would lead immediately to improved algorithms for a broad variety of
related problems. The generalized DFT is similarly fundamental, and concerns
transforming data in certain mathematically meaningful ways. Optimally fast
algorithms for both problems have been longstanding open questions. Such
algorithms would have consequences and applications both within and beyond
computer science. The project explicitly aims to increase fruitful interactions
between computer science and mathematics, and to integrate appropriate aspects
of the research program into teaching and training of students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to achieve "nearly-linear"
time algorithms for both problems, and in the case of the DFT, nearly-linear
time algorithms with respect to all finite groups. Both problems possess rich
structure that is susceptible to a sophisticated mathematical treatment. The DFT
inherently involves group theory and representation theory, while the project's
approach to matrix multiplication employs these well-developed areas of
mathematics to obtain fast matrix multiplication algorithms. A major technical
goal is to develop and leverage a recent breakthrough in combinatorics (the
resolution of the "Cap Set Conjecture") as a tool in the effort the find or
construct a suitable family of groups that can yield the desired nearly-linear
time algorithm for matrix multiplication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.