* 1815525
* NeTS: Small: A Scalable and Efficient Architecture for Exploiting Physical Layer Optics for High Performance Multicast in Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* T. S. Eugene Ng, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

As data centers scale up, there is an increasing need for fast data replication
to distribute computational load across servers. This is especially true of
distributed machine learning algorithms, where a 'master computer' must
distribute computational updates (i.e., do a multicast) to 100's or even 1000's
of other servers. For example, for text mining, each iteration of a computation
can easily result in more than a 1 Gigabyte of data being distributed, with the
total exceeding 1 Terabyte. Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art solutions for
transporting these massive data sets in the data center rely on application-
layer overlays where the data is transmitted sub-optimally as a large number of
repetitive flows. This project seeks to realize a fundamental breakthrough in
data center multicast performance by leveraging optical transmission to perform
the multicast function by simultaneously connecting a source machine rack to
multiple receiver machine racks with a reconfigurable optical device. The
results of this work will impact data analytics, which increasingly drives the
US economy, through much more efficient operation of datacenters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a scalable architecture leveraging
distributed small port-count optical cross connect switches and optical
splitters to realize a data center network that efficiently supports both
unicast and multicast traffic. To fully achieve the potential of this
architecture, this project designs, analyzes and evaluates: (1) Scalable, high
performance network connectivity for an optical splitter network, addressing
difficulties resulting from heterogeneous packet switch port-counts, link speeds
and splitter configurations; (2) Different routing algorithms and their
performance trade-offs for different network connectivity and workload,
addressing challenges such as failure recovery; (3) Different algorithms for
multicast demand placement and optical multicast network resource scheduling
that aim to optimize application level performance; (4) Different approaches to
exploit the flexibility of the distributed small port-count optical circuit
switches for adapting to dynamic shifts between unicast and multicast traffic
hot-spots; (5) A variety of real big data applications operating over this new
architecture, addressing the system design and implementation
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.