* 1815465
* CSR: Small: Energy-Aware and QoE-Aware Video Streaming on Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Thomas La Porta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Video streaming on mobile devices has seen tremendous growth recently, and is a
major marketing point of many wireless carriers. Because videos have very large
data sizes, the mobile devices must spend a great deal of their battery power on
downloading and processing the video over the wireless network. Existing
research on video streaming over the Internet does not consider the new research
challenges related to energy efficiency and the special characteristics of
mobile devices and wireless networks. This project addresses these challenges by
developing novel techniques to save energy while maintaining users' Quality of
Experience (QoE) during video streaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support energy-
aware and QoE-aware video streaming on mobile devices, this research addresses
the challenges of how, when and how much data to download under different
contexts to save energy and improve users' QoE through the following thrusts:
(a) understanding how the processor frequency affects network throughput and
energy consumption, and how to adjust the frequency to minimize energy or
maximize QoE considering user context; (b) development of protocols for buffer
management considering that users skip scenes and abort watching under some
circumstances; and (c) reducing the energy consumption of video streaming
through network quality aware downloading and context-aware downloading.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As video streaming on mobile devices becomes part of
everyday life, this research has great potential to benefit society by improving
the quality of video streaming and making mobile devices last longer. The
results from this research are likely to foster new research directions on
supporting energy aware and QoE-aware video streaming on mobile devices. The
project will engage under-represented students in research. The scholarly
discovery of this project will be disseminated broadly through publications,
open-source software, and summer camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data produced
as a result of this project, including trace data, software code, simulation
data, and publications, will be made publicly available at the project
repository: http://www.cse.psu.edu/~gcao/nsf/mobilevideo. The data and the
resulting research outputs will be maintained using appropriate methods for at
least five years after the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.