* 1815733
* CSR: Small: Data on the Edge: Leveraging Edge Datacenters for Low-latency, Fault-tolerant, mobile Geo-replicated Transactional Data Stores
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,924.00

Data-intensive computing is the driver of the continuing growth and success of
global Internet services and cloud applications. The system infrastructure for
data-intensive computing is built and run on top of compute resources housed in
large, centralized data centers. These data centers are typically placed away
from populous regions for economic reasons. This leads to a fundamental limit on
the speed of communication between users and data centers. To overcome this
limit, the project aims to extend data management systems to be edge-aware.
Edge-awareness is the capability of utilizing resources that are closer to users
to reduce the latency they experience by one to two orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate two closely related
research challenges to enable edge-aware data management systems. The first
research challenge focuses on one of the most important building blocks of
distributed systems, namely the problem of agreement between different nodes
(also called the consensus problem.) The project proposes a design of a new
consensus protocol that, unlike existing consensus protocols, is edge-aware and
thus enables preserving consensus and fault-tolerance while achieving the low-
latency performance enabled by edge-awareness. The second research challenge is
building edge data management systems that react efficiently to user mobility.
The project proposes augmenting consensus protocols with a mobility component
that enables handling user mobility efficiently while preserving consensus and
fault-tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large sectors of business and industry, in
addition to the modern style of living, increasingly rely on data-intensive
Internet and cloud applications. This project aims to advance the data and
system infrastructure for these applications. The project will also provide the
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to learn and work on
fundamental data management systems research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.