* 1815219
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Protocol Validation using Minimally Supervised Semantic Interpretation of Text
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 249,914.00

The networks that comprise the Internet are fundamental to our society,
facilitating access to medical and financial services, supporting critical
infrastructure such as the power grid, and enabling emergent services such as
those provided by autonomous cars and IoT (Internet of Things) devices. Network
behavior is dictated by a set of instructions, or protocols, developed and
tested over time. Such protocols must operate correctly and comply with
requirements that are usually described in a document(s), i.e., in a textual
representation. If they do not operate properly, the performance and security of
a network could be compromised. The goal of this project is to increase
assurance in network protocols, specifically in their compliance to specified
rules, in their inter-operability and in their functionality. This project will
accomplish this via a novel scheme to perform protocol testing through automated
extraction of protocol requirements from their textual specification. This would
mark a significant advance in the field, towards automated mechanisms that
assure that network protocols are behaving as we expect them to, making networks
more reliable and secure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project
combines expertise from natural language processing and computer networks to
create methodologies, frameworks, a knowledge base, and tools for protocol
validation for (1) compliance checking, (2) bug finding, and (3)
interoperability testing. The general approach is to apply machine learning,
semantic parsing and information extraction techniques to structured text (RFCs,
internet-drafts) and unstructured text (blogs, forums, and bug reports), and
create a knowledge base about the protocols, containing formal information such
as message formats, protocol state machine, constraints, and semi-formal
information such as temporal properties, tuning conditions and parameters,
changes from one version to another, or known bugs. This information is
organized into a knowledge base and used to validate protocol implementations
through protocol fuzzying, program analysis, software model checking, and
measurement methods, to check whether protocols are compliant with their
specifications, to detect semantic bugs dependent on intrinsic protocol
properties, or check for interoperability issues between different versions, or
protocol stacks. This work is guided by protocols from three representative
domains -- TCP variants, the SDN ecosystem, and IoT smart home
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.