* 1815959
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Real-Time Computing Infrastructure for Integrated CPU-GPU SoC Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Heechul Yun, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2022
* USD 280,000.00

Autonomous cars and drones demand high computational performance to process
massive amount of real-time data while also keeping their size, weight, power
and cost to an acceptable level. Graphics processing unit (GPU) is specially
designed hardware to efficiently process such large data. Therefore, it is
increasingly being integrated in new generations of computer chips.
Unfortunately, such integrated chips often exhibit unpredictable timing
behaviors due to unregulated use of shared hardware resources that can prevent
timely execution of critical tasks. This project will create a new real-time
computing infrastructure for GPU integrated computer chips to provide
predictable timing and high-performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
create new resource management algorithms, task models, real-time
synchronization protocols, and schedulability analysis methodologies for GPU
integrated computing platforms that significantly improve time predictability
and efficiency, and reduce analysis pessimism, compared to the state-of-the art.
The project has three research objectives. The first objective is to develop
software mechanisms to bound worst-case memory interference to controllable
limits with minimal programmer intervention. The second objective is to maximize
system resource utilization without sacrificing timing predictability of
critical real-time tasks. The third objective is to develop modeling and
analysis methodologies for the proposed computing
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several direct economic and
societal impacts. This research will greatly improve temporal predictability and
efficiency of GPU integrated computing platforms, which are used for safety-
critical cyber-physical systems---particularly in automotive and aviation
industries. Considering the market size of automotive industry and the high
certification cost in aviation industry, the expected improvements of the
project can potentially translate to multi-billion-dollar savings. The research
outcomes will be disseminated via public code repositories and integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses. In particular, autonomous car and drone
testbeds will be used to increase student engagement in the
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research artifacts, such as source code of
modified Linux kernel, user-level library, and tools will be publicly available
via open-source repositories at https://github.com/CSL-KU/igpu-rm for the
duration of the project and beyond. Research findings will be reported via
scientific journals and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.