* 1815209
* RAPID: The Impact of Infrastructural Stress on Civil Society Participation in Post-Disaster Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Yarimar Bonilla, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,824.00

Events like earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunamis, and floods are known to have
important effects on both natural and social landscapes, but less discussed is
the impact that natural disasters have on civil society. The proposed research
seeks to examine how the 2017 hurricanes Irma and Maria might impact civil
social behavior in Puerto Rico. These historic storms are certain to mark a
turning point, not only for the massive damage they have caused to the island's
infrastructure, but also for the extended state of emergency that was produced
when millions of Puerto Ricans remained without electricity, water, and basic
services for numerous weeks. Hurricane Maria has already created the largest
black out in US history, it has caused greater infrastructural damage than
Katrina, and is poised to completely transform the island of Puerto Rico and its
political future. This project takes advantage of this unique state of
infrastructural stress to ask how the storm, and its recovery process, will
shape civil society behavior in years to come. In addition, the project would
strengthen collaboration among scientists in the mainland U.S. and Puerto Rico,
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences, and train
undergraduate and graduate students in methods of scientifically-grounded and
empirical data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award supports the
collection of critical but ephemeral data in Puerto Rico concerning the role
that stresses on infrastructure play on civil society participation in post-
disaster contexts. Dr. Yarimar Bonilla of Rutgers University explores how Puerto
Rico's state of emergency, and the accompanying paralysis of basic physical
infrastructure following Hurricanes Irma and Maria, have shaped sociopolitical
behaviors. The study will use baseline data gathered in 2016 with over one
thousand participants across five different regional sites in Puerto Rico. For
this project researchers from the University of Puerto Rico, under the
supervision of the PI, will contact participants from the previously conducted
study to interview them about how they have experienced the storm and the
recovery process. Investigators will assess how the state of emergency might
have jostled pre-existing political beliefs, particularly how it might impact
the desire (or not) for statehood. The results of this study will help offer a
complex portrait of how the effects of climatic events are conditioned by pre-
existing forms of governance and will help illuminate how natural disasters can
transform political and social terrains.