* 1816925
* RI: Small: Agile Legged Robots: Composing Periodic Gaits for Aperiodic Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Pranav Bhounsule, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* David Miller
* 10/31/2019
* USD 351,007.00

The overall objective of this project is to create computational algorithms for
legged agility, which is defined as the robots ability to change its speed,
direction, and/or gait (e.g., walk to run). As evident from biology, legs
provide a highly agile mode of locomotion, yet no legged robot has been able to
achieve performance comparable to highly performing humans or animals. The
continued existence of this need is an important problem because it limits the
usefulness of legged robots; the need to start, stop, change directions,
accelerate/decelerate quickly are all essential if legged robots are to replace
wheeled robots in rough terrain. Some applications of such agile robots are, as
first responders, as search and rescue personnel, and as industrial workers. In
addition, this research will provide training opportunities for multiple
undergraduate students and outreach to school children including target
populations that are traditionally under-represented in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea to
achieve agility is to combine steady-state (periodic) gaits to achieve non-
steady gaits. The rationale is that computation-wise, steady-state gaits are at
least an order of magnitude cheaper to compute than non-steady gaits. The
specific aims of this research are to create tools for (1) filling the entire
state space with steady-state gait controllers and associated stabilizing
controllers, (2) transitioning between steady-state gaits to create agile gaits
and (3) experimental validation of the approach. A novel formulation of the
Lyapunov function allows the creation of stabilizing controllers and estimating
the regions of attraction (ROA). Then these ROAs will be composed sequentially
based on their overlapping regions to create transition controllers for agile
locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.