* 1816673
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Data-Driven Study of Attacks on Cyber-Physical Infrastructure Supporting Large Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project addresses security attacks that: (i) masquerade as failures and
(ii) are delivered via self-learning malware that monitors the target system and
launches the attack at a time and system location to have a maximal impact, by
injecting a strategic failure. The target systems are cyber-physical systems
(CPS) that manage or control large computing enterprises (e.g., the cooling or
power distribution of high-performance system or cloud infrastructure). In this
scenario, the vulnerability of the cyber-physical system acts as a weak point
that lowers the security barrier of an otherwise well-protected system. This
project addresses a full range of issues, including: (i) design of self-learning
malware; (ii) launch vectors for failure injection attacks; and (iii) mitigation
and defense against such attacks. The research draws on data from a cyber-
physical system that supports the cooling of the Blue Waters supercomputing
system at the University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this work lies in: (i) Development of scientifically sound methods to
jointly study reliability failures of, and malicious attacks on, a cyber-
physical system infrastructure that provides critical services for the
uninterruptible operation of a large computing infrastructure. Possible advances
in cyber-attacks in the context of indirectness, automation (driven by self-
learning and adaptive malware), and reduced barriers to unauthorized entry to
the system are considered; (ii) Study of feasibility of deploying attacks
through self-learning malware (inserted into the auxiliary CPS), which takes
advantage of a low-security barrier. In cyber-physical systems, the real-time
control sequences rely on online measurements from the sensors distributed
across the system. By monitoring those measurements one can build smart malware
that is able to learn (interpret) the system state and then trigger an attack
sequence at an opportune time; (iii) Develop attack mitigation methods that can
be integrated with an existing intrusion detection system and combined with the
monitoring from the cyber and physical layers of the tenant system; (iv)
Validation of the mitigation strategies using a data-driven simulation testbed
that emulates the cyber-physical system behavior and enables experimentation
with different attack scenarios. While we focus on a large computing
infrastructure, the problem has broader implications, e.g., the proliferation of
"Internet of Things" devices creates an environment for attackers to exploit
vulnerabilities in such entities as a stepping stone for launching attacks
against highly-valuable assets. In the broader context of cyber security, this
project aims to identify potential advances in threats by demonstrating the
feasibility of masquerading a security problem as a reliability failure.
Demonstrating a proof-of-concept on a potential threat and presenting an
effective mitigation method will promote the development of detection and
mitigation techniques against new threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.