* 1816263
* SaTC: NSF-BSF: CORE: Small: Attacking and Defending the Lifespan of Mobile and Embedded Flash Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Donald Porter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project explores approaches to attack and defend the lifespan of flash
storage in small mobile devices. While the project focuses on smartphones, the
research is applicable to any small flash-based device that allows users to
install applications, including smart watches, Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices,
computerized medical equipment, and computer-managed critical infrastructure. It
is well understood that, over time, writing to flash storage will physically
wear out the device. This problem is considered a nonissue with respect to
enterprise Solid State Drives (SSDs). However, preliminary findings of this
research indicate that wear is unresolved in the context of smartphones. A
malicious, unprivileged application can secretly render a phone permanently
inoperable in a few short days or weeks, and current mobile systems have no
protection against this attack. The risk is exacerbated by the fact that mobile
device users typically trust their app store ecosystem and are in the habit of
trying out third-party apps with a sense of safety. The goal of this project is
to develop ways to alleviate the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our society is
rapidly moving into the era of ubiquitous computing. Users depend on smartphones
for wide-ranging aspects (such as commerce, education, and healthcare), and
wearables and internet-connected gadgets likewise proliferate. Moreover, an
increasing amount of critical infrastructure is internet-connected via small
embedded devices, which may thus control physical systems. This research
identifies and addresses a critical vulnerability that seriously undermines the
ability of users to trust that downloading a new application will not ruin their
mobile devices. If unmitigated, this vulnerability might severely hamper the
usability of such devices. To address the problem, this project is studying the
input/output behavior of mobile devices and applications. Based on this
behavioral analysis, the project explores new attacks on and defenses for flash
wear. The end goal is to create defenses that are minimally disruptive to end
users, yet provide a lower bound on the lifetime expectancy of the device. This
work advances the state of the art of operating systems by creating techniques
to manage permanently consumable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.