* 1816995
* NeTS: Small: RUI: Towards Secure Home Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kuai Xu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 397,751.00

The last decade has witnessed the rapid growth of residential broadband
connections, home networks, smart home devices, and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
systems. However, securing home networks poses a serious challenge, because many
home users have little technical expertise to manage, secure and troubleshoot
their networks and connected devices. A compelling solution to secure and manage
home networks requires an automated and network-based solution that summarizes
what is going on in home networks, explains why some observed behaviors are
associated with normal or suspicious activities, and suggests how to defend
against security threats and stop unexpected behaviors with simple and
actionable steps. To improve understanding of the research problems and
challenges in securing home networks, this project develops a built-in behavior-
oriented traffic profiling system on programmable home routers to collect,
analyze and make sense of incoming, outgoing and internal traffic of all
Internet-capable devices in home networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will address the following research problems: i) how to automatically
collect traffic data from home networks with little impact on application
performance; ii) how to capture and make sense of behavior patterns of home
devices via incoming, outgoing, and internal traffic; iii) how to discover
network-wide activities across distributed home networks; and iv) how to
leverage behavior patterns of home devices to improve security and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges in uncovering behavior patterns
of home devices includes the heterogeneity of home devices, the wide diversity
of traffic behavior in different home networks, and the high expectation of user
privacy. This project will initiate an educational program on home networks that
will engage students in solving the real-world problems. The project brings
research and development opportunities for students in underrepresented groups
at ASU west campus, a predominantly undergraduate institution where 37% of the
applied computing majors are underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.