* 1816611
* CSR: Small: Cost-Aware Cloud Profiling, Prediction, and Provisioning as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Cloud computing has the potential to transform computational practice by
enabling immediate, on-demand access to large-scale computing resources. But
large-scale cloud computing can easily be costly. The Scalable Cost-Aware Cloud
Infrastructure Management and Provisioning (SCRIMP) project aims to develop new
cloud access methods that will reduce the complexity and cost and improve the
efficiency of using cloud resources. The project will innovate in three areas:
profiling, prediction, and provisioning. Its new machine learning-based
profiling techniques aim to predict application performance, at different levels
of accuracy, across a diverse set of cloud resources, based upon derivation of
comparable and related instance classes, explorative profiling techniques, and
analysis of historical usage. Its ensemble-based market prediction models will
allow the many existing cloud market prediction models to be easily compared and
then combined so that their collective strengths can be used to predict costs
with the aim of minimizing cost, price risk, and likelihood of instance
revocation. Finally, its overarching provisioning model will combine application
profiles and market prediction models to enable automated, cost-efficient,
policy-based cloud provisioning as well as efficient placement and migration of
workload within the resulting dynamically provisioned
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCRIMP will advance the use of computation
across the sciences, particularly within smaller institutions, by simplifying
access to on-demand cloud computing and improving the efficiency with which
researchers make use of cloud infrastructure. By lowering scientific computing
costs and complexity for many users, SCRIMP will enable more efficient use of
cloud credits (whether from cloud providers or funding agencies), democratize
access to cloud computing by researchers without dedicated computing
infrastructure or expertise, and allow researchers and students to conduct
increasingly complex analytics, on larger datasets, and at higher resolution.
SCRIMP will also be directly relevant in education, allowing educators to
provide access to large resource pools at low cost with guaranteed
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.