* 1816931
* NeTS: Small: Fundamentals of Assessing Occupancy Dynamics with Ubiquitous Wireless Signals
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yasamin Mostofi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,999.00

Robust and accurate occupancy assessment is key to many applications.
Optimization of heating/cooling in buildings, smart lighting, retail business
planning, smart home applications, smart city planning, and evacuation/emergency
planning are just a few examples. The overall goal of this proposal is to
introduce a new paradigm for occupancy assessment using ubiquitous wireless
signals. Not only are communication devices ubiquitous these days, but most
smart devices whose main goal is not communication (e.g., smart speakers or
thermostats) are now equipped with communication capabilities using cheap
communication transceivers such as Wi-Fi or Bluetooth. This opens the
possibility of using RF (Radio Frequency) signals for sensing and learning about
the environment. This project proposes to use wireless links in a non-
traditional manner: as a sensing mechanism for assessing the spatio-temporal
occupancy dynamics in a large region. Spatio-temporal occupancy assessment
refers to measuring several attributes of how people move and utilize their
spaces, such as the total number of occupants in an area as a function of time,
the average speed and dwell time of people, and the flow rate of people in
between several areas, among other factors. More specifically, the project will
develop the theoretical foundation and design tools for occupancy assessment
with ubiquitous RF signals, with an emphasis on understanding the fundamental
capabilities and limitations. The proposed framework does not rely on people to
carry any device, has through-wall sensing capabilities, and preserves the
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate and robust occupancy assessment with
everyday communication signals is considerably challenging. The proposed effort
has three major tasks to address the underlying challenges. The first major goal
brings a foundational understanding to how a single link can be turned into an
occupancy assessment sensor whose capabilities and limitations are well
characterized. More specifically, it proposes a mathematical probabilistic
modeling that reveals the relationship between the key attributes of occupancy
dynamics and the key attributes of the wireless measurements. The second major
task then builds on the first one to develop the foundation of optimum joint
processing of a number of links as an occupancy assessment sensor network. The
third major task develops the mathematical tools for designing an efficient
occupancy assessment system over a large region that consists of several areas,
with only a small number of wireless links. Finally, the proposed theoretical
foundation and design tools are extensively tested with several experiments in
different areas, including local department stores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.