* 1816640
* NSF/MCB-BSF:Elucidating the role of ERM proteins in cytoskeletal orientation in a contractile tissue
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Erin Cram, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 598,554.00

Animal bodies are full of biological tubing: blood vessels, lung airways,
intestines, the reproductive system, and ducts and glands of various sorts.
These tubes are composed of cells that squeeze and relax to move contents
through the tubes in the correct direction, at the correct rate, and in a
coordinated manner. The squeezing is driven by a molecular machine called the
acto-myosin cytoskeleton, which is comprised of tiny motors that pull on a
girdle-like mesh of fibers to contract the cells. The "girdle" must be lined up
properly and coordinated between cells for tubes to work properly. However,
little is known about how this "girdle" knows how to squeeze the right amount at
the right time or how its fiber alignment changes in response to changing
mechanical conditions. To better understand how this process works, the Cram and
Zaidel-Bar labs study the reproductive system of a small nematode worm called C.
elegans. This worm can produce its body weight in babies every day, so many eggs
have to be squeezed through the reproductive system in a coordinated and robust
manner. This system was chosen because the worm is transparent, which makes it
easy to see the response of the "girdle" in real time in a living animal, and
the system uses the same cellular components as do other animals. This project
will determine, molecularly, how the worm's acto-myosin "girdle" responds to the
stretch of eggs entering and exiting the system, and how it contracts just the
right amount to push the eggs through in the right direction and without
mangling them. Because similar genes regulate acto-myosin contraction in many
animals, the results should be broadly applicable up to and including primates.
Broader impacts of this project include developing materials to help
undergraduates learn how to be scientists, and involving high school teachers in
research experiences and helping them design projects that they can take back to
their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actin networks in contractile cells, such
as the smooth muscle and endothelial cells of the vasculature, are critical for
cell contractility, motility, and tissue function. But, how do cells organize
their actin cytoskeletons in response to changing mechanical conditions? And how
is cytoskeletal alignment coordinated between cells to produce a cohesive
tissue-level response? To address these questions, the Cram and Zaidel-Bar labs
have developed a new in vivo model system: the C. elegans spermatheca, a
stretch-responsive and contractile tissue in the nematode reproductive system.
The Cram lab has discovered that during the first ovulation, myosin becomes
activated and pulls a network of loose actin fibers into aligned and oriented
stress-fiber like acto-myosin bundles. In a screen through all actin binding
proteins in C. elegans, the ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) proteins Merlin (NFM-1)
and Ezrin (ERM-1) were identified as key tissue-level regulators of actin fiber
orientation. ERM proteins can bind plasma membrane, actin, and transmembrane
proteins, placing them ideally to regulate cell responses to stretch. Using live
imaging, biochemical, genetic, and optogenetic approaches, this collaborative
team will elucidate the role ERM proteins play in actin organization within and
between cells of the spermatheca. Aim 1 will determine the dynamics of the ERM
proteins during spermathecal stretch and contraction and discover the mechanism
by which these proteins regulate the apical and basal actin networks and tissue-
level organization of the actin cytoskeleton. Aim 2 will determine how ERM
proteins both regulate and are regulated by the small GTPase Rho, including
analysis of a novel regulator C45G9.7/Tip1, to promote cytoskeletal organization
and orientation. This project will reveal that Merlin and Ezrin, important
regulators of the actin cytoskeleton, act not only within individual cells, but
in tissue-level coordination of actin cytoskeletal alignment. Novel roles for
ERM proteins in cell response to physiological levels of strain will be
revealed, including, how the cytoskeleton adapts its orientation and alignment
for optimal tissue contractility. The Broader Impacts of this project include 1)
developing a structured mentoring approach for undergraduate research and 2)
involving science teachers in independent research with the goal of enhancing
K-12 STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project
is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.