* 1816319
* CHS: Small: Understanding how health information technology mediates collaborative reflection within care teams
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Gabriela Marcu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2023
* USD 523,973.00

This research will develop cyber-human systems design principles grounded in
empirical and user-centered methods to guide the development and implementation
of health information technology systems that have a positive effect on team-
based collaboration. The delivery of healthcare services is changing in response
to an increase in chronic conditions. Care is provided by teams often
distributed across agencies, rather than by a single physician. The
collaboration of a care team has also been extended to include active
involvement of patients themselves, home caregivers, and community
organizations. Integrating care that spans time, providers, and agencies is a
growing challenge that exacerbates barriers to communication and collaboration.
Despite its promise, health information technology (HIT) often fails to enhance
distributed collaboration over time. Current methods and tools, including
electronic health records, do not adequately support collaboration because they
become passive information repositories, which do not inform distributed,
collaborative reflection and decision-making for chronic care. This research
leverages prior work that (1) generated the framework of collaborative
reflection, and (2) prototyped and piloted a novel HIT system named Lilypad,
designed to support collaborative reflection within behavioral
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three aims of this research are: (1) to
understand instances when the process of collaborative reflection breaks down
and care advances without reliance on data or inclusion of multiple perspectives
from across the care team, (2) to identify potential unintended consequences of
HIT-mediated collaborative reflection, and (3) to generate empirically-based
design principles for HIT that promotes collaborative reflection. Based on the
promising results of exploratory studies, a long-term deployment study will
investigate the use of the prototype across organizational boundaries. The first
year will engage care teams in participatory design to tailor it for their needs
and facilitate a transition to its use. Then, over two years of use, data will
be triangulated from a range of methods, including: interviews to gather
individual participant attitudes, observation of care team collaboration via use
and non-use, and monitoring of usage logs. A sociotechnical study of Lilypad use
will provide insight into how novel HIT systems can mediate collaborative
reflection. In addition, this study will contribute to literature on unintended
negative consequences of HIT use, and provide design and implementation
guidelines for moderating these effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.