* 1816568
* RI: Small: Computational and Physiological Studies of Complex Neural Codes in the Early Visual Cortex
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Tai Sing Lee, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 527,594.00

In this interdisciplinary project, machine learning approaches are coupled with
neurophysiological studies of primate early visual cortex to investigate the
functional, coding and computational benefits of the observed neural
representation and computing architecture. Neural models, with recurrent
connections and the proposed dual-code strategy, will be developed to solve
multiple vision problems simultaneously and to fit neurophysiological data. The
representations will be studied from both coding perspectives and computational
perspectives, based on scene statistics and their relevance for solving vision
problems. The research program will be facilitated by international
collaboration and tightly integrated with undergraduate and graduate education
in neural computation. The proposed project wide provide new insights to the
computations and functions of the biological visual system, as well as new ideas
and inspirations for developing machine learning systems that can learn from
limited data and function robustly and flexibly in novel complex situations,
potentially with broad societal and technological
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current deep learning neural networks utilize tens
or hundreds of layers to learn solutions for specific computer vision problems.
The mammalian visual system has much fewer layers, and yet can solve many tasks
in a variety of novel and complex situations. The nervous system might achieve
this feat by having neuronal circuits with loops and recurrent connections, and
with order of magnitude more neurons in each "layer." Recent neurophysiological
findings suggest that neurons in the primary visual cortex (V1) of primates are
not simply oriented edge and bar detectors as described in textbooks, but
respond strongly to highly specific complex local patterns, although they also
respond to many other patterns with much weaker responses. The PI proposed that
the individual neurons are not amorphous entities, functioning facelessly in a
large population, but are distinct and unique individuals that serve as
specialists for some specific tasks and as generalists in other tasks. They
participate in population encoding of information with strong sparse codes or
weak distributed codes respectively, depending on the functional roles they
serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.