* 1816922
* AF: Small: Relaxed Distributed Data Structures: Implementations and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jennifer Welch, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 396,999.00

Society has become increasing reliant on distributed computing systems, from
search engines to mobile telephony to electronic commerce to social media, and
the future is likely to bring autonomous vehicles and more. Yet distributed
systems are notoriously hard to design so that they are correct, let alone
efficient. One way to construct distributed applications that are easier to
verify as correct is to use shared memory for inter-process communication
instead of more low-level techniques, as that contributes to better structured
code. Although shared memory is a convenient abstraction, it is not generally
provided in large-scale distributed systems; instead, the processes keep
individual copies of the data and communicate by sending messages to keep the
copies consistent. This project will contribute to making shared memory
applications more reliable and efficient by developing and analyzing shared data
abstractions that have relaxed semantics and thus can exhibit a trade-off
between performance and specification. In addition to training graduate
students, the project will include a focus on involving domestic undergraduate
students, especially women and under-represented minorities, in research through
summer as well as academic-year experiences, with the goal of increasing the
numbers that attend graduate school in computing related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strongly consistent implementations of shared objects with
strict semantics are provably expensive, fueling interest in relaxations. The
objectives of the project are: to find optimally efficient algorithms to
implement shared objects, focusing on relaxing specifications of both data types
and consistency conditions; to understand the relationships between relaxing a
type and relaxing a condition; and, to characterize applications that can
exploit the relaxations. Current performance analyses of shared object
implementations in message-passing systems have numerous gaps: upper and lower
bounds are not tight, some classes of operations are not considered, other
metrics have not been studied, and mostly only overly-pessimistic worst-case
analyses are known. The project will focus on tight amortized analyses of
algorithms for relaxed data types and seek a complete characterization.
Currently, relaxation of consistency conditions and relaxation of data type
specifications have been considered independently; the project will seek to
understand the relationships and trade offs between them to ease the task of the
programmer. Distributed systems in which processors enter and leave dynamically,
such as peer-to-peer networks, data centers, and social networks, are typically
asynchronous and crash-prone. Characterizing churn patterns that allow
implementations of relaxed shared objects would make it easier to determine if a
particular situation can support them. Many opportunities remain for
characterizing classes of applications that can exploit relaxed data structures
and/or relaxed consistency conditions; this would show which circumstances can
benefit from savings obtained from relaxation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.