* 1816908
* NeTS: Small: Machine Learning Meets Wireless Network Optimization: Exploring the Latent Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Yu Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 410,737.00

Machine learning has been widely applied in various areas including wireless
networking. While the capability of machine learning in classification and
pattern recognition has been widely accepted, the role it can play on
fundamental research issues in wireless networks is yet to be explored. With the
proliferation of heterogeneous networking, wireless network optimization has
seen a tremendous increase in problem size and complexity, calling for a
paradigm of efficient computation. This project aims at a pioneering study on
how to exploit deep learning for significant performance gain in wireless
network optimization. Innovative techniques are to be developed for extracting
latent knowledge from historical optimization instances, and such knowledge will
be leveraged to greatly mitigate the computation complexity in solving new
optimization problems. The proposed research seamlessly integrates studies in
the areas of optimization, machine learning, graph theory, and wireless
networking. This interdisciplinary research will not only provide various
training projects to undergraduate and graduate students, but also inspire
students to pursue high-quality research with an open-minded and cross-
disciplinary perspective. Outcomes from this project may directly benefit the
industry with low-complexity yet efficient resource allocation algorithms in
practical wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to
contribute a series of new insights and innovative methods in integrating
machine learning with wireless network optimization. This study will reveal that
properly trained machine learning algorithms can smartly identify critical
features (in terms of a small set of critical links or transmission patterns)
that lead to optimal or close-to-optimal solutions. The traditional learning
framework for data classification cannot be easily tailored for exposing the
latent knowledge in wireless network optimization. This project will conduct a
systematic study including learning method selection, input/output design, cost
function design, training set construction, and parameter tuning, to accommodate
the unique needs and requirements for learning from historical optimization
instances. This study will demonstrate how the learned knowledge can be
exploited to significantly mitigate the computation cost in both centralized
optimization and online scheduling. This study will enable people, possibly for
the first time, to understand the complex relationship among the input data
traffic, internal network features (link or pattern activation), and optimal
resource allocation (scheduling or routing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.