* 1816870
* CSR: Small: Development of Distributed Neural Processing Electronics for Whole-Body Computing and Biomedical Sensor Fusion
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jie Gu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 556,800.00

Wearable electronics and health assistive devices have become commonly used for
daily activity tracking and medical care. However, the existing devices can no
longer satisfy the growing demand on computing power and energy efficiency
especially when a large number of sensors are utilized to improve the
performance of such devices. This work will develop a new generation of wearable
biomedical devices that utilize the emerging computing architecture and state-
of-art networking techniques to boost the data processing capability of such
devices. The developed techniques will be demonstrated in the state-of-art
prostheses for rehabilitation application. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several key
intellectual merits are delivered. First of all, this project will develop novel
distributed neuromorphic computing architecture featuring a scalable,
reconfigurable, and multi-chip neural network system for sensor fusion enabled
biomedical devices. Heterogeneous sensor data from physiological signals will be
efficiently processed through reconfigurable neural processors. Moreover, to
form a highly efficient network and remove routing congestions, body channel
communication will be developed and integrated with the neural processors to
achieve a high-bandwidth, low-latency, inter-connected network around the human
body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work brings significant advancement and benefits
to modern biomedical devices by creating highly efficient sensing, computing and
networking solutions. The proposed development promotes technology fusion across
fields of computer, electrical, biomedical engineering. The sub-tasks of the
project will be delivered to undergraduate and graduate classrooms for hands-on
experience of integrated circuits design, biomedical instrumentation, machine
learning techniques. New courses on computing techniques for sensor fusion
enabled biomedical system will be created to disseminate the learned knowledge
to broader audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All publications, and experimental
data, source codes, design files from this project will be retained on
institutional servers for 3 years after the completion of the project. All
publications along with important data, codes, and supporting design files will
be made accessible through PI's data repository, http://nu-
vlsi.eecs.northwestern.edu/data_repository.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.