* 1816197
* NeTS: Small: RUI: Bulldog Mote- Low Power Sensor Node and design Methodologies for Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Nan Wang, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 424,612.00

Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are composed of a significant number of nodes
deployed in a widespread area in which not all nodes are directly connected.
WSNs have been widely employed in numerous real world smart applications that
greatly impact many areas of humanity, including health care monitoring, forest
fire detection, air pollution monitoring, landslide detection, and structural
health monitoring. However, limited battery life and inefficient power
management of the sensor nodes continue to be major concerns in the further
development of WSNs. This project aims to design a new low-power sensor node,
the Bulldog Mote, using attractive low power techniques, such as energy
harvesting, clock scheduling, and dynamic voltage scheduling, implemented
through all WSN design layers. The WSN and all its subsystems containing the
newly designed Bulldog Motes will be methodologically tested on forest fire
detection and/or smart watering applications. The impact of this project will be
further strengthened by: (1) embedding low-power design technologies in
substantial systems from major industry parties, (2) enhancing curriculum
development with improved courses and senior projects, (3) disseminating
research results through online tutorial, peer referred publications, and open-
source website, (4) reaching out to K-12 students and underrepresented minority
groups through open houses and summer camps, and (5) supporting women and
minority students in research. Finally, subsequent comprehensive low-power
design model and procedures will be developed for designers to create and
improve designs of other embedded devices under tight power constrains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful application of WSN heavily relies on
efficiently designed communication protocols and energy aware node architecture.
This project addresses the design and implementation of the following
components: (1) efficient low-power methodologies implemented throughout all
WSNs' design layers from the application to the physical layer, (2) a new WSN
sensor node, the Bulldog Mote, created using various low power methodologies,
and (3) energy harvesting technologies for sensor node architecture. A low power
design model will be created to design such embedded devices and made available
to educators, students and engineers working in related areas. Furthermore, this
research will provide the knowledge necessary to design enhanced sensor nodes
for WSNs in terms of power consumption and communication ability. The same low-
power design techniques can be used for a variety of other power constrained
applications, such as consumer electronics and medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.