* 1816379
* CSR: Small: System Support to Build Context Aware Applications at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Smart cities and Internet of Things (IoT) represent a domain of exponential
growth, profitability, and immense opportunities in the coming decades, and are
expected to revolutionize life. A key roadblock in realizing the immense
potential of this disruptive technology is that at present there isn't any
integrated system level support to build sophisticated smart city applications
or services. Current efforts have mostly been in silos and building applications
using the IoT or smart city infrastructure remains an arduous task. Edge
computing technology, which allows data produced by IoT devices to be processed
closer to where it is created is considered crucial for the success of the smart
city and IoT visions, but there are some significant challenges that this
project seeks to address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will identify a set
of core system level services needed to build sophisticated context-aware
applications at the edge, investigate systems and algorithmic challenges in the
design and implementation of these services, and build a holistic middleware
framework that exposes these services to the edge application developers in an
accessible, well integrated manner. The utility of this framework will be
demonstrated by developing three novel smart city and IoT applications that are
representatives of the type of applications that will be commonplace in the
future. Overall, this project will expedite the construction of sophisticated
context-aware edge applications and contribute to the growing body of work on
smart city and IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate research
ideas into the educational mission that involves students at high school,
undergraduate and graduate levels. The framework will be made available to
researchers in academia and industry and contributed to the open source
infrastructure for edge computing research and education. As edge computing
holds great promise for building transformative context-aware applications for
everyday life, the proposed research will contribute to better quality of life
and the nation?s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.