* 1816406
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Energy Efficient Strain Assisted Spin Transfer Torque Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Bin Ma, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 140,000.00

Non-volatile random access memory (NV-RAM) is often built with a device called
spin transfer torque random access memory (STT-RAM), the main constituent of
which is a circular nano-magnet. A bit is "written" into the nano-magnet by
passing a spin-polarized current whose polarity determines whether bit "1" or
bit "0" is written. The energy barrier between these states prevents the
magnetization from switching spontaneously due to thermal noise, making the
device non-volatile. Unfortunately, the energy dissipated in the writing current
is 100-1000 times more than the energy dissipated in today's CMOS devices, which
is a large cost to pay for non-volatility. This project seeks to demonstrate
that temporarily reducing the energy barrier between the "up" and "down"
magnetization states with surface acoustic waves (SAW) can significantly lower
the current needed to write a bit and reduce the energy dissipation by orders of
magnitude. This would make the SAW-assisted STT-RAM ideal for embedded
processors, internet of things, large data centers and cyber-physical systems
requiring low energy memory. At least 3 PhD students would be trained on the
techniques of complementary nano-fabrication, nano-characterization and computer
modeling. The investigators will hold a nano-magnetism workshop for high school
students and will host under-represented K-12 students in their labs for a
summer month, as well as leverage the "Nano-Days" program to reach out to high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical approach in this
research project will involve the following complementary experimental and
modeling research directions: (i) Modeling the combined effect of strain and
spin transfer torque (STT) on the magnetization switching in the presence of
thermal noise (ii) Experimental demonstration of strain induced reduction in STT
write current in optimized devices (guided by the modeling effort) (iii) Proof-
of-concept demonstration of acoustic wave induced reduction in STT write
current. The knowledge generated by this research would lead to better
understanding of the combined effect of strain and spin torque on switching
nano-magnetic memory elements and the switching probability in the presence of
thermal noise. If successful, it would demonstrate a low energy paradigm for
writing information in non-volatile nano-magnetic memory
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.