* 1816019
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: ForensicExaminer: Testbed for Benchmarking Digital Audio Forensic Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Hafiz Malik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 01/31/2023
* USD 331,471.00

The proliferation of powerful smart-computing devices (e.g., smartphones,
surveillance systems) capable of production, editing, analysis, and sharing of
multimedia files and associated technological advances have affected almost
every aspect of our lives. The use of digital multimedia (images, audio, and
video) as evidence is rapidly growing in multiple applications, including legal
proceedings and law enforcement. However, forensic audio examiners are facing a
new challenge of analyzing evidence containing audio from social networking
websites, because audio editing and manipulation tools are both sophisticated
and easy to use, increasing the risk of audio forgery. The goal of this project
is to develop a framework and methods to support audio forensics examiners in
detecting and localizing tampering in audio files, including developing novel
algorithms to associate files to specific recording devices; creating methods to
detect and estimate the risks of attempts to evade existing forgery detectors;
evaluating speaker recognition systems in the presence of audio replay attacks;
and collecting a large and diverse dataset of recordings that can be used for
benchmarking of existing and future audio forensic analysis tools and
techniques. The project also has a significant educational component, consisting
of a set of hands-on activities involving media generation, manipulation, and
analysis aimed at outreach and broadening participation in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines including forensic science,
digital signal processing, and statistical data analysis and digital
forensics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is has four main research thrusts.
The first will involve designing effective microphone fingerprint modeling and
extraction algorithms tailored for audio forensic applications. The team will
leverage microphone calibration methods, statistical signal processing
techniques for blind microphone fingerprint estimation, and system
identification methods for linking an audio recording to a specific recording
device. The second thrust aims to investigate the impact of anti-forensic
attacks on existing forgery detectors and replay attacks on speaker recognition
systems. The research team will design attack models to perturb the underlying
forgery detection feature space and analyze performance of existing and new
algorithms under these anti-forensics attacks. The third research effort will be
focused on designing new audio forensic analysis algorithms robust to these and
other emerging anti-forensic attacks. The team will use manipulation methods for
anti-forensic attacks and a game-theory-based framework for attack-aware tamper
detection and design new forensic methods based on findings of these activities.
The fourth research thrust will aim at developing a first-of-its-kind research
commons for audio forensics consisting of benchmarking datasets, algorithms, and
tools. The team will collect audio from both controlled settings and
crowdsourcing in the wild, and use known audio manipulation, editing, and anti-
forensic techniques to generate tampered datasets. The team will design and
deploy the benchmarking testbed, ForensicExaminer, using a micro services
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.