* 1816699
* NeTS: Small: Optimal Delivery of Augmented Information Services Over Next-Generation Cloud Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,801.00

Moving data and services from local computers into the cloud has been one of the
major trends in information technology over the past years. This trend has
upended the computer industry, and provides benefits, for example, in terms of
more efficient use of computing resources (which can now be shared by different
users) and centralized software updates (which increase security). In a related
trend, most information such as video is now stored in the cloud, and delivered
to the users on demand, replacing local storage methods such as DVDs and DVRs.
Augmented information (AgI) services, an important extension of that trend,
combine content delivery and computation, for example, when the original video
source data are processed on their way to the destination to create augmented
reality, telepresence, real-time surveillance, or industrial automation. This
project investigates how such joint communication and computation can be done in
the most efficient way in terms of energy, cost, or other criteria that might be
important to the consumer or provider. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transmitting
information over large distances is usually via multiple "hops", i.e., it goes
from the source via several intermediate nodes to the destination. For example,
the information could be routed from a source in Los Angeles via Denver, Dallas,
Atlanta, to New York. The necessary processing could be done at any of those
nodes, or might be distributed among different nodes with different associated
costs. Since processing can make the files larger or smaller (e.g., transcoding
functions), this also has an impact on the communication cost to the next nodes.
This project investigates the fundamental performance limits of this type of
network and develops practical algorithms that can do the routing and assignment
of processing resources in an efficient way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the project are to: (i) develop a universal model for AgI services, as a
generalization of traditional information services; (ii) formalize the AgI
service distribution problem (AgI-SDP) for the quasi-static case, where
placement of information and assignment of resources changes only slowly and
provide a complexity classification for each major service class and design fast
approximation algorithms for the AgI-SDP in its different categories; (iii)
develop formulations and algorithms that dynamically adjust the configuration of
AgI services in response to unknown changes in cloud network conditions and
service demands; and (iv) validate the algorithms by experimentation on testbeds
at Bell Labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The services covered by the AgI model range
from network services (e.g., 5G network slices) to automation services (e.g.,
smart buildings, industrial automation, smart transportation), to augmented
experience services (e.g., virtual reality, immersive video), and efficient
design of such systems thus has great impact on the economy, ecology (energy
savings) and user experience of a wide variety of services. Optimization of such
distributed systems also enhance the robustness of computation and communication
infrastructure to disruptions from natural disasters and other events. The
project includes a strong outreach and education program including having
undergraduates and graduate students perform experiments at the project
collaborator's state-of-the-art laboratory at Bell
Labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.