* 1816138
* RI:Small:Exploiting the Evolving Conditioning of Bundle Adjustment for Robust, Adaptive Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricio Vela, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 419,648.00

Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) is the process by which a mobile
robot establishes its movement through an environment while recovering an
estimate of the local environment's geometry. It is an essential component of a
mobile robot's sensory processing sub-system, especially when GPS is incorrect
or unavailable. This project will develop technologies to improve the accuracy,
robustness, scalability and efficiency of visual SLAM algorithms. The project
will identify a means to reduce the data needs of bundle adjustment SLAM (BA-
SLAM) algorithms while improving or preserving accuracy, leading to real-time
SLAM methods capable of being used in the feedback loop of mobile robots.
Extending these results for point and line-based SLAM will increase the
environments within which SLAM is applicable and reliable. The project will
promote exploration by undergraduate researchers and teams, and drive research
in engineering fields through open source release of the code. The project will
also promote engagement in engineering by diverse audiences through
demonstrations using autonomous robotic activities enabled by the findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will exploit the temporal conditioning
properties of vision-based SLAM algorithms for assessing and improving
robustness while managing computational cost. SLAM uncertainty and latency
negatively impacts downstream processes when there is a feedback loop. New SLAM
modifications will mitigate these issues, thereby providing more accurate and
lower latency localization and mapping outputs. The theoretical foundations for
the modifications will rely on observability theory, concurrent learning, and
matrix theory. Observability conditioning assesses the incoming data with
regards to estimation fitness in SLAM. Concurrent learning selectively
marginalizes data over time intervals to provide a minimal connectivity
inference graph for bundle adjustment. Matrix theory suggests efficient,
scalable, and nearly optimal implementations. Validation of the findings will
involve existing benchmarks and new benchmarks created to test open and closed
loop operation. The project generalizes to positively impact all visual SLAM
algorithms designed to date through complementary data assessment and processing
blocks, whose role is to lower estimation latency while improving or preserving
estimation accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.