* 1816874
* AF: Small: Foundations for Data-driven Algorithmics
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Yaron Singer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2023
* USD 499,947.00

The traditional approach in optimization assumes that the underlying objective
is known, but in many real-life applications, the true objectives are not known
and learned from data. This gap between theory and practice turns out to be
quite dramatic, and leaves us without guarantees on the performance of
optimization algorithms in such applications. The goal of this project is to
develop a theory for algorithms whose input (i.e., the objective) is learned
from data, and design algorithms that perform well in these settings. The
technical challenges in this space are highly non-trivial, but their solution
would dramatically impact our thinking in computer science and result in major
advancements in AI. The project develops courses in optimization and data
science that foster an interdisciplinary approach. The project will involve
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups and
promote an open access research culture. The investigator will develop new
interdisciplinary connections through courses, seminars, and workshops with the
goal of promoting a discipline of researchers working on algorithms for the
information age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In light of a recent line of impossibility
results initiated by the investigator, the goal of this project is to
investigate alternative notions of optimization that can facilitate desirable
guarantees for data-driven optimization. The first direction in this project
considers optimization from adaptive samples. The general notion of adaptivity
is surprisingly under-explored, and advancement on this front can have a
tremendous impact both on theory and applications. A complementary direction is
to consider algorithms that are given samples on a training datasets, and seek
to approximate the optimal solution of the testing dataset, drawn from the same
distribution. Finally, the last direction considered is that of optimization
from pairwise comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.