* 1816470
* CHS: Small: Balancing Individual and Group Needs in Personalized Adaptive Systems for Improved Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Evan Forman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 547,989.00

The past decade has witnessed a surge of intelligent systems capable of
providing personalized user experiences in many aspects of modern life.
Personalized adaptive systems such as personalized search, social media
filtering, and e-commerce recommendation systems have demonstrated potentials to
improve productivity and enjoyment. However, by catering to the immediate
preferences on individuals and de-emphasizing collective needs, these systems
also contributed to emergent social issues such as intellectual isolation. This
project seeks to understand how to reduce the current blind spots in
personalized adaptive systems and will directly address two key challenges in
personalized adaptive systems: how to balance 1) short- and long-term
needs/preferences and 2) needs of multiple individuals in a group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project investigates how to increase
and sustain physical activity using personalized adaptive systems for health.
Two thirds of the adult population in the U.S. are affected by overweight and
obesity, with sedentary behavior as a primary cause. In addition to address a
public health issue, the technology developed in this project will advance
theories in human behavior science. The empirical data generated from the
planned system can shed light on the dynamic nature of people's social
comparison process and reactions. To address the aforementioned challenges, the
team will investigate novel participant modeling algorithms, specifically
designed to model dynamic participant characteristics. Additionally, the
research will contribute to the literature of experience management by
developing algorithms that exploit those participant models to adapt interactive
experiences to groups of users rather than individuals. The approach is
innovative in bootstrapping design theory, algorithmic innovation, and health
behavior science in a synergistic way to make scientific
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.