* 1816282
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Information Flow Control Infrastructure for Single-Use Service Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Danfeng Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Many applications are now being deployed on rich, distributed platforms, such as
those for cloud computing and Internet of Things (IoT). Such platforms can aid
developers by launching their applications dynamically to align resource use
with demand in serverless platforms and by composing fine-grained components
into complete applications in microservice architectures. Even with these
advanced architectures, the system platforms themselves still have large trusted
computing bases, where a single vulnerability may threaten the security of the
entire platform. This occurs because platform services are available to all
applications and are typically fully trusted by other platform services. As a
result, a malicious application may compromise a vulnerable service to gain
access to another application's data and/or compromise the integrity of another
application's computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce theories
and techniques to deploy platform services to protect applications using
information flow control. First, it is advocated that stateless platform
services be deployed as single-use services: services launched on demand to
perform an operation on behalf of a single command, much like serverless
applications. Second, application data is protected by enforcing information
flow control over single-use services, validating that enforcement services
perform information flow control statically. Third, the project seeks to reduce
trust in complex, monolithic services by developing methods to partition
services into enforcement services and single-use services, which can be either
validated or governed using information flow control. In contrast to current
platforms that enforce mandatory access control to protect hosts from untrusted
applications, an infrastructure will be developed to build platforms that
protect applications from potentially vulnerable services using information flow
control. As part of broader impacts, this research examines methods for how to
"build security in" to emerging distributed platforms. A wide variety of
commercial efforts are targeting container-based cloud and IoT platforms, but
there is a dearth of infrastructure to aid programmers in constructing platforms
that adhere to security requirements while achieving desired functionality. The
open-source tools and example platforms developed will be utilized in coursework
and aggressively pitched to industry practitioners to gain feedback and increase
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.