* 1816637
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Tackling the Corner Cases: Finding Security Vulnerabilities in CPU Designs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Cynthia Sturton, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2022
* USD 333,333.00

Computing hardware including processors, memory banks, and communication busses
can harbor vulnerabilities that allow an attacker to gain unauthorized access to
the programs and data on a machine. Hardware designers and security experts
expend considerable time and effort to eliminate these vulnerabilities early in
the design stage. The focus of this research is to support these activities
towards improving efficiency and outcomes. In developing the methodologies and
tools to find and contextualize hardware security vulnerabilities, this research
will move the field of security validation of hardware designs
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research targets the security validation of
central processing units in the design stage. The project has two goals: 1) To
identify security critical properties of a processor. These properties will be
stated in a temporal logic over the register transfer level design. 2) To
develop the methodology and tools to automatically find and contextualize
violations of those properties. A key innovation of this research will be the
application of symbolic execution to hardware designs. In order to make
symbolically executing a complex hardware design through multiple clock cycles
feasible, the research will develop a targeted, backward search
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project has the potential to
significantly reduce the opportunity for a malicious actor to launch an
effective attack against hardware, improving the security of computer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools, testbenches, papers, and presentations
resulting from this research will be available at a site linked from
https://cs.unc.edu/~csturton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.