* 1816388
* Red Geyser Galaxies and the Suppression of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kevin Bundy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2022
* USD 278,515.00

For most of cosmic time, typical galaxies grow continuously by turning hydrogen
and helium gas into new stars. However, in the last few billion years (roughly
the most recent 25% of cosmic history), many galaxies stopped forming stars and
seem to have entered a permanent state of quiescence. Our own Milky Way galaxy
may be undergoing a similar fate. Astronomers are not only trying to understand
what initially stops star formation in these galaxies, but what keeps it from
re-starting when fresh supplies of gas become available. This project seeks to
understand a newly-discovered phenomenon that may play a role. So-called "red
geyser" galaxies host super-massive black holes at their centers that
periodically emanate a wind of hot gas that spreads through the entire galaxy.
This hot gas may be able to heat up cooler reservoirs and prevent them from
collapsing into new stars. This project will confirm the relationship between
red geysers and central black holes and study red geyser winds in detail to
understand how they impact their host galaxies. This program will also
contribute to training in research methods for students. It will support the use
of specialized Jupyter-type Marvin notebooks for astronomical research through
training classes for high school students and early undergraduates. This
training will provide experience and job-skills for next generation
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These investigators have recently discovered a
new class of quiescent, relatively common early- type galaxy that hosts large-
scale, AGN-driven winds. These "red geysers''---found in 5-10% of the quiescent
population---may be the missing energy source needed to maintain low levels of
star formation in galaxies where star formation in general ceased long ago.
Initial integral field observations from the relatively low resolution (R~2000;
2.5 arcsec FWHM) MaNGA Survey revealed characteristic ionized gas velocity
fields. This project addresses two key issues through follow-up observations
with the Keck Observatory. Investigators seek to determine (1) whether the tell-
tale enhanced emission is due to shocks or gas over-densities, and (2) how the
wind energy couples to the cooler ambient gas in order to suppress star
formation. Both questions will be addressed by analyzing recently obtained Keck
spectroscopic data that spatially and spectrally resolves the multicomponent gas
structure with finer detail, allowing the investigators to search for shocks and
turbulence at the interface between the wind and cooler material. These Keck
observations, obtained for six red geysers over two nights, will also constrain
a quantitative wind model to confirm the role of red geysers in suppressing
late-time star formation. Finally, they will test the hypothesis that these
winds are driven by low-luminosity AGN feedback by stacking the available but
shallow radio flux observations to determine whether radio AGN activity is more
often associated with optical identification of the red geyser
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.