* 1816213
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Overheard at Home - Mitigating Overhearing of Continuous Listening Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Shahriar Nirjon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 09/30/2021
* USD 252,000.00

Smart home devices that converse with humans are becoming popular day by day.
These hands-free, Internet-connected devices continuously listen to their
surroundings, so that whenever someone speaks to them, they can respond right
away. In the presence of such always-listening devices at home, people are at
the greatest risk of privacy invasion. For instance, a hacker can hack into
these devices and listen to everything one says or every sound one makes at
home. The goal of this project is to thwart such attacks and to ensure that
continuously listening devices do not overhear anything that they should not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a generalized approach to solve the
overhearing problem of any acoustic sensing system. A programmable acoustic
filter will be developed, which will inspect and filter out user-defined sounds
before audio signals enter into an untrusted acoustic sensing system. To achieve
this, the project is organized in four research tasks: (a) devising algorithms
to separate a large number of sound sources on resource-constrained embedded
platforms; (b) devising algorithms to count the number of active sources in
real-time; (c) developing sound recognition algorithms that require very little
training data; and (d) developing a custom, low-power, miniature embedded
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Privacy-preserving mobile health applications are
important to bringing personalized and low-cost healthcare to the mass of people
which they can trust. The system will be deployed in two audio-based mobile
health applications: asthma and sleep monitoring, where privacy is of utmost
importance. Hardware and software materials developed in this project will be
used in graduate and undergraduate level courses at both University of North
Carolina and Columbia University. This award will support a female graduate
student. Research results will be demonstrated at outreach events, as well as
through online course offerings, and conference publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anonymized datasets, algorithms, code, and the design of
the embedded system will be shared with the research community through a website
(https://overhearing.web.unc.edu/). The website is hosted at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The repository will be publicly accessible and
will be kept up-to-date throughout the 3-year project. The website will remain
alive beyond the project period for as long as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.