* 1816850
* SHF: Small: Lightweight Virtualization Driven Elastic Memory Management and Cluster Scheduling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiaobo Zhou, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2022
* USD 376,000.00

Data-centers are evolving to host heterogeneous workloads on shared clusters to
reduce the operational cost and achieve high resource utilization. However, it
is challenging to schedule heterogeneous workloads with diverse resource
requirements and performance constraints on heterogeneous hardware. Data
parallel processing often suffers from interference and significant memory
pressure, resulting in excessive garbage collection and out-of-memory errors
that harm application performance and reliability. Cluster memory management and
scheduling is still inefficient, leading to low utilization and poor multi-
service support. Existing approaches either focus on application awareness or
operating system awareness, thus are not well positioned to address the semantic
gap between application run-times and the operating system. This project aims to
improve application performance and cluster efficiency via lightweight
virtualization-enabled elastic memory management and cluster scheduling. It
combines system experimentation with rigorous design and analyses to improve
performance and efficiency, and tackle memory pressure of data-parallel
processing. Developed system software will be open-sourced, providing
opportunities to foster a large ecosystem that spans system software providers
and customers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabled by lightweight containers, cluster
scheduling and the underlying operating system can cooperate synergistically,
such that, the dynamic resource demand of an application can be exposed to the
operating system, and the cluster memory manager and scheduler can be assisted
with rich run-time information retrieved from performance counters and operating
system. Towards this end, the project aims to devise a distributed memory
manager for data-parallel programs that can survive from memory pressure and
enable elastic cluster memory management with architecture-aware container
placement, design a cooperative paging to improve performance of memory swapping
by extending the current virtual memory reclaim mechanism in Linux kernel,
enable memory over-commitment for elastic cluster scheduling with a new service
that can detect and exploit the over-commitment opportunities, and design a
multi-queue based distributed task scheduler to manage performance interference
and hardware heterogeneity. The contributions include a library of developed
mechanisms and open-source system software at cluster and kernel levels that can
significantly improve cluster utilization and application
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.