* 1816923
* CHS: Small: Non-Programmer Authoring of Data-Driven Prediction Simulations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Frank Shipman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,823.00

This project explores ways to support educators as they introduce interactive
data-driven activities to help learners develop intuitions about data and
acquire specific analytic skills. While educators agree that the availability of
data offers new educational opportunities in many disciplines, there is little
consensus about how data-driven educational activities should be created. Often
current solutions mandate teaching both instructors and students to program;
these solutions are ambitious in scope, but can easily fall short of their
aspirations, discouraging those who have difficulties learning to program and
distracting the class from its primary educational goals. The prediction
simulations framework enables an alternative type of activity, but how teachers
perceive the opportunities and challenges offered by this type of activity, and
how prediction simulations relate to their students, subject area, and
educational context all pose new questions. Data analysis skills are a
fundamental element of many disciplines, motivated by the widespread
availability of datasets, ubiquitous sensing capabilities, and ready access to
processing power. The ability to create prediction simulations has a potentially
transformative effect on data science pedagogy. Concepts can be introduced to
learners at different levels and disciplines to motivate learners and keep them
engaged. Besides allowing learners to "dig into" data to develop their own
understanding and construct better mental models of the underlying phenomena,
prediction simulations can deepen a learner's understanding and intuition for
the use of data in other domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide an understanding of how teachers view the increasing availability of
data in their domains, the tools and curricular activities currently available
to them, and the overhead of creating and tailoring activities to their
environment. Towards that goal, two interacting lines of research will be
pursued: a multi-method study of the non-programmers who might create prediction
simulations for use in pedagogical settings; and the design and evaluation of
techniques to support authoring of prediction simulations. These two intertwined
activities will help answer the following research questions: (1) What are the
characteristics of domains, educators and students, and pedagogical situations
that center on data analysis skills? Which would benefit from and be amenable to
the introduction of prediction simulations? (2) Can generalized capabilities be
developed to support the creation of novel situation-specific prediction
simulations based on new combinations of datasets, visualizations, and analytic
tools? (3) What are the most effective ways to support the authoring of new
prediction simulations by non-programmers? Methods to be investigated include
template-based and specification-based authoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.