* 1816396
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Stable and Efficient Peering through Internet Exchange Points (IXPs)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 336,499.00

The Internet comprises tens of thousands of networks (Autonomous Systems)
operated by Internet Service Providers (ISPs) that exchange traffic with each
other at Internet Exchange Points (IXPs), to save on transit costs and bring
content closer to their consumers. IXPs act as giant switches for groups of ISPs
to exchange traffic and have a significant role in today's Internet as much of
the traffic flows through IXPs. Stability and efficiency of ISP connectivity and
peering relationships that form at these IXPs are crucial to long-term
sustainability and scalability of the Internet. In the current practice,
however, the price paid for traffic exchange at an IXP is typically determined
by coarse, static measures that can result in end-to-end performance
inefficiency in the traffic flows. This project aims to improve the state of
traffic exchange and peering settlements at an IXP (for both non-profit and for-
profit IXPs) through economically efficient pricing of IXP services coupled with
flexible and value-driven ISP peering relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards fostering stable and economically beneficial
inter-ISP peering relationships, this project will investigate the following
important questions. Firstly, it will explore how the IXP services for traffic
exchange should be shared (in the non-profit model) or be priced (in the for-
profit model) so that economic efficiency is attained at equilibrium. Secondly,
it will investigate the potential benefits of paid peering at an IXP, when there
is significant asymmetry between the traffic flows. Finally, it will explore how
IXP providers (which typically operate at different co-location centers) can
facilitate formation of groups between ISPs at different co-location centers to
maximize overall efficiency of traffic flows across an entire geographical
region. This project is expected to enhance the understanding on how IXPs should
operate in the near future to cope with the increased rate and asymmetry in
traffic exchanges, and streamline the peering process and make it value-driven.
It aims to improve traffic flows in the Internet, and bring the content closer
to users, resulting in higher traffic rates, lower costs, and lower delays in
content delivery to end users. The project's impact and outreach will be
strengthened through collaboration with industry, and integration of education
with research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.