* 1816630
* Collaborative Research: Computational Modeling of How Living Cells Utilize Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation to Organize Chemical Compartments
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2022
* USD 249,670.00

Eukaryotic cells have evolved multiple mechanisms for sequestering and
maintaining localized chemical or molecular concentrations. The most obvious is
a physical membrane, such as the cell membrane that separates the cytoplasm from
its surrounding environment or the nuclear membrane that confines chromosomal
DNA within the nucleus. Mechanisms for compartmentalization are essential as
they override diffusive smoothing of concentration gradients that would
otherwise homogenize cellular contents and fail to allow spatial regulation of
critical cellular processes. A recently identified and current intense focus in
cell biology is on chemical compartments that form in the absence of physical
membranes. This project focuses on a specific example: the binding of
cytoplasmic proteins and RNAs into complexes that form protein-rich droplets by
way of liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). By bringing together mathematical,
computational, and biological scientists, the investigators aim to develop a
general computational modeling platform to study cytoplasmic droplets and their
spatial distributions that arise from LLPS. The aim is to understand
mechanistically how these compartments establish and preserve cytoplasmic
heterogeneity in mRNA localization and expression in live cells, and the
molecular species, complexes, and kinetic timescales that are responsible. By
applications of this platform to other live cells, there is the potential to
understand the essential cell-specific molecular ingredients and chemical
kinetics for LLPS, thereby contributing to understanding of the diversity of
intracellular compartmentalization across cell biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a rich history in cell biology of the study of
membranes and their role in establishing extracellular and intracellular
chemical compartments. Yet, relatively little is known about how molecular
proteins, organelles, and chromosomal DNA, within the cytoplasm or within the
nucleus, chemically interact and self-organize to create, sustain, and evolve
localized chemical and macromolecular compartments in the absence of physical
membranes. Armed with resolved spatial and temporal experimental data of primary
molecular species and species complexes, the investigators in this project focus
on three specific aims. 1. A computational modeling platform to explore the
input space of primary molecular (proteins, RNAs, protein-RNA complexes) and
microscopic (nuclei, membranes) species, chemical species affinities, and
spatial confinement conditions. This platform will produce a phase diagram of
outcomes that mimics live cell data (dynamic self-organization of complexes and
molecular species, droplet formation due to liquid-liquid phase separation), and
that reveals sufficient ingredients and interactions for membrane-less,
intracellular chemical compartments, and their robustness. 2. By way of coupled
stochastic and continuum modeling, conditioning on ex vivo and in vivo
experimental data, to discover sufficient molecular species, complexes, and
hidden chemical affinities that reproduce the chemical compartmentalization of
live cells. 3. To extend numerical tools for multiphase modeling to accommodate
strong fluctuations and out-of-equilibrium behavior driven by chemical kinetics,
viscoelasticity of droplets, and induced flow by liquid-liquid phase
separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.