* 1816013
* CIF: Small: Transcoding: A New Approach For Multi-hop Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Love, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,993.00

As one of the main driving forces behind modern ubiquitous communication and
computing, new 5G wireless technologies aim for substantially broader coverage
(10-100x number of connected devices) with special focus on supporting low-power
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, which will further propel the ongoing
revolution within the telecommunications and high-tech industries for the next
decade. One key technique underpinning the latest development of 5G and beyond
standards is the use of multi-hop wireless connections and advanced backhauling
to enable flexible extension of range and coverage area. Nonetheless, the
industry-standard multi-hop communication schemes are still based on concepts
developed 40 years ago, which incur intolerably high complexity and long delay
with respect to the high throughput (1-10Gbps) and low latency (1ms)
requirements of 5G networks and beyond. There is thus an urgent need for new
multi-hop communication paradigms that simultaneously optimize throughput,
delay, and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a new multi-
hop communication paradigm called transcoding, a much needed revamp of the
40-year old industry standard called decode-and-forward. Specifically,
transcoding takes a back-to-basics approach, which reexamines and analyzes the
causes of the long-delay and high-complexity of the decode-&amp;-forward
policies. New strategies will then be designed accordingly, which will
substantially improve the delay-tradeoff performance of multi-hop communications
while significantly lowering the complexity. By breaking away from the
decode-&amp;-forward paradigm, the fundamentally new design philosophy of
transcoding takes full advantage of the exciting recent development in single-
hop wireless communications and in information theory. The results of this
project will lead to new structured, low-complexity multi-hop "transcoders" that
achieve high-throughput and low-latency necessary for the emerging 5G and IoT
applications. The approaches and activities in this project include theoretical
capacity analysis, new signal processing designs, network resource optimization,
and testbed implementation and performance
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.