* 1816352
* SHF: Small: Dynamic Analysis on Code Fragments
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Wei Le, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 485,993.00

In many software engineering environments, software developers would like to
understand, test, debug and verify a relatively small fragment of code instead
of the entire program. However, currently available program analysis and testing
tools only work on programs that are whole, in the sense that they can be
compiled and executed as a whole program. When the goal is to target only a
small code fragment, it is excessively expensive and time-consuming to test and
analyze the targeted code in the context of entire programs, which requires
configuring a whole system, setting up the execution environment, and finding
suites of test inputs that supply all the needed data values to execute the
whole program. Software development processes would be much more efficient and
effective if a program property for the code fragment of interest could be
checked as a standalone unit of code. This research project addresses the
technical challenges in converting code fragments into testable units. If
software testing and analysis could be applied successfully to code fragments,
rather than whole programs, the overall process of developing correct code would
be streamlined. This project focuses on dynamic program analysis, which is the
analysis of computer software that is performed by executing programs in a run-
time environment (as opposed to static analysis, which is analysis of the source
code). The project will generate algorithms, tools, and data that can advance
the state of the art of program analysis tools and software engineering
practice. The results will be disseminated through conferences, classrooms, open
source projects, industrial collaborations and STEM volunteer
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For dynamic program analysis to be
effective, the target program must be executed with sufficient test inputs to
produce interesting (e.g., incorrect or anomalous) behaviors. Dynamic analysis
is made difficult by frequently huge numbers of program paths, and the large
number of inputs that must be tested. Often, the tests are ineffective because
they produce an overwhelming number of false positives and often fail on parts
of the program that are not even relevant to the purpose of understanding,
debugging or verifying the targeted code. The project will develop an approach
to take code fragments, selected or constructed from the original program, and
generate compilable and executable units, using new syntactic patching
techniques to enable dynamic analysis on code fragments. It will also develop a
techniques to search for and select meaningful code fragments on which to
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.