* 1816499
* RI: Small: Dynamics of repulsion and reinforcement in point process, latent variable, and trajectory models
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Vinayak Rao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2022
* USD 234,003.00

Most traditional ways of analyzing data assume that data points are sampled
independently of one another. In many problems, however, this assumption is
incorrect. This project focuses on data where one observation influences others,
either as reinforcing (likely to have a similar value) or repulsing (likely to
have a greatly different value). Such interactions might arise between static
measurements, between trajectories evolving in space/on a network, or may be
desirable biases in algorithms to promote goals like robustness, diversity or
fairness. These might arise as a consequence of competition for finite
resources, because of rich-get-richer dynamics from propagating social
influence, because of interacting processes in physical and biological systems,
or out of a desire to learn compact representations of complex systems. Examples
include the locations of cells or service stations, interactions among particles
or populations, traffic trajectories, users navigating social media, the spiking
of neurons or the spread of disease. The research brings together applied
problems and theoretical ideas from fields like machine learning, statistics,
physics and computer science. Such tools open new avenues to data-summarization,
exploration and visualization, and allow practitioners to explore trade-offs
between interpretability and predictive accuracy. The applied aspects of this
project provide an opportunity for undergraduate research and for the
integration of research and teaching through an undergraduate course on
stochastic processes and simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level,
this project develops principled statistical models and efficient algorithms
that relax assumptions of independence among observations lying on a shared
space. It considers interactions for three classes of problems: 1) point process
models, 2) latent variable models and 3) trajectory models. Central to the work
are two kinds of stochastic process models: the Hawkes process for
reinforcement, and the Matern type-III process for repulsion. Both processes
share intuitive and mechanistic generative schemes from an underlying Poisson
process, whose rate is modulated by event history. This allows a framework that
jointly models richer repulsive and reinforcing interactions in stationary and
trajectory data. The connection with the Poisson process allows novel models and
mechanisms of reinforcement and repulsion, as well as new, scalable algorithms,
allowing investigations into the fundamental role of non-Poissonness in real
applications. Incorporating repulsive priors into latent variables of
hierarchical models also allow novel repulsive latent variable models with
biases towards parsimony and interpretability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.