* 1816969
* CIF: Small: WetComm:Foundations of Wet Communication Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Massimiliano Pierobon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,528.00

The goal of this project is to develop transformative concepts and tools to
characterize, model, and design systems based on living communicating devices,
i.e., biological cells, to control the propagation of information in biological
environments. This information is at the basis of how cells communicate in
nature, and it is fundamental to their basic activities, such as growth and
reproduction, and their coordination with other cells and the environment in
which they live. More broadly, the way this information propagates impacts human
health, our environment, food and energy resources, and others, and its
engineered control would enable a plethora of game-changing applications. While
the discipline of synthetic biology provides tools to experimentally demonstrate
the capabilities of engineered biological cells, there currently lacks a unified
and coherent theoretical framework to specifically develop and optimize their
communications. Current communication theory tools fall short in capturing some
important peculiarities of biological communication systems that live, grow, and
reproduce. This project seeks to address these limitations by re-thinking
communication theory in light of these peculiarities and their impact on how
information is quantified, processed, and exchanged by engineered biological
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue the aforementioned research
direction by: i) defining novel information-theoretic metrics to address not
only the cell-to-cell information exchange through molecular processes, but also
the correlation of these mechanisms with the way cells harvest, store, and
utilize energy to grow and replicate; ii) exploring the application of
communication engineering methods to optimize communications according to these
novel metrics by designing system components based on systems and synthetic
biology, such as chemical reactions, molecule transport, and DNA-based
biological circuits, for information source and channel coding; iii)
incorporating a forward-engineering approach based on the novel metrics and
communication engineering methods within standard practices in synthetic biology
to optimize, design, model, and manufacture biological circuits ready to be
implemented in biological cell systems. These research activities will pave the
way for a novel interdisciplinary branch in communication theory and
engineering, where communication systems are developed based on tools from
systems and synthetic biology in place of classical electronics. Moreover, this
project is expected to contribute to the growing field of synthetic biology with
an information-centric approach to the design and optimization of genetically
engineered cells. Research and education will involve undergraduate and graduate
students with interdisciplinary background, increase the participation of
middle-high school students, and in particular inspire women, historically
underrepresented in communication engineering but representing more than half of
the majors in biology, to embrace this interdisciplinary
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.