* 1816189
* I-Corps: Modularized Bioprinter for High Throughput Pharmaceutical Development
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Kara McCloskey, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is expected to
primarily address the needs of the pharmaceutical industry, but is also relevant
to a broader range of biological applications. The cost of pharmaceutical drug
discovery has increased by nearly 150% in the past 10 years, averaging about
$2.6 billion to develop just one drug. A major contributing factor is the
inefficacy of pre-clinical studies that still typically use simple 2D cell
cultures as experimental models which do not accurately recapitulate the
complexity of 3D, multicellular physiological environments. The development of a
modular multi-printhead bioprinter will enable a wide variety of materials to be
incorporated into the 3D printed tissues. As a result, researchers in
pharmaceutical companies will receive a cost-effective means to streamline drug
development, leading to increased productivity in bringing medications to
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to investigate the
commercialization potential of a modular, multi-printhead bioprinter. This
bioprinting system solves the current limitations with two key features. Firstly
the multiple dispensing mechanisms can collectively process a wide range of
materials. Several printheads each specialized in different materials and
printing styles allow 3D, 2D, extrusion, or droplet printing of cell-laden
fluids of all viscosities with minimal stress and high resolutions. Secondly,
this is a modular design that allows the customization of a bioprinter to a
customer's specifications. The system supports the construction and operation of
bioprinters with any combination of the different printheads to match the
customer's price point and research needs. The combination of these features
enables the customer to create complex biological tissues of their design.