* 1816219
* AF: Small: Data-Driven Model Reduction for Optimal Control of Large-Scale Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Athanasios Antoulas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 507,373.00

Dynamical systems are a principal tool in the modeling, prediction, and control
of physical phenomena ranging from heat dissipation in complex microelectronic
devices, to vibration suppression in large wind turbines, to flow simulation.
Optimal control of dynamical systems plays an important role in the many science
and engineering applications where one wants to generate inputs to improve the
performance of a system. However, ever-increasing need to include more detail at
the modeling stage inevitably leads to larger-scale, more complex dynamical
systems. Many of these large-scale systems are obtained from spatial
discretizations of time-dependent coupled systems of partial differential
equations. The simulation of such complex dynamical systems creates huge demands
on computational resources and such high fidelity simulations may become
unmanageable when the system needs to be queried at many different inputs. This
project develops and applies a new class of model reduction methods for the
efficient simulation and optimal control of dynamical systems. The model
reduction approaches developed in this project approximate large, complex models
of time-dependent processes using smaller, computationally efficient models that
are nonetheless capable of representing accurately the outputs of the original
process under a variety of operating conditions. Thus the new model reduction
methods allow simulation and control of systems that would otherwise not be
practical with high fidelity computational models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
model reduction methods developed in this project are data-driven. Unlike
existing methods, in many cases, the new methods allow the generation of
efficient reduced order computational models directly from (experimental) data
and do not require access to high fidelity computational simulations. Overall,
this new approach offers several advancements. First, it generates a reduced
order model of the original nonlinear dynamical system that is valid for all
inputs. Second, the new approach is data-driven and avoids the use of
projections. This means less detailed access to the components of the original
system are needed, which makes the new method particularly attractive when
details of system simulation is inaccessible. This project will develop
mathematical algorithms for the creation of such data-driven reduced order
models and provide theoretical analyses of their performance. In addition, this
project integrates the new model reduction approach into the solution of optimal
control problems. For this integration, crucial additional input-output
relations will be identified and the reduced order model generation will be
augmented to ensure that these additional input-output relations are well
approximated. This new approach will be applied to simulation and control of
important biological phenomena and of fluid flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.