* 1816012
* CHS: Small: Deep Integration of Crowds and AI for Robust, Scalable, and Privacy-Preserving Conversational Assistance
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Bigham, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 532,000.00

This research will use the recently deployed crowd-powered conversational
assistant, Chorus, as a scaffold to develop technical components that allow it
to automate itself over time. Chorus introduces a hybrid intelligence model in
which humans and machines collaboratively power a single intelligent system.
This is unlike both fully-automated approaches which are limited in terms of the
domains they cover, and individual human-based conversational support which does
not scale. Conversation is interactive communication. When people converse with
one another, they build and refine a shared context that makes finding and
making sense of information efficient and more effective. Computers capable of
engaging users in natural conversations about arbitrary topics would
revolutionize how, when, and where people have access to information. Despite
many successes, computers are still far from being able to converse naturally
across general domains. Systems resulting from this research will be robust
enough and scalable enough to be used in real world domains. These types of
hybrid systems may lead to new, generally applicable models that are useful in
real-time human computation and natural language understanding. This work will
inform a better understanding of how automated agents can learn from crowd-
powered systems in order to gradually assume more responsibility over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating a robust, general-purpose dialog system from
the bottom up is difficult because it requires solving multiple hard problems at
once. This project employs a complementary top-down approach that will (1) use
the growing Chorus data set to train automatic responders, (2) facilitate
integration of existing task-specific dialog systems, (3) develop learning
systems to sample among integrated dialog systems and choose the best to
respond, (4) develop learning systems to choose the best responses from among
automated and human suggestions, (5) develop learning systems able to recommend
relevant elements from the user's history based on context, (6) develop crowd-
powered systems for allowing users to safely control their devices, and (7)
develop crowd-powered systems that allow users to safely access private
repositories such as their email. Integral to this work is the interplay between
computers and people. Central goals are to better understand how computers and
people can complement the work of one another; learn how people can teach
computers to be better in the difficult domain of robust dialog, and develop
novel approaches for applying human computation when the crowd is handling
confidential information or has control of a physical device such as a user's
mobile phone. Lessons learned from exploring the top-down approach of
introducing a crowd-powered conversational agent that is gradually replaced by
automation may apply generally to other hard problems. This approach may allow
research topics to be explored before successful computational approaches have
been developed for foundational problems, such as learning how to properly
curate persistent memory before having the ability to create reliable
conversational assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.