* 1816857
* SHF: Small: Circuits and Systems with Charge Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Baris Taskin, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 390,363.00

Hybrid cars enable energy-efficient transportation solutions by simply recycling
kinetic energy to potential energy stored in a battery. The concept of
hybridization in vehicles is analogous to proposed research activities on this
project for computation with charge recycling. Charge-recycling circuits allow
for the recycling of the energy from the electrical charge used in computation
into electromagnetic energy; consequently, reducing waste of energy in
computation. This project will provide the blueprint for the implementation of
charge recycling principles to commercial and consumer electronics. Green
computing with charge recycling, particularly as it impacts smart cities with
internet-of-things solutions as targeted in this work, is a contemporary area
that is a major recruiting tool, including from students from underrepresented
populations in STEM. Educational materials will be disseminated for the training
of a truly diverse, multi-disciplinary workforce in electronics at the
undergraduate and graduate levels with the new charge recycling computing
principles. A multitude of research and project-type experience opportunities
will be made available, in the form of NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates and the Vertically Integrated Projects programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of this project is to explore the
peculiarities of implementing charge-recycling solutions at the scale of an
industrial processor core down to a small application-specific integrated
circuit node and ultimately deliver greener computing devices. Innovative
solutions are offered at the transistor-level, gate-level and computer
architecture level. Performance metrics that are industry-standard are adopted
at each of these levels and will be used in the process of technology transfer
of the developed novelties to industry. The project entails transformative goals
in disrupting the conventional CMOS-based digital logic design process in
industry and enable more portable and increasingly faster computing
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.