* 1816753
* RI:Small:NSF-BSF: Computational and Statistical Tradeoffs in Inverse Problems using Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Joan Bruna Estrach, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,772.00

In many real life scenarios one may want to measure some information about a
certain object, but cannot measure directly, but only indirectly. For example,
if a doctor wants to see the lungs of a patient he cannot do it by just looking
at them, but needs to use a special machine such as a CT scanner. This scanner
emits radiation on the patient and then measures the reflected radiation to gain
information about the shape of the lungs. There are many other examples often
encountered in photography, telecommunication, or navigation and more that share
the same challenge of inferring signals of interest from indirect, noisy
measurements: these are known as inverse problems. While many techniques exist
for reconstructing the original object from its measurements, one of the main
challenges is to do it in a timely manner. This research aims at providing novel
computationally efficient techniques for solving inverse problems. In
particular, it explores the ability of deep neural networks to accelerate and
improve traditional techniques. This research focuses on both the theoretical
aspects of such methods, needed for example to certify that the reconstructed
image from a patient CT scan using a deep neural network is close to the
underlying original scan, and their applications to tomography and seismic
imaging. This research provides transformative multidisciplinary educational
opportunities, developed in the Center for Data Science, New York University,
bringing together signal processing, statistics and machine learning in new
graduate level courses. Thanks to the wide range of relevant applications, this
research also provides unique outreach activities to K12 and highschool
students, as well as minority students through the BSF
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse problems occur in many fields
ranging from signal processing to machine learning and are relevant to many
domains such as medicine (e.g., getting an image in computer tomography) and
physics (e.g., calculating the density of the earth from measurements of its
gravity fields). Many solvers have been developed for these type of problems,
leveraging specific high-dimensional statistical models for the signals of
interest. However, there are three main challenges that persist in current
existing solutions. First, many of them are computationally demanding and
therefore not applicable to many applications that require a solution in a
timely manner. Second, many inverse problems pose non-convex optimization
problems that do not have an efficient solution at all. Third, current
methodology do not make optimal use of available training examples, which,
depending on the application, ranges from tens of instances to millions. This
project provides novel theoretical foundations for the neural network based
solver on general inverse problems, extends this theory to include non-linear
problems that do not admit convex solutions, as well as graph-structured
problems, and demonstrates its efficiency on challenging applications including
low-dose Computed Tomography, Seismic spike de- convolution, and Quantum State
Tomography. It specifically builds on the combination of two recent tools
developed by the PI and his Israeli collaborator, which provide complimentary
insights on the mechanisms underpinning the neural network acceleration. This
novel theoretical framework enables a series of important extensions and
generalizations, such as non-linear inverse problems, partially known measuring
operators, and distributed optimization. As part of this research, several
educational outreach activities are conducted to make neural networks more
accessible to the broad student community, including K12, highschool and
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.