* 1816149
* III: Small: Persistent Data Summaries: Temporal Analytics on Big Data Histories
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Feifei Li, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,934.00

An increasing number of applications require the storage of and access to all
historical data to support rich analytics, learning, and mining operations. This
project develops a series of methods to summarize data so that it can be queried
with respect to not just the full data set, as is standard, but with respect to
the state of the data set at any historical time. These summaries integrate with
large temporal databases, in both offline batched-processing and online
streaming application scenarios. The effectiveness of these methods will be
demonstrated on an enormous scientific database of atmospheric data collected
for 20 years from over 40,000 weather stations. We will work with industry
collaborators to help deploy our new algorithms, and the results will be
integrated into education and outreach efforts surrounding the growth of data
science initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
extends and combines approximate query processing with temporal big data. In
particular, instead of (or on top of) using a multi-version database, this
project designs and implements persistent data summaries (PDSs) that offer
interactive temporal analytics with strong theoretical guarantees on their
approximation quality. In additional to formalizing these models, this project
develops practical PDS implementations for sampling-based summaries, data
sketches, and core sets that support advanced analytical
queries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.