* 1816887
* CSR: Small: Deconstructing Distributed Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Leana Golubchik, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

Deep learning has made substantial strides in computer vision, speech
recognition, natural language processing, and other applications. New
algorithms, larger datasets, increased compute power, and machine learning
frameworks all contribute to this success. An important missing piece is that it
is still challenging for users to effectively provision and integrate deep
learning applications into existing datacenters. This project develops novel
solutions that enable effective use of cloud resources, which in turn will aid
in broadening the population of users capable of discovering new and better deep
learning models and applying them in novel settings and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When developing new applications, users
experiment with many deep neural networks (DNNs), but have limited knowledge of
their computational demand. Due to non-linear scaling, predicting throughput
improvements is challenging. Techniques developed in thrust 1 of this project
quickly guide provisioning and resource allocation. In such environments,
efficient inter-job resource sharing (particularly for similar DNNs) is an open
problem, addressed in thrust 2 of the project by developing effective scheduling
techniques. The diversity of datacenter workloads (DNNs, web), with different
resource "affinity", creates opportunities to embrace cloud federations. While
promising, there is a lack of techniques to support their sustainable
deployment; these are developed in thrust 3 of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is committed to diversity in research
and education, involving undergraduate and graduate students, coupled with an
existing extensive K-12 outreach effort. The developed experimental testbed is
utilized for both, research and education. All algorithms, designs, software,
and data are made publicly available so that researchers and educators are able
to replicate and improve on developed technologies. Solutions to the fundamental
problems that are the focus of this project enable the development of new deep
learning models and increase the adoption rate of these technologies in novel
application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All reports and code are stored in an
SVN-based repository. Software and related documents are publicly available on
GitHub. All data is kept for at least 7 years beyond the life of the project.
Research products are available promptly after publication, including
supplemental information, through http://qed.usc.edu. These records are durable,
accessible through standard web protocols, and made secure. Appropriate storage
media is used, to keep data access current, as needed. Data that supports
patents resulting from the project is retained for the duration of the patents.
The URL to the repository is
http://qed.usc.edu/D3/repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.