* 1816687
* CHS: Small: Computational Modeling of Human Rhythms to Improve Health and Quality of Life
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Afsaneh Doryab, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 06/30/2020
* USD 514,496.00

According to recent research, balance is a significant contributor to health and
well-being. Health challenges are associated with work and personal imbalances,
in the form of overload, that exceed human capability to manage their own
natural pace. Part of these overloads are due to the imposition of activities
and mis-timed or incompatible demands on biological and psychological needs, or
lack of attention to synchronization or receptivity of mental and physical
states when meeting work and life demands. Advice about life management and
health is often generic (for example, have 8 hours sleep a day) rather than
tailored to individual lifestyles. This research proposes to improve health and
wellbeing in individuals through awareness of their personal rhythms, which are
repeated cycles of internal and external events including biological, mental,
social, and environmental. The investigators seek to design and evaluate a data
analytic and modeling method to make people aware of what they could be doing at
any given time to align with their biological clock and to achieve high
performance in daily life and work without burning out or developing stress-
related disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research provides an intelligent
platform for collecting longitudinal data and modeling human rhythms to enable
detection of current, and prediction of future states in each rhythm to provide
optimal action recommendations and interventions. The work leverages advances in
wearable devices, sensing technology, and online sources to proactively collect
and analyze physiological, psychological, behavioral, social, and environmental
data to identify personal rhythms, to explore their relationship to positive
physical, mental, and behavioral outcomes, and to provide people with tools to
reason about these relationships and to improve outcomes. In addition to
advancing the state of the art in modeling rhythmic patterns, the research will
demonstrate the impact of rhythm-aware technology in changing people?s
perceptions and behavior and directing them towards a more balanced and
successful life. Integration of personal rhythms in daily lives of individuals
will transform societal activities and the overall performance of people and
contributes to creating a healthier society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.