* 1816715
* 3-D CMZ: Unveiling the Structure of the Center of the Milky Way Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Cara Battersby, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,315.00

This astronomy project will produce a "3-dimensional" map of the center of the
Milky Way Galaxy. The team will develop a catalogue of gas and dust clouds for
use by other scientists. Infrared data from the Herschel space telescope will be
combined with radio observations from the APEX telescope in Chile and the MOPRA
telescope in Australia. By observing radiation from warm dust and from molecules
like formaldehyde, methanol, and silicon monoxide, the team will reveal the 3-D
shapes, sizes, and distances of the clouds. The data will be compared to models
of star formation to investigate how stars are born near the center of our Milky
Way galaxy. The center of the Milky Way, known as the Central Molecular Zone
(CMZ), is complicated and difficult to observe. The telescopes being used, which
operate at infrared and radio wavelengths, are very well suited to this project.
By comparison, optical telescopes struggle to see through the gas and dust that
blocks our view of the CMZ. The CMZ includes the supermassive black hole at the
heart of our galaxy, and intriguing objects like "the brick", a dense cloud that
has yet to create any stars, and "the three little pigs", a row of three clumps
on the verge of star birth. Understanding the CMZ is of great importance to
models of the galaxy, and to theories of star birth in dense
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A postdoctoral researcher will be involved in this
important and exciting project. The catalogue of clouds in the CMZ will be
posted on an easy-to-use website. The team will also produce a custom lesson
plan on the CMZ and a "WorldWide Telescope" (WWT) tour of our Galaxy's center.
The lesson plan will be developed as part of the "BiteScis" program, which is
led by this project's Principle Investigator (PI) and by a Boston Science
Teacher. The lessons are designed to relate to curriculum standards, are tested
in a local K-12 classroom, and are shared with other teachers through the
BiteScis website. The WWT, a project hosted by the American Astronomical
Society, will extend the reach of the CMZ survey beyond the K-12 classroom. The
PI has served as an ambassador to the WWT for a number of years and is committed
to including her survey data in the WWT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.