* 1816196
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Lambda Cold Dark Matter Paradigm with Dwarf Satellites of Low-mass Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Carlin, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 56,740.00

All large galaxies, like our own Milky Way, are surrounded by many smaller
"satellite" companion galaxies. Scientists have recently discovered tiny
satellite galaxies around the Large Magellanic Cloud, a small Milky Way
companion galaxy. Current predictions are not able to reproduce the numbers and
properties of these satellite galaxies. Small "dwarf" galaxies thus challenge
our understanding of the physical processes that shape galaxies. To solve the
puzzle, this project explores galaxies beyond the Milky Way and its Local Group
of galaxies. The investigators will test predictions by searching for the
tiniest satellites around small galaxies beyond our Local Group. These
satellites are predicted to be faint and can only be found using the most
advanced telescopes on Earth. The properties of the new objects will be compared
to satellites in our Local Group and interpreted in the context of theoretical
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three investigators, together with a
postdoctoral researcher and students, will use state-of-the-art instrumentation
on large optical telescopes to perform systematic, panoramic imaging surveys of
11 sub-Milky Way-mass target galaxies. The research team will interpret this
census of faint satellites with the aid of dedicated analytical models. The
final goal is to inform our understanding of the galaxy formation physics at the
lowest mass scales. These observations can reveal how the stellar content of
dwarf galaxies relates to their dark matter halos. The results will be
interpreted as a function of galaxy environment, halo mass and morphology, thus
providing quantitative constraints for star formation, feedback and re-
ionization prescriptions in the framework of galaxy formation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Investigators will use this research to
increase the involvement of underrepresented minorities in astronomy by
developing a support network for women in science at the University of Tampa.
This will provide valuable guidance for their future careers and advise them on
gender balance issues. At Ohio State University (OSU), astronomy-themed YouTube
coding videos will be developed for high school students. Additionally, a peer-
mentoring program led by OSU students will be supported by this program through
participation in a dedicated Leadership Retreat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.