* 1816627
* RI: Small: From acoustics to semantics:  Embedding speech for a hierarchy of tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Karen Livescu, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,984.00

There is an increasingly large array of spoken language interfaces available,
such as virtual assistants and telephone customer service interfaces. These
technologies both (1) recognize the words spoken by a user and (2) extract
actionable information, such as the topic of the user's query and the degree of
match between the query and documents in a database. Such applications are
typically treated as a pipeline of automatic speech transcription followed by
text processing to extract the meaning. This project aims to develop technology
that directly extracts meaning from speech, while using a variety of linguistic
information along the way. This approach is intended to mitigate the effects of
speech recognition errors, as well as to use all of the meaning-bearing
information in speech, such as intonation. This work is expected to have long-
term broad impact through technological advances, as well as immediate broad
impact through the PI's involvement in local schools and mentoring for a diverse
set of visiting students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this work
are (1) to do high-quality natural language processing directly on speech; (2)
to seamlessly integrate domain knowledge into end-to-end speech models; (3)
improve the performance-vs.-resources tradeoff; and (4) develop models for
embedding arbitrary speech signals into meaning-bearing representations. The
process of mapping from speech to meaning can be viewed as a hierarchy of tasks,
from the most basic acoustic-phonetic tasks to the deepest semantic tasks. The
experimental work will focus on two task hierarchies: a "retrieval" hierarchy
including query-by-example search, keyword spotting, semantic speech search; and
a "recognition" hierarchy including phonetic recognition, word recognition,
parsing, and topic identification. The main technical approaches to be developed
include hierarchical multitask learning methods for incorporating domain
knowledge and mitigating low-data settings, as well as new models for acoustic-
semantic speech embedding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.