* 1816537
* Simulating Dense Gas in Active Galactic Nuclei, Tidal Disruption Events, and Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2023
* USD 475,069.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astronomy is an observational, not experimental,
science. We cannot go to a star and directly measure its temperature, density,
or how it makes energy. Rather, we discover these things by careful study of
their light at different colors. Complex interactions between atoms and
molecules produce light. The PIs are developing a large computer program,
Cloudy, to predict this. Cloudy solves the complex equations of quantum
mechanics and relativity. Astronomers use Cloudy to simulate what is happening
in a distant star or galaxy and predict the emitted light. This is compared with
what is seen through telescopes. This comparison makes it possible to understand
what is happening. Cloudy is freely available and is among the more widely used
codes in astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will do two types of broader
impact. They organize international workshops showing how to apply Cloudy to
research projects. The Co-PI, a native of Spain, will visit local K-12 schools
with large Hispanic populations. He does Spanish language talks and
presentations. Hispanic students and their families visit the university for
astronomy talks and viewing with the MacAdam Student
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Astronomy is an
observational, not experimental, science. We cannot directly measure the
temperature, density, or energy source for a star or galaxy. We discover these
things by quantitative spectroscopy, the careful study of the observed spectrum.
Astronomical sources are usually far from equilibrium. Their spectra depend on a
number of thermal, plasma, chemical, and condensed matter processes. Analytical
solutions are not possible. The code Cloudy solves all of this, numerically, to
predict the spectrum. These predictions are compared that observations to infer
properties of a star or galaxy. Cloudy is one of the more widely used theory
codes in astrophysics with more than 300 papers citing its documentation per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloudy has long solved these problems using available
computers and atomic data. The simulations can be improved as computers become
more powerful and the atomic data more accurate. We are developing techniques to
improve modeling of the dense gas found near black holes or exploding stars. A
full treatment of the "Rydberg levels," the highly excited orbits of electrons
around ions, is the key improvement. This work will have an influence well
beyond this project because of Cloudy's broad community
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.