* 1816542
* SHF: SMALL: A Novel Algorithm for Automated Synthesis of Passive, Causal, and Stable Models for Optical Interconnects
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ata Zadehgol, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

With the explosive growth of Big Data and Internet of Things, and the ever-
growing demand for high-performance computing, mobility, security, and high-
fidelity experiences, there is an increasing need for high-bandwidth and low-
loss interconnect technologies that enable efficient data transfer across the
chip. The optical fiber and its significant capacity for high-bandwidth data
transfer are well-known in the telecommunications industry, and widely exploited
in their long-distance network of interconnects. Scaling down optical
interconnects to fit in nano-scale silicon chips would clearly be advantageous
for achieving high-bandwidth data transfer on-chip -- however, a major hurdle is
the dearth of accurate and efficient computable stochastic electromagnetic
models for simulation of optical interconnect structures comprised of multiple
tightly-coupled nano-scale silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wave-guides that carry
information signals (i.e., TeraHertz electromagnetic waves) across on-chip
transmitters and receivers. The overall goal of this proposal is to develop
algorithms for a software tool to perform the design, analysis, and optimization
of 3-dimensional (3-D) nano-scale optical interconnects based on SOI wave-guides
exhibiting random surface roughness. The overall educational components of this
project are to leverage the developed models and software to: (1) develop new
graduate courses, (2) develop interactive learning objects and lab-based
activities for undergraduate courses, and (3) stimulate undergraduate students'
interest in science, and recruit and mentor diverse groups of students including
women and minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop
the Optical Interconnect Designer Tool (OIDT) software, of which the input is
comprised of: (1) the specified 3-D geometry representing the physical
description of the multi-port optical interconnect system, (2) the random
distribution for surface roughness of SOI wave-guide, and (3) the wave-guide
material's electrical properties. The OIDT will autonomously synthesize two
types of electrical models: (1) network scattering parameters for design
optimization of the interconnect, in the frequency-domain, and (2) stable,
passive, and causal SPICE equivalent circuit models for timing analysis and
signal/power integrity analysis of the passive interconnect, integrated with
active non-linear drivers and components, in the time-domain. The proposed
Python-based software package may be used stand-alone, or integrated into
existing computer aided design (CAD) tools and design-flows to facilitate design
automation, and research and development of advanced microelectronics for a
variety of applications including computing, communications, energy, security,
sensing, health, etc. The numerical program will be hosted on GitHub as an open-
source project, to facilitate and promote (inter)national optical device
research. The education component expands public's scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.