* 1816929
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Usable Key Management and Forward Secrecy for Secure Email
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kent Seamons, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 498,215.00

Sending and receiving information securely online is a basic need in our
connected world. However, one of the most frequently used online applications,
email, remains largely insecure for all but the most expert users. The
researchers will gather data to better understand why users do not adopt secure
email. They will also identify the most practical, usable practices for users to
safeguard their secure email from hackers, and make sure they do not lose access
to their secure email by forgetting the password or key that unlocks their
sensitive emails. The initial studies will be conducted in a laboratory
environment, utilizing a novel methodology the researchers have developed that
tests whether two novice users can adopt a secure email system without help from
an outside expert. Toward the end of the project, the researchers will conduct
long-term usability studies with the best-of-class systems they have developed
to understand how people integrate secure email into their everyday email
habits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the long-standing problem of
providing usable, secure email for the general public. Key management is a core
problem. The researchers will explore a trust-on-first-use (TOFU) key exchange,
followed by a variety of methods that improve trust in the exchanged keys.
Starting with TOFU key exchange prioritizes deployability and usability, while
additional methods can increase security, for example, by using a public ledger
and forward secrecy. Keys will be exchanged only with regular or approved
contacts so that it is not easy for spammers to deliver encrypted spam and
malware to large numbers of users. The researchers will also develop usable key
storage software, including key portability and backup. Potential solutions
include purely local storage, encrypted cloud storage, a smartphone app, and
hardware tokens. For backup, we will evaluate a variety of methods to help users
store a master key in a secure location, without requiring technical expertise
to manage the key. The researchers will support forward secrecy for secure email
using key ratcheting. By developing for email, with its generality and
interoperability requirements, advances in usable key management will be broadly
applicable to a wide variety of other applications, including instant
messaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.