* 1816399
* CSR:Small:System Support for Edge Computing Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Qun Li, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

Edge computing promises to enable many applications not readily supported by the
cloud computing paradigm. By placing resource-rich nodes in close proximity to
mobile or Internet of Things (IoT) devices, edge computing offers better
responsive services, along with higher scalability and availability than
traditional cloud platforms. Edge computing, as a new computing paradigm, also
poses vastly different research challenges due to its distinct infrastructure
from other systems. In this project, a number of novel technologies will be
developed to run various applications on an edge computing system with less
deployment effort and higher efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
project proposes a comprehensive architecture for edge computing application
development and identifies task scheduling, service migration, data management
as enabling techniques for edge computing to prevail. The project will focus on
new algorithms and system design methodologies in (1) a task queue management
and inter-edge collaboration system, (2) a highly efficient and robust service
migration support based on Docker/Virtual Machine, and (3) a combined edge/cloud
computing architecture for distributed data management. With respect to broader
impacts, this project will advance the state of the art in emerging edge
computing systems by designing system support to facilitate the development of a
wide variety of edge computing applications, thereby having a positive impact on
our daily lives. The new paradigm derived from the research will lead to a
number of interesting problems that are not explored in traditional cloud or
mobile systems. The findings of this research will be incorporated into new and
existing undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.