* 1816010
* CHS: Small: Extracting affect and interaction information from primary care visits to support patient-provider interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Jacob Furst, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Primary care is an integral part of an effective health care system that
emphasizes continuous and preventive care. However, the United States faces a
shortage of primary care physicians that is projected to get worse, a shortage
most pronounced in clinics that serve rural and minority patients. This shortage
can lead to stress and physician burnout, affecting both the shortage itself and
the quality of patient-provider interactions. This project will develop methods
for semi-automated analysis of primary care visits, with the long-term goal of
detecting both momentary and longer-term stress, then providing feedback and
reflection systems to help reduce stress and improve the quality of patient care
and retention of physicians. This will require both advances in video processing
to recognize aspects of how humans interact with both each other and with
technology, novel models of how these interactions affect the group's affective
state and relationship, and initial design inquiry into patients' and providers'
needs during primary care visits. This, in turn, will require providing
interdisciplinary educational opportunities for health service and engineering
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two main aims. The first focuses
on developing methods to extract data from clinical encounters about stress,
burnout, and interaction, leveraging a large existing dataset of recorded
primary care visits collected in several contexts. The team will develop
techniques to recognize both non-verbal and verbal cues in interactions,
including eye contact, facial expressions, posture and body language, turn-
taking behaviors, and indicators of socio-emotional exchange such as facial
mimicry. The team will also extract cues about how the people involved interact
with technology through gaze analysis, evidence of typing or touchscreen use,
and screen sharing/co-referencing behaviors. These methods will be validated by
comparing their performance against human annotations, with the extracted data
informing the second main aim around determining opportunities and requirements
for developing tools to provide feedback and support reflection. This second aim
will be pursued through user-centered design methods, including reviewing
extracted data with clinical collaborators to evaluate its potential value,
workflow analysis of patient-provider interactions informed by ethnographic
observational methods, and thematic analysis of focus groups including both
patients and care providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.