* 1816845
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Characterizing Architectural Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mehdi Mirakhorli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,135.00

Software architecture plays a fundamental role in addressing security
requirements by enforcing the necessary authentication, authorization,
confidentiality, data integrity, privacy, accountability, availability and non-
repudiation requirements, even when the system is under attack. Therefore, a
design flaw in a software system's architecture could lead to attacks with
enormous consequences. Most of the research, techniques, and tools that address
security focus on secure coding. However, it is difficult to achieve a high
level of security (and other quality attributes) by focusing solely at the
coding level. Architectural design flaws can overwhelm even the most heroic
coding efforts, and ignoring such issues can result in backdoors into systems
and severe software vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;This project presents the
transformative notion of a Common Architectural Weakness Enumeration (CAWE),
defined as a catalog of commonly-occurring flaws in the design and
implementation of a system's security architecture that can result in severe
vulnerabilities and security breaches. Additionally, this work will develop a
novel approach for automating the detection of common architectural weaknesses.
It combines concepts and techniques from the software reflexion model, program
analysis, as well as pattern matching techniques to develop new algorithms for
mapping CAWEs to an application's source code and detecting potential
architectural vulnerability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, software
vulnerabilities will be extracted from the National Vulnerability Database (NVD)
and large scale empirical studies will be conducted to investigate relationships
between architectural flaws and software vulnerabilities. This project is
expected to advance software security knowledge on the theoretical foundation,
concepts, and automated tools to (1) characterize architectural vulnerabilities
and security design flaws that can result in severe security breaches, and (2)
automatically identify architectural weaknesses in the source code of a system
and suggest appropriate mitigation techniques to fix them. The results of the
project will contribute towards enhancing the state of practice for software
assurance and cyber security. The CAWE catalog will provide the tool development
sector of software security industry with benchmarks to assess existing software
assurance tools. Our automated technique to detect architectural weaknesses will
complement existing static and dynamic source code analysis techniques. Ongoing
research opportunities will be provided for a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students. Research and pedagogical materials will be developed and made
publicly available for use in a variety of courses in software architecture and
software security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.