* 1816591
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Online Malicious Intent Inference for Safe CPS Operations under Cyber-attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Nicola Bezzo, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 290,642.00

Modern autonomous vehicles are not built with security in mind. The increased
sensing, computation, control capabilities, and task complexity have introduced
security concerns beyond traditional cyber-attacks. By injecting malformed data,
by spoofing sensors, by tampering with controllers, and even by manipulating the
environment, an attacker can compromise the integrity and even take control over
the functionality of such cyber-physical systems. Examples of attacks have
recently been demonstrated on a variety of systems which include the rerouting
of drones, the hijacking of vessels by Global Positioning System (GPS) spoofing,
and the use of wireless connectivity to take over the steering and brakes of
automobiles. Several solutions have been pursued in recent years to solve this
problem, yet the bulk of cyber-physical system security literature is focused on
the detection and estimation of malicious attacks without considering the
context, risk or consequences, much less the intent of the attack. Predicting
the intention, by contrast, may yield more information about the attack and thus
offer defense mechanisms. This research focuses on the development of techniques
to identify, predict, and mitigate malicious intentions of autonomous vehicles,
seeking to develop fundamental methods for estimating risk and consequences of
malicious attacks, identifying malicious intent, and defending, controlling, and
reconfiguring the compromised system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide fundamental approaches to increase resiliency in autonomous vehicles.
Specifically, the proposed research includes: 1) new techniques to estimate risk
and consequences of attacks, leveraging knowledge about the system model and
reachability-based analysis; 2) machine learning-based and control-level intent
inference methods; and 3) the development of policies for resilient planning and
control to ensure continuous operation of the system with closed-loop
performance guarantees. To better develop and assess the security techniques
proposed in this work, realistic case studies will be implemented using state-
of-the-art unmanned aerial and ground vehicles with different sensing,
computation, and communication capabilities to facilitate their transition into
practice. The proposed research is also applicable to cyber-physical systems
broadly and will contribute directly to the development of safe autonomous
systems. Additionally, as part of this project, a major emphasis will be given
to education and outreach including the development of novel curriculum
activities centered on the topic of resiliency in robotics, involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in research, and collaborations with
industry to train the next generation workforce on cyber-physical system
security problems and mitigation schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.