* 1816960
* Enhancing infrastructure for multidisciplinary, long-term research at the Karisoke Research Center, Rwanda
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Tara Stoinski, The Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2020
* USD 72,010.00

The Karisoke Research Center (KRC) in Rwanda (www.gorillafund.org) is the
world's largest and longest running continuous field site for studying gorillas
in the wild. Data collected at Karisoke has contributed to nearly 300 scientific
publications on gorillas and the surrounding region on topics ranging from
socioecology, life history, paternal and maternal investment, ontogeny,
physiology, health, feeding ecology, evolutionary biology, and genetics. Over
the past five years, 47 researchers from 17 universities, including
undergraduate, graduate students, postdocs, and faculty, have also conducted
research at Karisoke and data from Karisoke has been used in collaborations with
more than 40 institutions. Despite the long-term success of Karisoke as a
research site, its facilities are not currently adequate to support this range
of inquiry and demonstrate the limitations of ad hoc field facilities.
Particularly, the laboratory and herbarium are desperately in need of
refurbishment. These facilities lack adequate sanitation, ventilation, and the
organizational capacity to store samples. This improvement project will provide
the infrastructure needed for broad interdisciplinary research in the fields of
endocrinology, genetics, disease ecology, and conservation biology. The primary
outcomes will be an improved laboratory facility to advance innovative,
interdisciplinary research, and a high-functioning herbarium, including a
digital archive, to aid national and global collaborative research to better
understand the increasing changes to the region's flora. In addition,
improvements to these facilities will be utilized by visiting researchers around
the world, as well as by host-country researchers (undergraduate and graduate
students, and scientists), where there is a great need for next generation
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for a modern Karisoke laboratory
facility has been growing over the past 15 years and has become acute in the
last five years as vast developments in new lab techniques and a need for
increasingly interdisciplinary research has emerged. To improve working
conditions for laboratory staff and visiting researchers, and to meet
international laboratory standards, multiple laboratory workspace upgrades are
needed for processing and preserving fecal samples for hormones (metabolites),
particle size, isotope, microbiome analysis, and molecular work, and or
parasitological analyses and phytolite studies, which require up-to-date imaging
microscopes. Additional improvements include installing exhume hood exhaust
systems along with refrigeration units and storage for samples. The KRC
herbarium will be reconstructed into a biological sample storage room with state
of the art storage and climate control measures. A drying preservation stage
will be installed in a separate room to reduce the risk of contamination. These
improvements will make the collection of plant species more sustainable,
accessible, and usable to visiting researchers to study the diverse Virunga
massif vegetation, and will allow for the expansion of the plant collection (and
potentially other voucher collections).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.