* 1816652
* Collaborative research: Investigating the Fate of Carbon at an Ultraslow Spreading Center
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Thomas McCollom, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 210,680.00

Knowing the cycle of carbon in the Earth and how biological and abiological
processes control the composition of the resulting carbon-bearing phases and how
those change over time is a major scientific goal that has important
implications for our understanding of both ecosystems and global warming. The
circulation of seawater through deep-sea hydrothermal vent systems results in
the extensive transformation of both inorganic and organic carbon compounds and
may have a significant impact on the deep ocean carbon cycle. To date, most
reports of organic compounds in deep-sea hydrothermal fluids have focused on
methane and light hydrocarbons. The distribution and abundance of other types of
organic compounds, however, remains poorly known. As a result, the contribution
of hydrothermal systems to organic carbon in the deep ocean and the
biogeochemical processes responsible for this input, remain highly uncertain.
This research conducts a comprehensive study of the composition and abundance of
carbon compounds from fluids discharging from two very different, but closely
located, hydrothermal vents on the ultraslow spreading mid-Cayman rise in the
Caribbean Sea. The two vent sites are located in substantially different host
rocks and occur at very different water depths. They also have very different
vent fluid temperatures. Fluids will be collected using multiple, complementary
sampling systems and analyzed by various mass spectrometric and other analytical
techniques. Comparison between these two sites allows carbon fluxes and chemical
transformations to be determined over a range of physical and chemical
conditions. Broader impacts of the work include training of graduate and
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art geochemical methods and provide them
with an opportunity to gain experience and training in sea-going research in a
strongly interdisciplinary subject. A graduate and several undergraduate
students from the University of South Carolina, an EPSCoR state (i.e., a state
that does not receive significant federal dollars); Bridgewater State
University, which serves economically disadvantaged communities in
Massachusetts; and the University of Colorado at Boulder will be involved in the
research and play key roles in both the scientific cruise and supporting
laboratory activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In ocean crust, extensive
transformations occur to the carbon compounds present in both the fluids and
solids on and below the seafloor due to processes such as heating, precipitation
of minerals, injections of magma, and the activity of microorganisms. These
processes have consequences for global elemental cycling in the present day and
over geologic time. To date, most reports of organic compounds in deep-sea
hydrothermal fluids have focused on small, volatile organic molecules such as
methane. However, the abundance and fate of other types of organic compounds
remains poorly known. To better understand these transformations and the amount
of carbon in seafloor hydrothermal systems and their potential impact on deep
sea microbes and ecology, samples of hydrothermal fluids emanating from two
compositionally and thermally different seafloor vent systems on the mid-Cayman
rise (Piccard and von Damm) will be collected on a 16-day oceanographic cruise
using a robotic vehicle. Samples will be analyzed for their carbon content and
carbon compounds using mass spectrometric and other analytical tools. Goals of
the project are to addresses issues such as: (1) the relative contribution of
abiotic synthesis, thermal alteration of biomass, fluid-rock interaction, and
microbial activity to the inventory of carbon compounds in ridge-crest
hydrothermal fluids, (2) how host rock, style of venting, and temperature
influence the generation and stability of reduced carbon compounds in axial hot-
springs, (3) the fate of seawater-derived dissolved organic carbon during
circulation through the oceanic lithosphere, and (4) which organic compounds and
signatures are the best geochemical indicators of fluid reaction history. Three
different sampling devices will be employed to ensure the full range of carbon
containing compounds is captured. Collected samples will be analyzed for bulk
characteristics (dissolved organic carbon concentrations and isotopes) and for
the composition and isotope characteristics of individual compounds, ranging
from volatile (e.g. methane and light hydrocarbons) to non-volatile (e.g. fatty
acids), and from labile (e.g. amino acids) to refractory (e.g. polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons). These data will permit the calculation of carbon and
isotope mass balances at each location. From this, a comparison of the fate of
carbon in both systems will be carried out to evaluate the importance of rock
type, temperature, and style of venting on the carbon-bearing compounds present
in seafloor hydrothermal vents. Additional measurements will be made with non-
targeted, broad spectrum organic compound analyses to identify alteration trends
and carbon compound evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.