* 1816732
* CHS:Small: Improved Cross-Subject Cognitive and Emotional State Classification  Using Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy Data for Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Leanne Hirshfield, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 494,374.00

New advances in bio-technology suggest devices to wear and measure the brain
will be available to support many different activities. Future technologies may
use brain activity data to adapt or customize educational software in real-time.
Activity support based on interpreted brain activity could be used to reduce
mental workload, modify emotional states, or help someone with post-traumatic
stress disorder. However, brain activity data is complex and difficult to
interpret. This project will use deep machine learning methods to overcome the
challenge of classifying and interpreting brain activity data using real-time
data from participants. The objective is to harness the tremendous potential of
cognitive sensors and computational methods to help individuals function more
effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although many early successes were achieved
using machine learning on brain data, several notable challenges have arisen,
which significantly limit the impacts of these early successes. The technical
approach in this project has three research thrusts. The investigators will
develop models specifically for use on high density functional-near infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS) data. Thrust 1 involves the development of advanced deep
learning techniques that are particularly well-suited for fNIRS data, and
address spatial and temporal inter-relations. Thrust 2 involves development and
adaptation of algorithm transparency (AT) techniques that are well-suited to
shed light on brain dynamics embedded within the deep learning model structures.
This will help the research team interpret the underlying structure of the
models, with respect to brain spatial and temporal dynamics at the individual
and group level. Thrust 3 collates the model and AT techniques developed in the
prior thrusts and evaluates them using an extensive cross-subject and cross-
participant fNIRS dataset. Using this data for evaluation purposes, the research
team will work together to interpret results to improve upon classifier
performance and model generalizability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.