* 1816714
* CSR: Small: Delegation Systems for Efficient and Safe Multi-Core Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jakob Eriksson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,832.00

This project helps software on highly parallel (multi-core) computers access
shared data structures more efficiently. The conventional approach is based on
individual cores taking turns to access the data structure. However, every time
the data structure changes hands there is a considerable slowdown, while other
cores waste valuable time awaiting their turn. Delegation is an alternative
approach. Here, a single core (server) is in charge of the data structure, and
performs work as requested by other cores. Focusing on one job makes the server
more efficient, often by far outweighing the costs of delegation, given a high-
performance delegation design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into
three main tasks. First, delegation should theoretically be 10x faster than it
is today, using current hardware. The project investigates what currently holds
back delegation performance, and reaches for the fundamental performance limits
of delegation. Second, delegation currently relies on some degree of hand-tuning
of parameters to achieve peak throughput. The project investigates mechanisms to
allow delegation to automatically adjust to current conditions, improving ease
of use. Finally, delegation today is fundamentally client-server oriented. The
project investigates whether a fully distributed model can achieve further
gains, both theoretically and in practice.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
project is to make delegation both extremely high-performing, and easy to use.
If the project is successful, and if delegation as a result sees adoption among
software developers, the result will be programs running considerably faster on
the same hardware. This, in turn, reduces the amount of computing hardware
required to perform the same amount of work, thereby reducing both equipment
cost and electricity consumption.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts
produced in the course of this project will be made publicly available on the
research lab's github page: http://github.com/bitslab, where they will remain
well beyond the project period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.