* 1816495
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Robust Moving Target Defense: A Game Theoretic and Learning Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Zizhan Zheng, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 260,105.00

Malicious attacks are constantly evolving to inflict even more damage on the
nation's infrastructure systems, corporate information technology (IT) systems,
and our digital lives. A fundamental obstacle to achieving effective defense is
information asymmetry, through which, under current static and passive defense
schemes, the attacker has essentially limitless time to observe and learn about
the defender, while the defender knows very little about the attacker. A
promising approach to reverse information asymmetry is Moving Target Defense
(MTD), whereby the defender dynamically updates system configurations to impede
the attacker's learning process. Although MTD has been successfully applied in
various domains, existing solutions typically assume an attacker with fixed
capabilities and behavioral patterns that are known to the defender. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop the foundations for the design
and analysis of robust MTD mechanisms that can provide a guaranteed level of
protection in the face of unknown and adaptive attacks. The proposed research
contributes to the emerging field of the science of security via a cross-
disciplinary approach that combines techniques from cybersecurity, game theory,
and machine learning. The investigator will disseminate the research findings to
industry to help impact real systems. Elements from this research are to be
incorporated into new courses on cybersecurity at Tulane University. The project
engages underrepresented students and K-12 students and provides rich research
experience to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing robust MTD
faces three major challenges induced by (1) the coupling of system dynamics and
incentives; (2) the hidden behavior of stealthy attacks; (3) the necessity of
coordinating multiple defenders in large systems. To tackle these challenges,
the investigator will focus on three interrelated thrust areas. In the first
thrust, a dynamic two-timescale MTD game that captures a variety of attack
patterns and feedback structures is designed and techniques for handling games
with large state spaces are investigated. In the second thrust, reinforcement
learning-based MTD policies for thwarting unknown attacks are studied. The focus
is on developing approximately optimal solutions with low complexity that can
effectively exploit the delayed and noisy feedback during the game. In the third
thrust, the MTD game and learning framework are extended to incorporate multiple
attackers and defenders, and information sharing and mediation schemes for
enabling coordinated MTD are investigated. The developed game models and defense
strategies are validated via testbed implementations and trace-driven
simulations. The research outcomes are expected to provide new insights and
novel mechanisms that will significantly advance our understanding of how
strategic thinking and learning can help achieve more adaptive cyber defense
against advanced attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.