* 1816594
* SHF: Small: Collaborative: Managing Software Evolution through Continuous Measuring and Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 302,794.00

Architecture degradation can have fundamental impacts on software quality and
productivity, resulting in substantial loss of time and money. It has been
estimated that failed and troubled software costs around 60 billion to 70
billion dollars per year in the United States alone, and recent research has
revealed that only 2%-6% of large projects are successful. None of these
problems happen overnight. Software evolves continuously, through numerous
maintenance tasks, such as fixing bugs and adding new features. Developers
typically are focused on their immediate tasks while the cumulative impacts of
their activities, as they affect the architecture, go unnoticed. Early symptoms
continuously evolve and grow in scope and significance until the system becomes
difficult to maintain. Numerous software metrics and measures have been proposed
to monitor software maintainability, but they have not yet achieved the
reliability needed for comparing and contrasting projects, or to signal early
symptoms of severe problems. Current techniques, which are largely based on
(static) syntactic dependencies, tend to report large numbers of false
positives. This makes it hard to pinpoint the true problems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a novel metric suite for source code
assessment based on options theory, accompanied by a suite of evolution history
measures using maintenance tasks as first-class entities. The project will also
develop a hotspot detection method to capture early symptoms of architecture
flaws before the software becomes unmanageably buggy and costly to repair. This
project has the potential to revolutionize how software systems are monitored
and managed, potentially resulting in substantial savings for development
organizations, and resulting in a more disciplined, controlled process of
software evolution and maintenance. The proposed metrics and tools will be
integrated with widely-used software management tools, such as Bitbucket and
Github, potentially impacting hundreds of thousands of software projects. The
industrial benchmark will establish a Software Heath Chart against which any
software project can make a comparison. The methods produced from this research
can be used in software design and maintenance education, providing pedagogical
tools with scientific foundations. The empirical basis for this research will
provide an industry-wide foundation for reasoning about software evolution and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.