* 1816837
* SHF: Small: Principled Compiling and Linking for Multi-Language Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 505,802.00

When building large software systems, programmers should be able to use the best
language for each part of the system. But when a component written in one
language becomes part of a multi-language system, it may interoperate with
components that have features that don't exist in the original language. This
affects programmers when they refactor code (i.e., make changes that should
result in equivalent behavior). Since programs interact after compilation to a
common target, programmers have to understand details of linking and target-
level interaction when reasoning about correctly refactoring source components.
Unfortunately, there are no software toolchains available today that support
single-language reasoning when components are used in a multi-language system.
This project will develop principled software toolchains for building multi-
language software. The project's novelties include (1) designing language
extensions that allow programmers to specify how they wish to interoperate (or
link) with conceptual features absent from their language through a mechanism
called linking types, and (2) developing compilers that formally guarantee that
any reasoning the programmer does at source level is justified after compilation
to the target. The project has the potential for tremendous impact on the
software development landscape as it will allow programmers to use a language
close to their problem domain and provide them with software toolchains that
make it easy to compose components written in different languages into a multi-
language software system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate the
idea of linking types by extending ML with linking types for interaction with
Rust, a language with first-class control, and a normalizing language, and
developing type preserving compilers to a common typed LLVM-like target
language. The project will design a rich dependently typed LLVM-like target
language that can encapsulate effects from different source languages to support
fully abstract compilation from these languages. The project will also
investigate reporting of cross-language type errors to aid programmers when
composing components written in different languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.