* 1816365
* RI: Small: Diverse Particles for Continuous Learning and Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Erik Sudderth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,163.00

Scientific and technological problems require representing and reasoning about
many spatial and temporal relationships. Examples tasks include: from video
data, tracking the full articulated pose of humans performing various
activities; from specification of a robotic manipulation goal, identify feasible
and efficient motion plans; from an input sequence of amino acids, and low-
resolution observations provided by modern imaging technologies, predicting the
3D structures into which proteins are most likely to fold. However, as problems
grow in size and complexity, current algorithms for handling this kind of
continuous data become intractable. The proposed work will overcome this problem
by creating a new class of algorithms, called "particle-based belief
propagation", that efficiently handles continuous relational data. Broader
impacts of the project include the creation of educational materials targeting
graduate and undergraduate courses, as well as community outreach to local
middle and high school students. The project's open source statistical software
also enables a number of important real-world applications, which are explored
via diverse teams of undergraduate and graduate students. This work may
contribute to technological problems like the development of autonomous robots
and vehicles, and scientific problems like the study of diseases caused by
incorrect folding of proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical research
significantly advances the theory and practice of message-passing algorithms for
inference in graphical models with non-Gaussian, continuous variables. This work
will substantially generalize a recently developed family of diverse particle
belief propagation inference algorithms, that replace the (unstable) stochastic
resampling of classic particle filters with provably accurate discrete
optimization. The first research aim is to explore a number of improvements to
the computational algorithms, and supporting theory, that enables effective
particle-based inference. Motivated by problems where precise quantification of
posterior uncertainty is important, the project generalizes existing work on
"max-product" belief propagation optimization to support "sum-product" belief
propagation integration, and "mixed-product" updates for more general inference
queries. The project also generalizes prior work on discrete graphical models to
study how errors made in local messages propagate throughout the model.
Furthermore, the researchers study how particle-based inference can enable new
types of loss-sensitive structured learning for continuous estimation problems,
including semi-supervised learning from partially labeled training
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.