* 1816943
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Reliable 60 GHz WLANs through Coordination: Measurement, Modeling and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Zizhan Zheng, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 235,912.00

Although wireless networks have advanced significantly over the last few years,
newly emerging applications such as augmented/virtual reality and ultra high-
definition video streaming and the continuous growth of mobile and wearable
devices are leading to higher than ever mobile traffic demand. It is becoming
apparent that today's wireless networks (such as 2.4/5 GHz Wi-Fi) are struggling
to satisfy the demand and there is a need for designing the next generation of
wireless networks that can provide significantly higher data rates in a reliable
manner. Wireless communication using the 60 GHz unlicensed millimeter-wave
spectrum has shown the potential to bridge this gap by providing multi-gigabit
per second data rates. Designing enterprise-grade 60 GHz millimeter-wave
wireless networks is challenging due to directionality and severe performance
degradations observed in presence of human blockages. The main objective of this
project is to design proactive blockage mitigation techniques based on network
coordination that can enable high data rate wireless links while ensuring
reliability in presence of mobility and blockages. The project will have
immediate impact on research and development of high-speed millimeter-wave
mobile wireless networks. It will result in hands-on wireless networking
research experience for undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to investigate a novel class of
proactive blockage mitigation techniques based on coordination between the
access points of 60 GHz WLANs. The proposed research exploits joint
transmissions from multiple access points to mobile devices. With intelligent
selection of access points and antenna sectors, such joint transmissions can
provide adequate spatial diversity and separation of angle-of-arrival, resulting
in robust communication in presence of self-body blockages. The project will use
measurements, modeling and optimization to design, analyze and evaluate joint
transmissions. First, multi-state performance degradation models for link
blockages will be developed using measurements. The models will be used to
design novel reliability metrics for assessing the robustness provided by joint
transmissions. Second, based on the measurement-driven models, a joint access
point selection and link scheduling problem will be studied with the aim of
maximizing network throughput taking into account reliability-spatial reuse
trade-offs. Third, the impact of joint transmissions on link layer delay will be
studied using measurements on 360-degree live video streaming over 60 GHz links,
and delay sensitive scheduling strategies will be investigated. The proposed
research will be evaluated using 60 GHz off-the-shelf devices and a software-
radio platform with phased antenna arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.