* 1816006
* Intergalactic Archaeology: Decoding the Relics of Reionization in the Intergalactic Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Joseph Hennawi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2023
* USD 482,432.00

The first sources of light formed several hundred million years after the Big
Bang, ending what astronomers refer to as the cosmic dark ages. In the 2010
Decadal Survey, the US astronomy community designated the study of this epoch as
a core science objective. This project will obtain new constraints on this epoch
and the first sources of light by applying novel methods to astronomical data
collected with the largest telescopes. These data will be compared to state-of-
the-art supercomputer models to yield new insights into cosmic history. This
project will support the research of a PhD student, partially support a
postdoctoral scholar, and engage undergraduates from two hispanic serving
institutions in cutting edge astronomical research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining exactly how and when reionization occurred are
among the most important open questions in cosmology. Absorption spectroscopy of
new large statistical samples of high-z quasars has tremendous untapped
potential. This project will study the statistical properties of Ly-alpha;
absorption in the spectra of z ~ 6 quasars. By leveraging the recent fivefold
increase in the number of such quasars, archival data, new methodologies and
simulations, this project will enable precise measurements of hundreds of quasar
spectra. This project will: 1) reconstruct the reionization history at a
precision that far surpasses existing methods, 2) measure the ionizing photon
output from galaxies up to the end stages of reionization, 3) measure the amount
of heat that was injected into the intergalactic medium by reionization,
providing new insights into what sources (galaxies, AGN, Pop. III stars) re-
ionized the Universe, 4) measure the distribution of quasar lifetimes, 5)
spectroscopically characterize a statistical sample of recently discovered young
quasars. The overarching goal is to elevate quantitative study of the
intergalactic medium to be on the same solid methodological and statistical
footing as other precision cosmological measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.