* 1816382
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Decentralized Active Goal Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Christopher Amato, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 469,987.00

Autonomous systems often need to coordinate with other sensors, robots,
autonomous cars, and people. This results in multi-agent systems, in which
agents must be able to determine what others are currently doing and predict
what they will be doing in the future. This task of plan and goal recognition,
typically relies upon a passive observer that continually observes the multi-
agent system. In many real-world systems, such as assistive robotics in the
home, this is not practical. Real-world systems will require active goal
recognition, where information has a cost, and other tasks are pursued and
completed continuously during goal recognition. For example, consider a team of
robots assisting a disabled or an elderly person. The robots must fetch items
and clean areas, while also opening doors or otherwise escorting the person. The
agents will have to balance completion of their own tasks with information
gathering about the target person's behavior. Current goal recognition methods
cannot solve this active goal recognition problem. Furthermore, in realistic
multi-agent domains including agricultural applications, disaster assistance, or
military settings, communication will be limited or noisy. This will require
decentralized active goal recognition methods where agents make choices based on
their own limited viewpoints. Developing such active goal recognition methods
will be the focus of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
research will develop new methods for active goal recognition to allow teams of
agents to coordinate with other systems. The project will develop methods for:
active goal recognition, combining the observer's planning problem with goal
recognition to balance information gathering with task completion for a single
agent (observer) and single target, decentralized active goal recognition,
combining multi-agent planning for the observers with goal recognition to
balance information gathering with task completion and coordination for multiple
observer agents and a single target agent, and decentralized active goal
recognition of multiple targets, combining multi-agent planning for the
observers with goal recognition to balance information gathering with task
completion and coordination for multiple observer agents and target agents. The
research will develop a range of methods that are based on classical,
information-theoretic and decision- theoretic planning that exploit the special
structure in our problem. The work will be tested on a range of common
benchmarks, against current methods and in multi-robot domains to ensure
realistic experiments. This research will consider active goal recognition
(combining an observer's planning problem with goal recognition of a target) in
single-agent and decentralized multi-agent environments. The resulting work will
greatly extend the usefulness of goal recognition, making it realistic to use in
scenarios when information gathering has a cost and other tasks may need to be
completed by the observer(s).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.