* 1816904
* The Einstein@Home search for new neutron stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Bruce Allen, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2024
* USD 532,687.00

Einstein@Home is a volunteer distributed computing project. When otherwise idle,
home computers download astronomical data from the Einstein@Home servers, search
it for weak signals, and upload the results. The aim of Einstein@Home is to
discover new neutron stars, using gravitational wave data from the advanced LIGO
and Virgo observatories, gamma-ray data from the Fermi Satellite, and radio data
from the Arecibo Observatory and other radio telescopes. Neutron stars, the
targets of this search, are extreme objects formed in supernova explosions.
Although they are only about ten miles in diameter, they are more massive than
the Sun. So far, most neutron stars have been discovered via pulsations that
occur when their beamed electromagnetic emission regularly sweeps past the
earth. However, while it is believed that the Milky Way contains about a hundred
million neutron stars, fewer than 3000 have been detected so far. Gravitational
waves might well be the only way to unveil this invisible population of extreme
objects. A project run by the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee has three
goals to use Einstein@Home to (1) Make the first direct detection of
gravitational waves from spinning neutron stars, and thus to observe these stars
via a completely different physical mechanism, which would carry important new
information about their internal structure and composition. (2) Make use of new
high-frequency radio data from the MeerKAT telescope array in South Africa to
discover neutron stars near the Galactic center. These would give the community
a way to study the supermassive black hole that resides there, as well as the
dense and active region around it. (3) Use gamma-ray data to identify radio-
quiet millisecond gamma-ray pulsars, providing new evidence about the evolution
and emission of pulsars. Einstein@Home is an outstanding public outreach effort,
allowing people world-wide to contribute directly to exciting and cutting-edge
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since it began, Einstein@Home
volunteers have donated more than 3 billion CPU-core hours of computing time to
the project. Using typical costing (cloud providers like Amazon, or super-
computing centers) this represents more than 100 million dollars of computing
time. This award also funds the continued operations and further development of
Einstein@Home, including maintenance and administration of the central hardware
and software infrastructure, the handling and post-processing of LIGO, Virgo,
Fermi and radio data, and the design and implementation of improved search
methods. The detection of continuous gravitational waves will provide glimpses
into the invisible population of neutron stars that inhabits our Galaxy and shed
light on their internal structure and evolutionary history. The discovery of new
neutron stars in short period binaries and near the Galactic center will improve
our understanding of stellar evolution and populations, help study the black
hole at the Galactic center, and provide stringent tests of general relativity.
Discovery of new millisecond radio pulsars will improve the ability of "pulsar
timing arrays" to detect low-frequency gravitational
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.