* 1816514
* CHS: Small: Functional Proceduralization of 3D Geometric Models
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bedrich Benes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,937.00

While computational power and digital storage availability have increased
tremendously in recent decades, the creation of useful 3D digital content is
still difficult. Although we can find huge collections of existing 3D models on
the Internet, these models are typically geometrically disorganized which
severely limits their utility. The vision underlying this research is to
facilitate semi-automatic, controllable content creation and editing of large
and complex 3D models for use in digital simulation, visualization,
entertainment, education, and cultural heritage, by converting unstructured data
into organized and easily editable representations. With that goal in mind, this
project will create digital tools that proceduralize a geometric model provided
as input into a set of meaningful rules and their parameters so that the model
is compact, can be altered in an intuitive way, and is fast to render. Project
outcomes are expected to have broad impact in computer graphics applications
spanning a wide variety of domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology
underlying this work is to find a procedural representation (i.e., algorithm,
rule set, and parameter values) that can generate a given input model while
considering its function. A key novelty of the approach is the automatic
production of a procedural representation and the learning of the function as
well as the semantic structure of the object. The project will explore
generation both of procedural representations in programming languages such as
Python and Java Script and by using novel procedural representations such as
adaptive geometric graph grammars or extensions to shape and split grammars. As
a result, the methodology will help content creation by enabling the generation
of functionally-valid variants of the same object, exposing parameters for
performing high-level or low-level alterations, and completing the object with
plausible details. The work will proceed with three main components: atomization
(discovery of the atomic, or terminal, elements of the input model);
patternization (finding and enumerating the parameterized rules and/or the
parameter values that are collectively used to produce the input object); and
synthetization (providing algorithms and tools to enable the efficient and
intuitive generation of synthetic variations of the input object or
objects).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.