* 1816380
* CHS: Small: Teachable Object Recognizers for the Blind
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Hernisa Kacorri, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 497,653.00

Identifying objects, from packages of food to items of clothing, is an everyday
task that we perform predominantly using our sense of sight. Blind persons, for
whom sighted help is not available, attempt such tasks using a combination of
senses, strategies, and ad hoc organizing systems. In recent years, members of
the blind community have been early adopters of mobile apps that use image
recognition for identifying objects. However, such solutions currently have
limited use for many objects of interest, because image recognizers cannot
provide enough granularity to distinguish among all possible objects of interest
across all users. They also tend to be trained on images taken by sighted people
with different background clutter, scale, viewpoints, occlusion, and image
quality than in photos taken by blind users. The goal of this research is to
empower blind users to customize the recognition task to their objects of
interest, photo-taking strategies, and environment, through a new approach
called teachability which holds the promise of allowing end users that are non-
experts to provide the training examples for the machine learning models in
these applications. Specifically, a teachable object recognizer (TOR) app will
be designed, deployed and publicly released that blind users can train by
providing labels along with a few examples of their objects through a
smartphone's camera. If successful, project outcomes will have broad impact by
changing the nature of smart assistive technologies by empowering people with
disabilities to define the functionality of such technologies, especially for
small recognition tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the data
scarcity issue in accessibility through teachability, where end users teach
models pretrained on more available yet less relevant data, with fewer but more
pertinent data specific to their needs. The work will examine the concept of
teachability in the context of object recognition for the blind, and will
investigate whether accessibility research can leverage advances in computer
vision with limited data from blind users. Questions to be explored will
include: How to best explain such intelligent systems to users for higher
quality training data? What is the best way to measure their efficacy? What
design parameters, sensing modalities, interactions, and algorithms are most
influential on their success? The project will include a variety of research
methods: surveys, participatory design sessions, prototype usability testing,
lab-based user studies, and longitudinal real-world evaluation with blind users.
Using a working prototype mobile application on teachable object recognition, it
will investigate accessible interactions on learning-to-train and examine the
underlying mechanisms by which robustness and scalability of such teachable
assistive technologies can be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.