* 1816462
* A New View of the Chemical Evolution of Nearby Galaxies with Keck and VLT Integral Field Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Karin Sandstrom, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 09/30/2022
* USD 252,862.00

As stars evolve, they produce and distribute heavy elements (i.e. elements
heavier than helium) into the interstellar gas. Over time, the heavy element
content builds up in a galaxy, increasing the metallicity of the gas.
Metallicity has an important role in governing how galaxies form new stars.
Metallicity can also change because of inflow of gas from the galaxy's
surroundings and outflows of gas from the galaxy disk caused by intense bursts
of star formation. Once it is in a galaxy, gas with varying metallicity is mixed
together by turbulence and flows. The local metallicity in a galaxy therefore
reflects the competition between all of these factors. These investigators will
study the region-to-region variation of metallicity in nearby galaxies to learn
about how these important processes shape the heavy element content of galaxies.
The PI will also lead a program of professional development and mentoring for
incoming transfer students to the physical sciences at UC San Diego with the
goal of increasing their participation in undergraduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will make the next critical step forward
in measuring ISM metallicities in nearby galaxies using new integral field
spectroscopic observations performed with the Keck Cosmic Web Imager (KCWI) and
the Very Large Telescope Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (VLT-MUSE). These
instruments will obtain high sensitivity, fully-sampled maps of the 3500-9300
Angstrom optical spectrum allowing detailed metallicity studies using
temperature-sensitive auroral emission lines of oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur.
Previous studies have been limited in their assessment of metallicity due the
faintness of the spectral lines needed for accurate metallicity diagnostics. The
investigators will use the KCWI and MUSE observations to study metallicity
inhomogeneity as a function of galaxy properties such as morphology, specific
star formation rate and presence of a stellar bar and they will compare these
observations to predictions from galaxy simulations and theory. To broaden
participation in science, the PI will lead a series of workshops for transfer
students in the physical sciences at UC San Diego to provide training in
research skills and guidance in finding research positions. The PI will also
initiate organized data collection to track the career path of transfer
students. This dataset will be used to assess the effectiveness of the program
and develop further strategies for increasing the fraction of underrepresented
minorities who pursue advanced degrees in the physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.