* 1816614
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Static Analysis Infrastructure for Variability-Aware Bug Detection and Translation of Highly-Configurable Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Paul Gazzillo, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 10/31/2018
* USD 229,087.00

Highly-configurable systems, e.g., the Linux kernel, form our most critical
infrastructure, underpinning everything from high-performance computing clusters
to IoT devices. Keeping these systems secure and reliable with automated tools
is essential. However, tool support is lacking for such systems because of the
complexity and scale of their configurability. This leaves some of the most
critical software with some of the least tool support. The problem is that most
software tools are not variability-aware; that is, they do not account for the
many configurations of the software. Serious defects, including null pointer
errors and buffer overflows, can and do appear in specific configurations,
making them hard to find without accounting for variability. The goal of this
project is to advance the state of the art for systems development and
debugging, resulting in more secure and less error-prone systems, benefiting the
millions who rely on highly-configurable software
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve these challenges, this project
aims to develop the infrastructure, analysis techniques, and language support
for debugging and maintaining configurable software systems written in C-family
languages, currently lacking for software developers. The first part of the
project is to develop a front-end infrastructure that captures these sources of
variability in a new intermediate representation. Such reusable infrastructure
is crucial to the development of state-of-the-art analyses. The second part
seeks to create variability-aware versions of static analyses and propose new
inter-procedural analyses that enable tradeoffs between scalability and
precision. While static analysis has proven useful for detecting bugs,
accounting for configurations increases the complexity of analysis. Systematic
extensions to bug detection algorithms based on these new analyses can target
previously obscured bugs. Since the C preprocessor has long been recognized as a
source of problems, the third part of this project is to develop new language
extensions to C, supplanting preprocessor usage and enabling compiler support
for variability specifications. Translators to the new language based on our
front-end analysis infrastructure will enable existing software to benefit from
the new language. The PIs on this project will mentor graduate students and are
committed to promoting female and under-represented minority participation.
Artifacts developed in this project will be used in courses to introduce
students to state-of-the-art software tool
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.