* 1816314
* AF:Small: Algorithms for Fast Simulation of Macromolecular Interaction Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Dmytro Kozakov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 460,000.00

Macro-molecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids, are the major building
blocks of the cell. Many macro-molecules perform their function by interacting
with each other. Characterizing these interactions helps elucidate how living
organisms function at the molecular level, contributes towards the development
of treatments against diseases such as cancer and facilitates the design of
novel bio-inspired materials. Detailed understanding of macro-molecular
interaction mechanisms requires determining the three-dimensional structures of
their complexes. These structures are very difficult to obtain using
experimental techniques, thus, computational approaches, called macro-molecular
docking, can be very useful. The investigator has developed fast and effective
algorithms and software that, according to the worldwide evaluation experiment
CAPRI (Critical Assessment of Predicted Interactions), are among the best for
predicting the structures of protein-protein complexes. These methods have been
implemented in the fully automated docking server ClusPro, which is free for
academic use, and has over 18,000 regular users. However, the current macro-
molecular docking tools are effective for mostly rigid macro-molecules that do
not significantly change conformation upon binding. This severely limits
applicability of the approach. The goal of this project is to develop new
algorithms for docking flexible molecules. Expanding the scope of the docking
approaches will lead to better understanding of fundamental biological questions
and will facilitate biochemical, biomedical, and biotechnology research. In
addition, the methods will be used in training graduate students and teaching
undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The docking problem
is to computationally determine the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of the complex
formed by two unbound macro-molecules, given their individual structures.
Solving this problem requires detailed sampling of an energy-based scoring
function over a complex search space. Due to the high cost of energy function
evaluation and the extremely rugged energy landscape the sampling is
computationally challenging. The goal of this proposal is to develop algorithms
for fast energy evaluation and corresponding sampling methods for the modeling
of interactions among flexible macro-molecules with many degrees of freedom. The
basic idea is to represent the molecular system as a forest (i.e., a set of
disjoint trees) of rigid clusters connected by hinges, calculating the
interaction energies for all relative orientations of all rigid clusters on
grids, and storing the calculated energy grids on the manifold of all rotational
and translational states. The energy of the system can be then obtained by
summing up the interaction energies extracted from the pre-calculated lookup
tables of cluster interaction energies. The key advantage of proposed approach
is a significant reduction in the cost of energy evaluation. In addition, the
search is performed on the manifold of appropriate dimension. The major
challenge for making the above approach applicable in practice is storing the
large interaction energy tables of rigid clusters in memory. To solve this
problem, the investigators will develop approaches and algorithms to compress
interaction energy data using wavelets, resulting in good accuracy, high level
of compression, and fast lookup speed. In addition, specialized sampling
algorithms using wavelet compressed energy grids on the search manifold will be
developed, and their application to flexible macro-molecular docking problems
will be studied. The developed algorithms will be evaluated for performance and
behavior. The approaches will be released as an open source software library, as
well as made available to end users of docking by means of the ClusPro
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.