* 1816805
* III: Small: Methods for Auditing and Enhancing Completeness of Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Licong Cui, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2019
* USD 309,454.00

An ontology is a formal representation of the knowledge by a set of concepts
(terms) and the relationships between those concepts within a domain of
specialty. Ontologies have been widely used for orchestrating the coding,
management, exchange, and sharing of the increasingly large amounts of digital
data produced by the biomedical research enterprise. For example, SNOMED CT, one
of the largest and most complex biomedical ontologies, supports the development
of high-quality electronic health records and facilitates patient subgroup
identification, clinical decision support, and healthcare delivery quality
measurement. Given such important roles that biomedical ontologies play, quality
issues (such as incompleteness in coverage of subclasses), if not addressed, can
affect the quality of diagnoses and decisions. However, incompleteness issues
such as missing hierarchical relations and missing concepts are infeasible to be
addressed by manual work alone due to the size and complexity of biomedical
ontologies. The goal of this project is to develop automated and scalable
approaches for identifying potential incompleteness issues as well as suggesting
solutions to fix them. This project will incorporate the computational aspects
of the proposed work into curriculum development and educational offerings
related to data science and promote women participation in data science.

To audit and enhance completeness of ontologies, this project explores the
following research tasks: (1) Development of a robust reasoning framework for
detecting and repairing missing subclass or hierarchical relations. This will
result in suggestions that directly enhances the subclass completeness of
ontologies; (2) Development of novel methods for identifying missing concepts
and creating appropriate name labels for the identified missing concepts. This
will result in enhancement in the concept completeness of ontologies; (3)
Generation of supporting evidence for suggested solutions by leveraging rich
extrinsic knowledge. For further verification of the robustness of the proposed
approaches, domain experts will be involved in validation of the discovered
incompleteness issues. The proposed approaches are applied to three large
ontologies in biomedicine: SNOMED CT, Gene Ontology, and NCI Thesaurus.
Suggested ontology changes will be communicated to the respective ontology
owners for incorporation in subsequent versions. The project website will
include further information about this project, and provide access to
publications, software, datasets and curriculum material.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.