* 1816540
* RI: Small: Exploiting Global Structure in Robot Decision Problems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Kris Hauser, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 01/31/2020
* USD 348,774.00

Some decision problems, like loading a dishwasher or assembling furniture,
require explicit planning about a sequence of steps, while others, like grasping
an object or swerving to avoid a stopped car, can be performed largely through
learned reflexes. In robotics, it is still poorly understood why some problems
require planning and why others can be solved via reflex. This project explores
how techniques from topology, a branch of mathematics, can be applied to study
the fundamental nature of robot decision problems. By developing algorithms that
apply topology to optimize, analyze, and visualize large datasets of robot
motions, the researchers hope to better understand the gray area between
planning and learning. Ultimately, this better understanding could help other
engineers develop more responsive, capable, and robust robot behaviors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this research is to analyze the
mathematical relation connecting robot decision problems to their solutions in
order to shed light on fundamental questions surrounding the connection between
motion planning and control learning. Breaking from the classical planning
paradigm of developing an algorithm that solves individual problem queries, the
project studies the global topological characteristics of continuous variations
of related problem instances. Specifically, it investigates how certain features
of topological complexity relate to the performance of learning and planning
algorithms. Based on this understanding, new algorithms, topological metrics,
and visualization techniques are developed to help exploit topological structure
for faster planning and more accurate learning. The proposed methods are
evaluated on benchmark problems in redundant inverse kinematics, legged robots,
and agile autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.