* 1816812
* SHF:Small:Scalable and Precise Program Analyses via Linear Conjunctive Language Reachability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Zhendong Su, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Static program analysis provides foundational and practical techniques to help
build reliable and secure software. Context-free language (CFL) reachability has
been widely adopted for specifying program analysis problems. However, little
foundational progress exists on advancing the CFL-reachability framework itself.
To support precise and scalable program analyses, an expressive, accessible
class of formal language reachability is needed to bridge fundamental formal
language research and practical analysis-based tool development. The project's
novelties are twofold: a new powerful formalism for specifying program analyses,
and algorithms and techniques for realizing a practical framework based on this
formalism. The project's impacts are deepened knowledge on and improved
capabilities for building precise and scalable static analyses, as well as
practical analyses for improving software reliability and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore linear conjunctive
language (LCL) reachability as a new static analysis formalism. In contrast to
CFLs, LCLs are closed under all set-theoretic operations and can also be
efficiently recognized in quadratic time. A significant number of advanced
program analyses need to match properties described by multiple CFLs
simultaneously. LCLs can precisely express many such properties, while CFLs
cannot because they are not closed under intersection. Thus, LCL reachability
offers a novel perspective in specifying and realizing program analyses. The
investigators' initial work on LCL-reachability has shown considerable promise,
leading to both more precise and orders of magnitude more scalable alias and
taint analysis, two widely-used analyses. This project aims to fully exploit
LCL-reachability's potentials by developing a unified solution for specifying
program analysis problems in LCL and implementing novel data structures that
support efficient LCL-reachability algorithms. It focuses on (1) theoretical
development of the LCL-reachability formulation, (2) efficient algorithms for
computing LCL-reachability, and (3) generalizing to practical program analyses.
If successful, this project will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in
software analysis and verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.