* 1816889
* III: Small: Using Location for Retrieving Text and Images in News And Social Media Posts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 516,000.00

The goal of this project is to enhance systems which make use of a map interface
to access documents such as news and social media postings. Most geographic
search systems require the user to enter the latitude and longitude of two
corners of the bounding box that encloses the region of interest. Some allow
locations to be specified by name, but the region associated with the name is
fixed in advance and is often different from the region that the user intends to
search. For example, a user might enter the location name "Los Angeles", hoping
the search for social media posts from the city. However, the system might be
designed to interpret "Los Angeles" to mean the greater Los Angeles area (too
large) or the geographic point center of the city (too small). This project will
create a system that overcomes these problems with text geographic queries. The
underlying textual data is accessed via a map query interface using direct
manipulation actions such as pan and zoom to navigate the data. The advantage of
these actions is that the act of pointing at a location (e.g., by the
appropriate positioning of a pointing device) and making the interpretation of
the precision of this positioning specification dependent on the zoom level is
equivalent to permitting spatial synonyms. This means that when searching for a
"rock concert in Manhattan", responses such as Harlem, New York City, and
Brooklyn are all acceptable when no concert is found in Harlem. The search for
Harlem is expanded by using its spatial synonyms since Harlem is contained in
Manhattan, New York City includes Manhattan, and Brooklyn is a sibling
(neighbor) of Manhattan. The location-oriented map-based provides a new paradigm
to reading and analyzing news and social media on a local level or global level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses challenges in: (1) Detecting tweets
or other social media posts about local events. This is difficult as only a few
people may be posting related tweets in contrast to global events where many
people post tweets thereby making it easier to detect global events. (2)
Improving the resolution of ambiguous location names when retrieving documents
using textually-specified locations by developing more appropriate precision and
recall evaluation metrics. (3) Enabling domain-specific tracking of mentions of
events such as crimes and diseases in news and social media such as Twitter over
time with the aid of heat maps which may have an impact on public safety and
health. (4) Allowing users to specify the desired domain as well as infer it by
use of exemplars. (5) Improving the method the NewsStand system, a prior
contribution of the investigator, uses clustering by using word2vec which makes
better use of semantics than the currently used TF-IDF. This clustering is used
for the actual documents and their associated images and videos, and enables the
detection of similar images based on semantics rather than local features such
as color and texture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.