* 1816965
* CIF: NSF-BSF: Small: Collaborative Research: Characterization and Mitigation of Noise in a Live DNA Storage Channel
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jehoshua Bruck, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 187,250.00

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is emerging as a potential solution to growing data
storage needs, due to recent advances in DNA synthesis and sequencing. Compared
to silicon-based storage, DNA offers higher density and data longevity. Data-
bearing DNA can be stored in non-biological environments (in vitro) or be
embedded into the DNA of living organisms such as bacteria or plants (in vivo).
In vivo DNA data storage benefits from a natural protective shell and a reliable
and cost-efficient way to copy data. Furthermore, the compatibility of in vivo
storage with living cells creates a potential for advances in synthetic-biology
algorithms that require a mechanism for data storage. The goal of this project
is to develop and demonstrate an in vivo DNA data storage system that is
resilient to errors arising during sequencing and synthesis and from mutations,
while achieving the maximum possible data density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve its goal, the project relies on the following research thrusts: 1)
Characterization of the live DNA channel and 2) Error mitigation and correction.
Errors in DNA storage are known to be context-dependent, i.e., they depend on
the local structure of the sequence. To enable error control, a mathematical
model for the channel of live DNA storage will be formulated and the dependence
of error rates on sequence context will be characterized. This project will take
advantage of new advances in gene-editing technologies, in particular the
CRISPR/Cas system, to characterize the channel through experiments. The second
thrust aims to overcome the limitations of the existing error-control
techniques, which either do not provide adequate error protection or are highly
redundant. The project will develop semiconstrained-coding techniques for
limiting the frequency of patterns with high error rates and high-rate error-
correction schemes for combating errors. The semiconstrained and error-
correction methods will be adapted to the live DNA channel and then implemented
to evaluate their performance in practice and to demonstrate their
advantages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.