* 1816838
* A Census of Starburst Regions in Luminous Infrared Galaxies as Unveiled by the Jansky VLA
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Aaron Evans, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 06/30/2022
* USD 343,315.00

Galaxy collisions are among the most energetic events in the local Universe.
They are ideal labs for studying strong bursts of star formation and the feeding
of giant central black holes. They also represent a preview to the future of the
Milky Way Galaxy, which will collide with the Andromeda Galaxy in 5 billion
years. The collision process produces debris that hide much of the activity from
optical telescopes. In this study, a subset of the most extreme nearby colliding
galaxies are observed with the upgraded Very Large Array to create detailed
radio maps of their hidden star-forming regions. The measured properties of
these regions will be compared with those in normal galaxies. This will allow a
determination of the physical conditions that make star formation in galaxy
collisions so extreme. Concurrent with the above study, the PI will lead the
Charlottesville part of the successful National Astronomy Consortium (NAC). The
NAC is an undergraduate program designed to increase the number of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Participating students work on research
projects and receive long-term career mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-redshift luminous infrared galaxies (LIRGs)
are the sites of gas-rich galaxy interactions and mergers, and are prime systems
for studying the environments of extreme starbursts and nascent active galactic
nuclei (AGN). Both phenomena occur in compact, dust-enshrouded regions that are
responsible for up to 99% of the bolometric luminosity of LIRGs. The present
proposal makes use of high- resolution, 2-37 GHz observations with the upgraded
Jansky VLA (JVLA) of a complete sample of IRAS RBGS LIRGs in the equatorial
range declination = +20 to -20 degrees. These data will be used to isolate their
compact, energetic regions and to characterize their physical properties
relative to star-forming regions in nearby normal star-forming galaxies. The
declination range of the sample ensures the legacy value of the dataset. Data
products will primarily be disseminated through the NASA Extragalactic Database.
The National Astronomy Consortium (NAC) is a program designed to increase the
number of students from underrepresented and underserved groups and those
otherwise overlooked by the traditional academic pipeline into STEM or STEM-
related careers. In addition to research opportunities, the NAC provides career
development and year-round mentorship of its participants. The PI will take on
the role as NAC Project Scientist and run the Charlottesville NAC site. NAC
students working under the research supervision of the PI will work on JVLA
observations of LIRGs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.