* 1816242
* CHS: Small: Innovation Through Analogical Search
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Aniket Kittur, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 516,000.00

Comparisons between two things are useful to support creative thinking and
reasoning. Many important breakthroughs in science and technology were driven by
analogy: observing water led the Greek philosopher Chrysippus to speculate that
sound was a wave phenomenon; an analogy to a bicycle allowed the Wright brothers
to design a steerable aircraft. Opportunities to find analogical breakthroughs
are exploding with the increased availability of online repositories of ideas
ranging from scientific papers to patents to the entire web. This project will
use computational tools to facilitate searching for analogies drawn from one
domain to help with innovative thinking and reasoning in another domain. The
goal is to dramatically accelerate innovation and discovery across domains as
diverse as science, humanities, mathematics, law, and design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research bridges the gap between the power of
large-scale text mining approaches, which excel at detecting surface similarity,
and the depth of human cognition, which is currently unsurpassed at detecting
deep analogical similarity. Investigators will explore how representations with
weaker structures are robust to issues of language complexity, hierarchies of
purposes, and levels of abstraction that are present in real-world documents
like research papers and R&amp;D documents. Using these representations,
investigators will build computational tools enabling users to connect problems
in one field with solutions from another field based on deep structure. Results
and algorithms could spur the development of new types of machine-learning
techniques that focus on deep structure, and may contribute back to theory in
the fields of creativity, problem solving, and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.