* 1816833
* SHF:SMALL:Collaborative Research: Exploring Nonvolatility of Emerging Memory Technologies for Architecture Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Yuan Xie, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,000.00

In modern computers, by combining the speed of traditional cache technology, the
density of traditional main memory technology, and the non-volatility of flash
memory, a new class of emerging byte-addressable nonvolatile memories (NVMs)
have great potential to be used as the universal memories of the future. Such
memory types include technologies such as phase-change memory, spin-transfer-
torque magnetoresistive memory, and resistive memory. As these emerging memory
technologies mature, it is important for computer architects to understand their
pros and cons in a comprehensive manner in order to improve the performance,
power, and reliability of future computer systems incorporating these systems
which will be used in various application domains. Yet, most of previous
research on NVM architecture is focused only on the performance, power, and
density benefits and how to overcome challenges, such as write overhead and
wearout issues. The non-volatility characteristic of NVM technologies is not
fully explored. Therefore, this project examines how to exploit the non-
volatility characteristic that distinguishes the emerging NVM technologies from
traditional memory technologies, and investigate new memory architecture design
with novel applications.

The goal of this project is to advance the memory architecture design of various
types of computer systems with a full exploration of the non-volatility
characteristic of NVM technologies across architecture, system, and application
levels. To this end, the project explores the design space of various types of
computer systems, ranging from severs to embedded systems. In particular, the
project identifies and addresses design issues in nonvolatile cache
architecture, re-architects main memory structure to leverage the non-volatility
characteristic to improve system performance and energy consumption, supports
persistent memory systems in various use cases with emerging NVM technologies,
and studies near-data-computing techniques applied for these NVM technologies.
The successful outcome of this research is expected to provide the design
guidelines for enabling both large capacity and fast-bandwidth nonvolatile
memory/storage, which are beyond the present state-of-the-art. Consequently, the
research will spawn new applications involving the computation on the exascale
of data, e.g., data mining, machine learning, visual or auditory sensory data
recognition, bio-informatics, etc.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.