* 1816966
* CHS: Small: Designing verbal and nonverbal behaviors to increase immediacy and rapport in virtual tutors
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Ning Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,974.00

Charisma is an effective form of communication and a powerful device of
persuasion. In classrooms, teachers use charismatic devices to inspire students
and help them learn. A teacher's verbal behavior (such as the use of humor) and
nonverbal behavior (such as the use of gaze, gesture, and facial expressions)
have consistently demonstrated a positive impact on students' cognitive and
affective learning. In fact, a teacher's charisma, often studied in the context
of immediacy behaviors in an educational context, is one of the biggest factors
contributing to a teacher's efficacy. For the future workforce, learning is
increasingly taking place in virtual and online classrooms, such as Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs). Being able to bring such charismatic behaviors to
virtual tutors in online environments could greatly increase student learning.
To that end, this project will investigate the design of such charismatic
behaviors and will measure the efficacy of a charismatic virtual tutor in
fostering student motivation and engagement and in improving learning outcomes.
In addition to its applications to virtual and online education, the charismatic
behavior studied through this project can be applied to many applications where
technology provides devices of persuasion, including negotiation and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the important issue of how
to realize immediacy, one of the biggest factors contributing to teacher
efficacy, in online and virtual environments. The team will break down
charismatic behavior into both verbal and nonverbal communication devices that
can be executed by virtual agents. These devices will then be evaluated and
implemented in virtual agents through a number of activities. First, the team
will develop scripted tutorial dialogue for a virtual tutor based on existing
literature on charisma and teacher immediacy. State-of-the-art speech synthesis
will then be used to develop a charismatic voice for the virtual tutor. Finally,
a suite of procedural animation tools, such as Smartbody and Cerebella, will be
used to generate nonverbal gestures that contribute to perceived charisma. The
project will take the approach of iterative design, with behavior generated at
each phase empirically evaluated on its impact on perceived charisma and student
learners and used to inform the design of agent behaviors in the next
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.