* 1816620
* CHS:III:Small:Designing Visual Representations to Mitigate Potential Cognitive Biases in Complex Decision-Making Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ronald Metoyer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 485,396.00

People often assess complex information to make decisions. For example,
reviewers assess student applications to make college admissions decisions. In
such cases, people can be subject to reasoning biases that may lead to unfair or
poor decisions. Visuals, such as charts and graphs, can be used to support such
complex processes. They can also help in countering some of the possible biases.
This research will study the potential biases and how to reduce their effects
with visual representations. The findings can be applied to support and improve
many complex decision-making applications, including the college admissions
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research project is to
identify and understand the potential cognitive biases in the holistic review
process through ethnographic studies and to devise corresponding debiasing
approaches using visualizations. This will be achieved through three primary
research phases. The first phase will employ a cognitive task analysis and
socio-organizational analysis to understand and characterize the holistic
admissions process in terms of the data and tasks involved as well as the
potential cognitive biases. In the second phase, the project team will explore
the potential of visual representations for mitigating several of the candidate
cognitive biases. Through systematic crowdsourced studies, the visual debiasing
approaches will be evaluated and will result in a set of guidelines for
integrating bias-mitigation strategies into visualization design. Finally, the
third phase of the project will test the resulting guidelines in practice. The
project team will design and develop a visual analysis tool for the holistic
admissions process that integrates the effective visual bias-mitigating
strategies. This tool will be evaluated through a three-month deployment
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.