* 1816426
* CHS: Small: Data-Driven Retention in Crowdsourced Image Analysis and Mapping
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Seth Cooper, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2022
* USD 494,899.00

This research aims to improve individual participation, retention, and repeat
engagement in citizen science image analysis. Improving engagement in citizen
science may accelerate the pace of problem solving and discovery by allowing
contributions from a larger group of people, broaden participation, and allow
new pathways for involvement for communities who may not otherwise have had
them. This project seeks to serve and build smaller regional non-profit
organizations that are vital to regional resilience by connecting participants
with organizations proposing projects and encouraging participant re-engagement
and collaboration. It will develop and deploy an open-source web platform and
toolkit for creating engaging citizen science projects. The motivating
application is disaster response, which has the potential for broader impact as
disasters are increasing in frequency and severity. However, the general
approaches can be applied more broadly in the citizen science, crowdsourcing,
human computation, and human-computer-interaction
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main research aims.
First, it will develop techniques to automatically improve the onboarding
process of online citizen science projects. This will help to understand the
impact of early tasks on longer-term engagement in such projects. Second, it
aims to develop a model of participant disengagement that can be used to guide
interventions that dynamically adjust to individual participants. These
interventions will be examined in the context of multiple tasks types, limited
participant history, and relevant diversions within the workflow. Third, while
most crowdsourced citizen science projects are driven by formal academic
researchers and large-scale organizations, a goal of this project is to build a
research platform where small to medium scale community based organizations can
set the research agenda and explore the different questions and aims they
pursue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.