* 1816851
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Adversarial ML in Traffic Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Wright, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 515,840.00

Surveillance and tracking on the Internet are growing more pervasive and
threaten privacy and freedom of expression. The Tor anonymity system protects
the privacy of millions of users, including ordinary citizens, journalists,
whistle-blowers, military intelligence, police, businesses, and people living
under censorship and surveillance. Unfortunately, Tor is vulnerable to website
fingerprinting (WF) attacks in which an eavesdropper uses a machine learning
(ML) classifier to identify which website the user is visiting from its traffic
patterns. The research team's state-of-the-art WF attack using a deep learning
classifier reaches 98% accuracy, which is deeply concerning to Tor and its
users. The goal of this project is to explore the new landscape of WF attacks
and defenses in light of the team's findings with deep learning. A key aspect of
the work is to build upon recent advances in fooling deep learning classifiers
and apply these new findings to the context of anonymity systems. Based on this
focus on adversarial machine learning, the project will create a new course and
an accessible summer camp module on the topic, as well as launch a podcast on
Cybersecurity Research featuring interviews with top researchers in the fields
of adversarial machine learning and anonymity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
has three thrusts. First, the team is exploring the impact that these attacks
can have for Tor users by addressing how the attacks can generalize to different
network conditions and Tor versions, how they can be better adapted to realistic
settings, and how they are impacted by real-world user behaviors in Tor. Second,
since recent work has shown that it is possible to reliably fool deep learning
classifiers, the team is studying how to adapt these techniques for robust and
efficient defense. Prior work has primarily been in the image classification
domain, whereas network traffic is more challenging to manipulate, so the team
is designing new methods that account for this difference. In the third thrust,
recognizing that researchers are actively seeking robust classifiers that are
harder to fool, the team aims to understand new ways to build robust classifiers
and explore their properties. While this aspect of the project means potentially
finding stronger WF attacks against Tor, robust classifiers would be helpful for
the myriad applications of deep learning, such as self-driving cars, stylometry,
malware detection, processing drone and satellite imagery, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.