* 1816408
* Statistical Methods in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Juraj Foldes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 123,446.00

Most natural phenomena involve interactions of many particles and exhibit
chaotic dynamics and strong sensitivity to parameters as well as to exterior
influences such as thermal fluctuations. Additionally, in many vital areas of
application, notably in geology or astrophysics, direct detailed observations
are not available. The chaotic microscopic behavior can give rise, however, to
very robust macroscopic structures, for example, the great red spot on Jupiter
or pattern formation in chemical reactions, which can be studied by methods of
statistical physics. A rigorous derivation of the existence and properties of
such coherent patterns from the fundamental laws of physics is a notoriously
difficult problem that requires additional assumptions that select typical
solutions. These assumptions frequently include an addition of randomness, which
models unknown influences, or a condition that the system equally explores all
possible states. Then the existence and properties of statistical steady states
of complex systems is accessible mathematically. This research project explores
and further develops this important class of mathematical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project branches in two directions. The first
part focuses on properties of statistical invariant states for stochastically
forced systems, especially their stability, dependence on parameters, and
distribution on the state space. Special attention is given to the structure of
the introduced forcing, as it is crucial for application, where the noise might
act only in parts of the physical space or be localized is some scales. Although
mainly problems arising from fluid dynamics are explored, equations originating
in biology and chemistry are also considered. The second branch aims to gain
more insight into the problems for which the addition of random forcing is not
well motivated or it causes undesired behavior of the model, such as blow-up.
Assuming the ergodic hypothesis, the large deviation principle implies that the
system evolves toward thermodynamic equilibrium, and statistical solutions can
be viewed as maximizers of an entropy, which effectively transforms evolution
equations to variational problems. The analysis of stability, observability, and
qualitative properties of these so-called Gibbs states relies on variational
methods, bifurcation theory, and investigation of associated Euler-Lagrange
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.