* 1816028
* SaTC: CORE: Small: New Approaches to Decentralized Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Abhi Shelat, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Recently, Google and Apple have deployed large systems for differentially
private collection and analysis of decentralized user data. These systems use a
local model of privacy in which no sensitive user data is collected. This local
model enjoys many implementation advantages, but does not capture the most
expressive private algorithms. These more expressive private algorithms
inherently require a central model of privacy, in which a trusted party agrees
to collect the sensitive data and reveal only the outcome of some private
algorithm. Finding a trusted aggregator can be problematic in many applications.
This project specifically addresses this tension by using cryptography to design
and implement scalable secure protocols for the statistical analysis of
decentralized user data that combine the best features of the central and local
models of privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces and studies a
novel intermediate model for decentralized privacy based on anonymous
computation. Protocols in this model enjoy the same simplicity as protocols in
the local model of privacy, but bypass some of the limitations of protocols in
the local model. For functionalities that cannot be achieved in this
intermediate model, this project designs tailored secure cryptographic to
implement these functionalities without a trusted data collector, while
overcoming the high communication, computation, and round complexity overheads
of generic protocols. The investigators will involve graduate and undergraduate
students in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.