* 1816145
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research:Toolkits for Aging in Place for Older Retirees (TAIPOR)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Amanda Lazar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 245,461.00

CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Tools for Aging in Place for Older Retirees
(TAIPOR)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many older people want to live in their
homes for as long as possible. This research will find what technology retired
older adults want to use in their homes. Toolkits will be created so people can
make the technologies look and act the way they want them to. Older retirees
will be able to design their own technologies. Workshops and reading materials
will help people learn to design these technologies.&lt;br/&gt; The aim of
TAIPOR is to assess older adults? interest in pervasive computing while
supporting them in designing and creating their own aging in place technologies.
The TAIPOR research team will improve aging in place technologies by
investigating the perceived usefulness and limitations of current Internet of
Things (IoT). Findings will inform the development of a toolkit that enables
older retirees to easily integrate electronics into everyday objects. The
researchers will utilize in-home longitudinal, qualitative methods with short-
term participatory design workshops to develop the toolkit. TAIPOR will leverage
the untapped potential of older retirees who are interested in learning about
STEM, but do not currently have the opportunities or the workforce support that
younger individuals often have.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.