* 1816325
* III: Small: Domain-Agnostic Dataset Search
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Haiyan Jia, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 515,770.00

Today, the size of the Web is such that one cannot imagine finding much
information without a web search engine. Similarly, the number of collections of
public datasets now available has become so large as to be difficult for a
researcher to track all of them within his or her discipline, and impossible to
do so across disciplines. To help searchers find data in a discipline-agnostic
manner, this project will investigate new, promising approaches to full-content
dataset search. This research will provide the technology and develop the
prototype of a tool that can ultimately assist many kinds of scientists to
locate data that they can use to perform exploratory analysis and test
hypotheses. Thus, this work will enable public dataset discovery and reuse,
regardless of who produced the data or where it is stored. A dataset search
engine using these methods benefits society by helping researchers to accelerate
their work and reduce duplicate efforts. It will also benefit others, such as
data journalists, as data promises a new source of evidence and for story
discovery, a new way for story-telling and fact-checking, to make reporting that
is both meaningful and trustworthy. This work will help any data analyst locate
relevant datasets. This project will impact the training of graduate students
and undergraduates. This involvement will make it possible to broaden
participation by underrepresented groups and the development of educational
materials. The researchers will incorporate results of this work in courses,
including Data Science, Web Search Engines, Data Journalism, and Semantic Web
Topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing dataset search services are cumbersome,
focusing on searching descriptions, not data, and cater to searchers looking
within their own discipline. The project's goal is to develop a prototype
dataset search engine incorporating new techniques for full-content indexing to
enable searchers to find data across the web, regardless of domain. The
investigators will combine principles and novel methods from information
retrieval, databases, and data mining. The design and development of the
prototype will also take a user-centric approach, involving professionals and
practitioners in observational, interview and experimental studies to inform and
guide this process. The outcomes of this work include: (1) The development of
new principles, methods, and technologies for the construction of search indexes
from hundreds of thousands of real-world public datasets: the researchers will
create novel methods for a) full-content indexing and analysis, b) inferring
additional metadata such as attribute names when the existing descriptors are
lacking and, c) inferring additional descriptors that can be used to resolve
schema and data heterogeneity. (2) The understanding of searchers' cognitive
processes as they search for and consider use of datasets. A social cognitive
model will be built to describe human-system interactions in dataset searches,
and to predict the effectiveness of the system in various scenarios. (3) The
development of novel interfaces to support the search, exploration, and
presentation of datasets to such users. Through this process, the researchers
will develop a set of instruments for evaluating the dataset search technology
and interface from the user's perspective. Research results will be disseminated
broadly by presenting and publishing at conferences and journals, sharing on the
web, giving talks, and making developed software open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.