* 1816375
* SaTC: CORE: Small: API-centric Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Thomas Shrimpton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Cryptography is a core component of modern technology. It protects internet
transactions, hides usernames and passwords as they traverse networks, protects
the data residing on mobile devices and computer disk drives, and much more. The
systems that cryptographic mechanisms are tasked with protecting are typically
very complex, with many interacting parts and a large number of places that may
be vulnerable (often called the "attack surface"). One element of this large
attack surface is the connection (or disconnection) between the mathematical
algorithms that researchers design and the software that purports to implement
these powerful algorithms. When the software fails to accurately implement the
mathematical algorithms, much can go wrong in practice. This has led to real-
world attacks, even though mathematics proves that no such attacks should be
possible. The two main themes of this research are: (1) to develop a broad and
deep view of just how prevalent these disconnections are between the
mathematical algorithms and their implementation, and (2) to reshape the way
that researchers think about their theoretical efforts, so that what they
develop is harder for software developers to get wrong, easier to understand,
and easier to validate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, to date the onus
is on the security engineers and developers to understand and correctly realize
the cryptographic primitives and protocols that are provably secure in theory,
and to reshape their existing code base and application programming interfaces
(APIs) as required. This project explores an alternative viewpoint: as real-
world libraries and their APIs are necessarily inflexible, the onus is to be on
the theory to respect this. Moreover, ease of correct implementation ought to be
a primary design goal. Whenever possible, theoretical primitives should be
resilient to misunderstandings by developers who lack expertise in cryptography.
Concretely, the work includes three main tasks. The first one applies this "API-
centric" viewpoint to several important primitives, e.g., secure channels and
authenticated key exchange. It also includes efforts to survey existing
standards, libraries, and software artifacts. The second task seeks to develop
theoretical primitives that are forgiving of their misuse (e.g., primitives that
are robust in the face of bad randomness, and that natively handle highly
structured plaintext data). The third task is to develop abstract syntax for
cryptographic primitives that is "thoughtful" with respect to the real
functionalities that will need to be implemented in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.