* 1816227
* RI:Small: Online Maximization Algorithms for Streaming Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Siwei Lyu, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,333.00

Although existing machine learning (ML) methods are effective for analyzing data
that are static in nature, many of today's applications from information
retrieval to web searching require real-time processing of massive amounts of
streaming data. Often, the data is available in an online fashion, meaning the
entire dataset is not available at once, but rather, individual data instances
arrive sequentially. Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve
(AUC) has been proven to be an effective evaluation metric and learning
objective in many application domains, but it is difficult to optimize directly.
To date, there are no satisfactory approaches to incorporate AUC into online ML
algorithms for classification and ranking problems. This project will address
the fundamental theoretical and algorithmic challenges in ML algorithms based on
AUC maximization for processing streaming, high-dimensional data with efficient
algorithms and theoretical analysis. The results of this project are expected to
have broader impact in intrusion detection for cyber-security, fault detection
in safety critical systems, information retrieval and cancer diagnosis. The
planned research will also integrate with educational activities, including
developing new undergraduate/graduate courses on optimization and machine
learning, organizing a workshop and making software tools freely available to
the public. The principal investigators also plan to undertake outreach
activities to improve STEM learning of high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central topic of this project is to develop
efficient online learning algorithms for AUC maximization and bipartite ranking,
making them amenable for online processing of high dimensional and large volume
of streaming data. This project also establishes a rigorous statistical
foundation and thorough theoretical analysis of the online AUC maximization
algorithms developed. The primary technical challenge in developing online AUC
maximization algorithms and theory is that the objective functions involve
statistically dependent pairs of instances while individual instances
continuously arrive in a sequential order. This is in contrast to standard
classification based on accuracy, where the loss functions only depend on
individual instances and the related algorithms and theory are well developed.
The project will address this gap by sufficiently exploiting the structures of
the population objective involved in the problem of AUC maximization, rather
than an empirical objective on finite data, through novel interaction of machine
learning, statistical theory and applied mathematics. This will help to remove
the pairwise structure in the original objective function and facilitate the
development of efficient online learning algorithms for AUC
maximization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.