* 1816307
* CSR: Small: Virtual Sky: Morphable Geo-Spatial Computing for the Internet of Planes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Stacy Patterson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 324,604.00

In the near future, a majority of aircraft will be equipped with sophisticated
technology to sense flight conditions and to directly communicate with nearby
aircraft. By sharing information, each plane can provide mission critical
information to its pilot beyond what can be perceived by a single aircraft. An
example is warning of dangerous weather conditions just outside of an aircraft's
sensing range. This project will create a Virtual Sky platform that enables the
network of planes, called the Internet of Planes (IoP), to fuse and analyze
sensed data correctly, reliably, and quickly, to support safer and more
efficient air travel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into two
thrusts. The first is to create distributed algorithms for planes to learn a
consistent, accurate estimate of flight conditions. Contributions will include
analysis of the correctness and performance of the algorithms and a study of
their theoretical limits in global-scale dynamic networks like the IoP. The
second research thrust is the development and evaluation of a large-scale
prototype of the Virtual Sky that uses real-time aircraft and weather data. The
prototype also integrates a flight simulator, which will be used to study the
benefits of the application with a human pilot in the
loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solutions developed for this project have
applications in many other data-rich mobile computing platforms, including
ground vehicle networks, to provide real-time information on road and traffic
conditions, and autonomous drone networks, for search and rescue or wildfire
monitoring, for example. This project also includes curriculum development and
outreach activities in mobile and edge computing, including a Raspberry Pi
hackathon that will provide students with hands-on learning with sensors and
edge computing devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All research products of this
project, including data, source code, publications, and other project artifacts
will be made publicly available at the project repository:
http://nsl.cs.rpi.edu/iop. The prototype software will be published as an open
source repository on github.com under the GPL license. The research products
will be maintained for a period of no less than three years after the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.