* 1816234
* Collaborative Research: Studying Magnetic Fields in the Interstellar Medium
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2022
* USD 410,223.00

Astronomers refer to the gas and dust that fills the void in space between the
stars as the Interstellar Medium, or ISM. Magnetic fields are an important
component of the ISM in the Milky Way Galaxy. They affect the way the gas moves
and the way the gas collapses under its own weight to form stars. Being able to
measure the strength of these fields is therefore very important. The team has
developed their own technique, which uses gas velocities, to measure the
strength of the magnetic field. By observing radio emission from atoms and
molecules in the gas, the researchers can study different regions in the ISM,
probing to different depths. Many of the radio observations needed for the
magnetic field measurements already exist. Telescopes like the NSF-funded Green
Bank telescope and the NSF-supported Arecibo Observatory have surveyed much of
the ISM. The team will show how magnetic fields change in denser regions, how
they affect the birth of stars, and how they change across the ISM. This project
also represents a collaboration between astronomers who specialize in developing
complex models of the Interstellar Medium, and astronomers with experience
observing the ISM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at graduate and undergraduate
levels from both institutions (University of Wisconsin-Madison and University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) will be involved in this collaboration. Indeed,
student exchange is an important part of the project. The Principal
Investigators (PIs) will also organize an annual workshop and will teach classes
related to this research that are open to external undergraduate students. Both
PIs also present to public audiences at the Wisconsin Outreach Center and Space
Place, and in local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.