* 1816608
* Applied Harmonic Analysis to Non-Convex Optimizations and Nonlinear Matrix Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Radu Balan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 423,426.00

This project advances scientific understanding in applied harmonic analysis
while promoting teaching, training and learning. The investigator studies two
sets of problems, each exploiting redundancy of representation in mathematics
and engineering. An example of the first is the problem of estimating
simultaneously, from an array of many sensors, the locations of stationary
sources and the content of their separate signals, when the sources are not
correlated and not all sensors receive information from a given source.
Mathematically, this comes down to extracting information from a positive semi-
definite covariance matrix that relates signals from sources to receptions by
sensors. The existence of unknown blind spots makes this problem challenging.
The first thrust concerns the class of positive semi-definite finite trace
operators. The aim is to look for decompositions of such operators into sums of
rank-one operators that minimize a given criterion. What makes this problem hard
is the condition that the rank-ones are also positive semi-definite. It turns
out this problem is connected to an open question of Feichtinger in analysis of
compact operators with kernels in a modulation space. Additionally, the problem
has strong connections to the theory of sparse matrix decomposition, and to
array signal processing. The second thrust is related to analysis and
optimizations on classes of low-rank positive semi-definite matrices. In
particular, this thrust continues the investigator's previous work on the phase
retrieval problem and the quantum state tomography problem. Tools from Lipschitz
analysis and non-convex optimizations are used throughout this program. Graduate
students participate in the research. In addition, the investigator is training
them for a globally competitive STEM workforce through his contacts with
industry and government labs. The project strengthens existing partnerships with
industry while offering opportunities to explore mathematics of real-world
applications and to create novel solutions to existing problems. Undergraduate
students are encouraged to enter this area of research by participating in
existing opportunities under the umbrellas of Research Experience for
Undergraduates or Research Interaction Teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
problem proposed here relates to the question H. Feichtinger asked in 2004: does
the eigen-decomposition of a positive semi-definite trace-class integral
operator with kernel in the first modulation space converge in a stronger
modulation space-sense? It turns out this question has a negative answer;
however, it naturally raises the question of whether a different decomposition
of such operators (not necessarily the eigen-decomposition) converges in such a
stronger sense. A similar decomposition problem appears in the context of blind
source separation. Consider a system composed of many sensors (e.g., antennas,
or microphones) and decorrelated wide-sense stationary transmitting sources. The
mixing environment has blind spots so that not all sensors receive information
from a given source. The problem is to estimate simultaneously location of
sources and the source signals, based only on the positive semi-definite
covariance matrix. The existence of unknown blind spots is what makes this
problem challenging. The second problem of this project refers to quantum state
tomography and phase retrieval. Specifically, it asks to estimate low-rank
positive semi-definite unit trace matrices from inner products with a fixed set
of Hermitian matrices. The project focuses on the class of homotopy methods for
matrix recovery. Graduate students participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.