* 1816511
* CHS: Small: High-Dimensional Euclidean Embedding for 4D Volumetric Shape with Multi-Tensor Fields
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jing Hua, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,985.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop a rigorous computing system
to make the internal workings of the human body easier to understand and
analyze. Many complex real-world 4D (space-time) dynamic objects have both
heterogenous and anisotropic (unequal along different axes) properties, which
can often be captured by multi-modality imaging devices (e.g.,
4D-CT/MRI/Ultrasound/DTI), and there is a pressing need to model and analyze
these objects. For example, in cardiology, high-fidelity modeling and processing
of 4D deformable volumes of cardiac organs and tissues with complex properties,
shape geometry, motion and deformation at different phases of the cardiac cycle
in real-time becomes important for building an effective and unified tool which
doctors can then use to accurately visualize, track, and diagnose. Similar
applications also exist in lung cancer treatment, prostate cancer treatment, and
so on. This project will also provide several educational activities for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as outreach to local middle school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers around a high-d Euclidean
geometric embedding framework that integrates Riemannian metric, tensor field,
and Nash embedding theory, making it possible to effectively and efficiently
represent and process the 4D Riemannian volumetric shapes from a new
perspective. The computational realization of the high-d embedding will
transform a 3D/4D shape with arbitrary metric tensor fields obtained from 3D/4D
heterogenous data feature/property space into a novel high-d shape isometric
space which preserves all intrinsic geometric characteristics as well as
integrating other multi-modality properties. The generalized geometric embedding
space through the unified Riemannian metric tensor fields allows formal and
diverse study of geometry scalability and variability in shape optimization,
processing and measurement involved in data informatics. In the high-d embedding
space, complicated Riemannian metric computations in optimization,
reconstruction, comparison and analysis will be replaced with simple and
efficient Euclidean computations under the isotropic metric. Through the
validation of the framework using 4D shape-tensor reconstruction and analysis,
it will be possible to offer medical imaging and biomedicine communities an
accurate, robust, and rigorous approach for geometric reasoning and quantitative
assessment of multi-heterogenous features and properties across different
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.