* 1816934
* Dispersive Hydrodynamics and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Mark Hoefer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 433,609.00

Tsunamis in the ocean and intense laser fiber optics are examples of waves whose
speed of propagation depend on both the wave's wavelength and
amplitude/intensity. The coincidence of these two properties in media that
support waves is not limited to the ocean and fibers but is ubiquitous in
nature, the lab, and technology. There is an emerging field of applied
mathematics called dispersive hydrodynamics that explores the mathematical and
physical ramifications of these two properties. This project will develop new
mathematical solutions and models of nonlinear, dispersive waves in a variety of
physical environments. The solutions will include solitons or solitary waves and
dispersive shock waves, quintessential manifestations of waves whose speeds
depend on wave amplitude and wavelength. An in-house laboratory shallow water
experiment will also be constructed to realize and test the physical
implications of the developed mathematics. Additional applications to fluid
dynamics, nonlinear optics, and quantum fluids will be by-products of this
research. Consequently, this project is truly
interdisciplinary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dispersive hydrodynamics has emerged as
a unified mathematical framework for the description of multiscale nonlinear
wave phenomena in dispersive media. Small-scale solitons/solitary waves and
large-scale hydrodynamic waves (dispersive shock waves, rarefaction waves) are
both solutions of nonlinear dispersive wave equations. This project weaves
together research on integrable and nonintegrable dispersive partial
differential equations, convex and nonconvex dispersive hydrodynamic systems,
multidimensional waves, asymptotic analysis, and applications that include an
in-house shallow water experiment. While the mathematics of solitons and that of
dispersive shock waves have been extensively developed in isolation, this
project explores the rich and physically motivated set of new mathematical
problems related to soliton propagation in dispersive hydrodynamic flows. The
scale separation inherent to solitons and dispersive hydrodynamic flows enables
the asymptotic description of their interaction in a convenient and universal
form in terms of a hyperbolic system of partial differential equations with a
linearly degenerate field. Extending and applying this description to nonconvex,
multidimensional, and attractive dispersive hydrodynamic flows are the primary
aims of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.