* 1816518
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: A software toolbox for computing and exploring the fundamental limits of information systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* James Plank, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 180,005.00

This project aims to build an open-source software toolbox under the GNU-GPL
license to facilitate the investigation of information systems (e.g., data
storage systems, streaming data structures, and content delivery systems) using
information theoretical methods, more precisely, to facilitate the derivation of
outer bounds and identifying novel code constructions. By building modern
software tools which are able to take advantage of the advance in computer
hardware and software, this effort can help the community more efficiently
incorporate computational intelligence into information theoretic
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main theoretical foundation for the approach
is the entropy linear programming framework, and techniques based on symmetry
and implication relations that can reduce the complexity of such programs. The
core components of the toolbox are various software tools to perform information
theoretic analysis and exploration of information systems in a computational
manner. The completion of such a toolbox can enable researchers to build, with
minimal programming efforts, computer software which takes in a description of
the information system of interest, processes the relation among its components,
formulates an appropriate optimization problem, and invokes a computational
optimization solver to produce meaningful results regarding the fundamental
limits and code constructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.