* 1816740
* Collaborative Research: DNA Packing of Bacteriophages: Liquid Crystal Modeling through Analysis, Knot Theory  and Numerical Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 261,907.00

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and whose genome is, in some
cases, a double stranded DNA molecule. In order to develop strains of double
stranded (ds) DNA bacteriophages that can be efficiently used in nanotechnology
and for treatment of bacterial infections, a detailed mathematical and
biophysical characterization of the packing and delivery of the viral genome is
required. Paradoxically, very little is known about these processes due to the
extreme density and pressure conditions that the DNA is subject to inside the
virus. In the proposed research, the investigators will combine experimental
work and the theory of liquid crystals to determine the properties and
organization of the DNA molecule inside bacteriophages and of its release. The
project will establish a firm theoretical framework for genome delivery in nano-
technological applications. In particular, it will produce the first analytical
model describing the liquid crystalline phase of DNA in confinement. Two
postdoctoral fellows and at least two graduate students will be trained each
year. Results and materials will be broadly disseminated, through open access as
well as standard journals and conference presentations. Materials developed in
this project will be presented at the UC Davis program for high school students
COSMOS. Collaborations and contacts with device development laboratories will be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis of the project is
that the DNA molecule inside the viral capsid forms a hexagonal chromonic liquid
crystal phase for which mathematical models are lacking. In the proposed
project, the investigators will first build a mechanical model determined by an
energy function that incorporates information from cryo-EM data, information
from semiflexible polymers, results from Onsager theory of lyotropic liquid
crystals and parameters from experiments on chromonic liquid crystals. Next,
they will extend their mechanical model by including polyelectrolyte gel
features, acknowledging the presence of water with many types of ions and their
interaction with the negative charge of the DNA molecule. Third, the
investigators will develop models of delivery of genomes with different
biophysical properties. Furthermore, the investigators hypothesize that defects
in the DNA liquid crystalline ordering are manifested as knots and DNA kinks.
The proposed mathematical and computational models will be, both, guided and
validated by multiple experimental techniques including cryo-EM, topological
analysis, estimation of osmotic pressures and delivery of DNA sequences. The
ultimate goal of this project is to construct and analyze a mathematical model
of chromonic liquid crystals capable of making packing, pressure and delivery
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.