* 1816861
* AF: Small: Algorithms March on through Continuous and Combinatorial Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Satish Rao, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project will continue the exploration of the combination of continuous and
combinatorial methods for algorithm design. Continuous methods are similar to
high school calculus, where the notion of the derivative of a function is used
to find exact, optimal solutions to problems such as the shortest way to swim
across a moving creek. An example of a combinatorial method is multiplication,
where one follows a simple step-by-step method (algorithm) to compute a product.
In optimization, both techniques have been used to compute the optimal solutions
for many problems. One such example is airline scheduling, which combines
aspects of staff scheduling, route planning, and even profit maximization.
Recently, a breakthrough in optimization has combined these approaches at a
lower level. Combinatorial problems (e.g., scheduling staff) are translated to
continuous ones (e.g., multi-variable real number function optimization).
Combinatorial structure is re-imposed, based on understanding of the original
problem, to speed up calculus-based methods. This has led to remarkable
breakthroughs in producing theoretically fast algorithms for basic problems such
as the solution of linear systems. Such algorithms are applicable, for example,
in climate modelling, weather predictions, and oil exploration. The technique is
also making exciting inroads into the area of linear programming, which is used,
for example, in the previously mentioned application of airline
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the idea of "pre-conditioning"
a function is studied to allow for continuous ("calculus-based") optimization
techniques to run faster. One example is producing an interpolation of a
function on a line. The value of the function is specified at particular points,
and one wishes to produce the "smoothest" interpolation on the many points on
the line. This can be viewed as a multi-variable problem where the value of each
point is a variable, but one loses the structure of the line. Re-incorporating
this structure into the multi-variable optimization techniques produces very
fast algorithms. This simple intuition has been applied to more complicated
situations, ranging to very general problems in convex optimization, and is
yielding fruit. This project will attempt to further understand and extend the
applicability of these techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.