* 1816029
* CHS: Small: A Spatial Cognitive Framework For Personalizing Locomotion in Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Stephen Gilbert, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 07/31/2022
* USD 563,722.00

The availability of low-cost head-mounted displays has made virtual reality
affordable to consumers and there are now millions of virtual reality users
worldwide. The most natural way to explore a virtual environment is to walk and
turn, just as one does when exploring a real environment. However, many virtual
reality systems lack necessary technology to allow physical walking, and those
that do allow physical walking provide only limited walking space. Therefore,
virtual reality users must rely on navigation interfaces to fully explore the
virtual environment. Perhaps the most common technique is the teleport
interface, in which the user points a virtual laser pointer to the desired
location in the virtual environment and is then directly transported to that
location. The teleport interface is easy to learn but lacks body-based cues
normally associated with walking, such as leg movement and sense of balance,
which can cause rapid disorientation. This project's goals are to evaluate the
effects of the teleport interface on navigation and to identify ways to help
users stay oriented when using the teleport interface. Teleporting is likely to
be especially disorienting for some users, such as those with low spatial
ability, so this project incorporates a personalized approach to determine the
amount of and type of adaptive navigation support that should be provided to a
given user. Findings from this project will support creation of the Design of
Virtual Environments (DOVE) website, a public Wikipedia-style site for research-
based guidelines from virtual reality research, along with materials to support
both undergraduate and graduate education and outreach to programs targeted at
broadening participation in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a
novel framework based on concordance/discordance between movement through a
virtual environment (VE) and movement of the user's body. Within this framework,
this project evaluates the impact of three common navigation interfaces
(walking, teleporting to change position, and teleporting to change position and
orientation) and several types of environmental cues on users' ability to
perform two fundamental navigation tasks. The first task, spatial updating,
involves keeping track of self-location and orientation when moving through
space, answering the question, "Where am I?" Disorientation represents a failure
of spatial updating. Accurate spatial updating is critical for a successful VE,
particularly in time-sensitive domains such as remote medical assistance and
training for extreme workplace circumstances. The second task, cognitive map
formation, involves storing experienced locations and relationships between them
in memory, and is critical for tasks that involve navigation to remembered
locations or selection of alternative routes or shortcuts, e.g., "How do I get
there?" The results from a series of experiments will be used to make evidence-
based recommendations for navigation interfaces and aids that VR designers
should ideally include in a VE, either uniformly or using an adaptive
personalized approach based on users' spatial abilities or other individual
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.