* 1816763
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Making Information Deserts Visible: Computational Models, Disparities in Civic Technology Use, and Urban Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Susan Winter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2022
* USD 246,805.00

This research will develop a foundational tool for understanding how civic
technologies are used and how information inequalities manifest in a city. User
data from new civic technologies that reveal inequalities in the information
environments of citizens has only recently become available. Since a large
portion of data is demographically or geospatially biased due to varying human-
data relationships, computational social scientists have used data modeling and
algorithmic techniques to adjust the data and remove biases during data-
processing. However, this approach limits our understanding of how and why
biased information is created, and our ability to address urban information
inequalities and biased data-creation. Consequently, as cities transition to
e-government enabled by information and communication technology, they may
project the inequities of the past into the smart cities of the future, so a
fresh approach is needed. This innovative research analyzes and visualizes data
from Boston's 311 system for reporting non-emergency issues to the city
government, using computational and qualitative approaches to identify,
categorize, and understand the kinds of information disparities that are
becoming institutionalized by crowdsourced municipal systems, inhibiting smart
city transitions, and perpetuating information deserts. For Boston and its
citizens, this research could improve both the function and the equity of the
city's 311 system. The resulting insights and tools could also inform other
cities' implementation of smart city technologies, identify potential
distortions in existing urban datasets, and surface potential corrections that
could improve decision making and equitable delivery of services for all
residents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be performed in three phases.
First, six years of civic, census, and geospatial data will be combined with
interviews with users, then analyzed to discover the socio-technical dimensions
of "information deserts," which are conceptual and physical spaces where local
information is poorly embedded in diverse infrastructures and/or less available
than in other areas of a city. This research will develop a conceptual model to
determine where and how information deserts are located, identify a typology of
information deserts based on related community features; and, assess
relationships between information deserts and major demographic and geospatial
features of data biases. Second, the research team will perform semi-structured
interviews with civic stakeholders to gather user requirements for a visual
analytics tool as well as to validate the ground truths for the initial models.
Based on this, a visual analytics tool will be created to show different types
of information deserts, their causes, and anticipated results. Third, through an
iterative process the research team will conduct participatory modeling
activities with municipality officials and relevant stakeholders to refine the
computational models with local contextual information. Also, the usability of
the visual analytics tool will be improved with additional user studies. The
resulting conceptual and computational models of information deserts will
support a refined visual analytics tool that displays information deserts and
their characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.