* 1816387
* NeTS: Small: Functional Fabric Devices and Architectures for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,648.00

Functional fabrics are textiles designed to perform a wide variety of functions
with applications ranging from medicine and sports to realizing the potential of
textile-based smart devices (e.g., clothing, drapes, upholstery) as sensor
networks within the Internet of Things (IoT). One particularly compelling
application of functional fabrics is in the area of wearables for the IoT, which
are becoming ubiquitous. Coupled with pervasive access to smart phones and
wireless Internet, they are enabling exciting new application domains, notably
in smart homes and wearable health systems. The next generation of wearables for
the Internet of Things are likely to be fully integrated into textiles, turning
the fabric into garment and textile devices. The applications that functional
fabrics will enable, leveraging the networking technologies that will be
developed in this proposal, will vary widely between what will one day be seen
as: mundane (e.g., smart drapes with sensors that measure and regulate
temperature within a room), convenient (e.g., smart laundry that will help
prevent bright colored clothing from being washed with whites), personal /
professional productivity (e.g., convergence of functional fabrics with voice
and data transceivers for social / work applications), as well as life-
changing/saving (e.g., biomedical functional fabrics with textile based sensors
and soft robotic actuators for collecting data, enabling seamless telemedicine,
and remote actuated treatments). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of passive radio
frequency identification (RFID), in particular, is an enabling technology for
high density deployments since each functional fabric device would not require a
battery or cumbersome transceiver electronics. We will use a balanced approach
between theory and implementation, to develop architectures for passive RFID-
based functional fabrics and associated sensor solutions. The density of
functional fabrics will be much larger than conventional RFID networks,
requiring a coordinated network of cognitive RFID interrogators that use spatial
and spectral degrees of freedom to isolate individual devices. Passive RFID
sensor devices provide pseudo-periodic connectivity with IoT services and
provide the ability to sample and report the physical surroundings independently
from supporting infrastructure. Message concentration protocols for this
supporting infrastructure will be considered. Enabling these networks will
require challenging assumptions that have been made regarding physical layer
(PHY) and medium access control (MAC) layer design for RFID architectures, and
we will leverage a combination of network modeling along with prototyping on a
flexible software defined radio (SDR) to propose new IoT architectures and
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.