* 1816615
* SHF: Small: Science and Tools for Intelligent Developer Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Tianyin Xu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

Software dependability plays a critical role in United States businesses,
government, and society. Although much progress has been made in software
verification and validation, software testing remains by far the most widely
used technique for improving software dependability. Among various types of
testing, developer testing has been widely recognized as an important and
valuable means of improving software dependability. The popularity and benefits
of developer testing have been well witnessed in industry; however, manual
developer testing is known to be labor intensive, and is often insufficient in
comprehensively exercising behavior of the software under test to expose its
hidden bugs. To address the issue, one of the common ways is to use testing
infrastructures and tools to reduce or complement manual testing effort to
achieve higher software dependability. In the past decade, the software testing
research community has made significant progress in automatic test generation.
With various recent scientific advances by the research community, a question
naturally arises: what would be the audacious goal for the field of developer
testing in the upcoming decade to bring a much higher testing effectiveness and
efficiency to developers? To address this question, this project investigates
the science and tools of intelligent developer testing, fundamentally advancing
knowledge and understanding in foundations, techniques, and tools for
intelligent developer testing. The project improves software dependability by
revealing more bugs during software development before they manifest in deployed
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on science and tools for
instilling intelligence from two major ways (natural language interfacing and
continuous learning) into developer testing tools as part of the efforts for
realizing the vision of intelligent software engineering. The project develops
novel and practical techniques and tools of intelligent developer testing that
have high potential to impact the industry. In particular, the project focuses
on parameterized unit tests, which are an improvement over conventional unit
tests because they can easily be extended by automated tools to increase code
coverage while reusing developer-written oracles. The PI plans to develop
intelligent tools that will make it significantly easier for developers to write
parameterized unit tests with the goal of automatically translating developer
intents into parts of executable test cases. This project advances the science
by exploring a series of questions, e.g., how to define or determine levels of
intelligence in developer testing, how to bring high levels of intelligence in
developer testing tools, how to synergistically integrate machine intelligence
and human intelligence (e.g., domain knowledge or insight) to effectively tackle
challenging tasks in developer testing. The project involves research
collaborations with industrial partners and involves participation of students
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.