* 1816484
* Energizing Photospheres of Gamma-Ray Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Yuri Levin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2023
* USD 622,147.00

The detection of a gravitational wave event from a neutron star merger, GW
170817, coincident with a gamma-ray burst, GRB 170817A, is a major achievement
of modern astrophysics. GRBs are the most extreme explosions in the Universe and
GRB research can impact fundamental physics through understanding new properties
of matter under extreme conditions. In order to better understand GRB 170817A
and other GRBs, a research group at Columbia University will investigate how the
GRB photosphere, or outer shell from which light is radiated, is energized to
become so bright. This will be accomplished using state-of-the-art numerical
tools developed by the group. The simulations of shock waves in the GRB, derived
from first principles, will self-consistently include the creation of electron-
positron (anti-electron) pairs, and predict the spectrum of the radiation
produced, which can be compared with observations. The results will be used to
develop a concrete physical scenario for GRB 170817A. The group will continue
with its outreach activities through both public lectures and communications
with the press, and the results will be disseminated at international
conferences, colloquia, and seminars. Methods and results of the research will
be taught as part of astrophysics courses at Columbia University, and the
project will involve training of a postdoctoral scholar and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photospheric emission from opaque relativistic
ejecta plays a key role in cosmological gamma-ray bursts. A key physics question
is why the photosphere is so bright in GRBs and what processes shape its
observed nonthermal spectrum. The proposed research will focus on building
physical models for two heating mechanisms: (1) internal radiation-mediated
shocks and (2) damping of a turbulent cascade. An important goal is to
investigate how shocks break out at the photosphere, releasing their radiation.
The code will directly follow the evolution of sub-photospheric shocks, coupled
with propagation of individual photons around it, and calculate their breakout,
accompanied by copious electron-positron pair creation. This method is
particularly applicable to studies of gamma-ray counterparts of neutron star
mergers. It can give a robust physical model for GRB 170817A and lead to
specific predictions for counterparts of future gravitational wave detections.
The results will have applications to short and long cosmological GRBs as well
as shock breakout in supernova explosions. The planned research also includes a
novel physical model for turbulence damping in GRB jets and the radiative
effects of free neutrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.