* 1816209
* CIF: Small: Occlusion-Based Computational Imaging and Scene Analysis: Theory, Methods and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Gregory Wornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,847.00

Humans have long sought ways to extend their vision, hearing, and other sensory
capabilities, and there has been a long history of scientific and technological
progress. These efforts have involved new physical devices that enhance existing
human sensory capabilities (e.g., microscopes and stroboscopes), and and also
the use of information from modalities humans cannot sense (e.g., radio
frequency wave-forms and X-rays). Today we have the ability to jointly
manipulate these sources of information both physically and computationally, via
signal processing, to ever increasing degrees, and the resulting technologies
are finding application in diverse domains. While interference effects would
appear to limit the information that can be extracted, this need not be the
case, as the familiar example of a pinhole camera illustrates. Motivated by such
examples, this project develops, in a unified way, the role that such phenomena
have to play in enhancing the amount of information that can be recovered from
environments of interest. Potential applications include medicine, public
safety, building security systems, autonomous vehicle safety systems, microscopy
and astronomy, and virtual and augmented reality systems. The proposed research
is a highly education-centered activity with a focus around the intellectual and
professional development of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
investigates several instances and aspects of occlusion-based imaging problems,
including: the analysis and optimization of interference phenomena; the
development of optimum information extraction and inference of environmental
parameters of interest; and investigation of blind methods for poorly
characterized settings. The research emphasizes a common framework of analysis,
and exploits a rich collection of tools from signal processing, statistical
inference, systems theory, and information theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.