* 1816442
* AF: Small: Laplace-de Rham Operators in Scientific Computing and Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Amir Nayyeri, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 408,000.00

Algorithmic problems about geometric spaces are ubiquitous in many fields of
science and engineering. For example, in data analysis, a central task is to
extract important features of data, a high-dimensional point set in many cases.
The extraction of the significant features then leads to applications such as
visualizing the data or clustering the data in a meaningful way. Another example
is in scientific computing where modeling the behavior of a physical phenomenon
such as heat, sound or electricity within a geometric space is a central
problem. These problems can be specified by partial differential equations
(PDEs), for which efficient solvers are necessary. Many of these geometric
problems can be cast as problems in linear algebra: computational problems on
Laplace-de Rham operators, a sequence of matrices that succinctly present
geometric spaces. Thus, faster and simpler methods can be developed for these
problems using powerful tools from linear algebra, which is the focus of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the study of graph Laplacians
(the first matrix in the Laplace-de Rham sequence) have resulted in a series of
simple and elegant algorithms that helped important applications in computer
science and data analysis. In contrast, higher dimensional variants of Laplace-
de Rham operators, in spite of their key roles in science and engineering (e.g.
in solving physical equations, in performing Helmholtz/Hodge decomposition for
applications in data visualization and statistical ranking, or in revealing
effective geometric or topological properties of a hidden space) have remained
largely under-explored. This project will fill this gap by addressing important
open problems about Laplace-de Rham operators for two different types of
applications under two high-level aims: (1) design efficient solvers for
Laplace-de Rham matrices that appear in important problems raised from partial
differential equations (PDEs), e.g. vector Laplacians in Navier-Stokes or
Maxwell equations, in scientific computing, and (2) discover and harness
effective properties of Laplace-de Rham matrices and their spectra for data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.