* 1816238
* Robust Persistence and Permanence in Biological Interaction Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Gheorghe Craciun, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,999.00

The phenomenon of persistence is the focus of much modern biological and
biomedical research, and is found at all scales, from the molecular and
cellular, to tissues, organisms, populations, and ecosystems. For example, at
the cellular level, persistence in gene and protein networks plays a key role in
the establishment of homeostasis, which is the ability of the cell to regulate
key variables, so that internal conditions remain relatively constant. At the
intracellular level, the nodes of these interaction networks could be signaling
molecules, genes, and gene products; at the ecosystem level, the nodes could be
the various species and energy resources. In this project, the investigator aims
to create algorithms that implement mathematical methods for analyzing
persistence, which will allow biologists and biomedical scientists to
investigate persistence properties of diverse biological networks of interest.
Many diseases involve a disturbance of homeostasis in specific types of cells,
which corresponds to a loss of persistence in the associated interaction
networks. A more complete characterization of persistent systems will improve
our understanding of these diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Persistence and
permanence refer to the capacity of a system to maintain all its variables
within some fixed limits in a robust way; they are among the key features of
biological interaction networks. In understanding the role played by specific
biological interactions (for example, the role of a signaling pathway in a cell,
or the effect of introducing a foreign species in an ecosystem), there are often
difficulties in interpreting the effect of positive and negative feedbacks,
nonlinear interactions, and other complex signaling between the nodes of the
network. These difficulties are due to the inherent complexity of the dynamics
of nonlinear systems. This project analyzes persistence as a fundamental
theoretical concept that traverses levels of biological complexity and aims to
develop mathematical and computational tools to understand persistence in
general biological interaction networks. As a concrete step in that direction,
the investigator will focus on biochemical networks, with the aim to provide
mathematical tools for drawing precise connections between the structure of a
reaction network and the persistence properties of its associated dynamical
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.