* 1816041
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Computational Acoustic Design for Digital Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Changxi Zheng, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,981.00

The acoustic characteristics of objects are among the most important properties
that influence or define their function. Thus, design for fabrication of objects
with high-fidelity acoustic specifications is a widely desired engineering task.
Currently, this design process remains slow and expensive, commonly requiring
many trial-and-error iterations; as a consequence, an object's acoustic
properties are often not optimized at all, as to do so would drastically
increase the design's cost and time. The long and suboptimal design cycle
further limits the use of new materials and the exploration of shape variations.
This research aims to address this fundamental challenge by developing new
numerical models that simulate and optimize acoustics. Project outcomes will
include a suite of computational tools that design the geometric shape and
structure of an object so as to realize its acoustic properties using novel
fabrication methods such as additive manufacturing. These tools have the
potential to improve the function of many of today's products, thereby shifting
the current paradigm of visual design into computational audiovisual design. The
new tools will be made available to a large population of expert designers,
engineers, hobbyists, and students, thereby facilitating the design, manufacture
and customization of musical instruments, mechanical structures, consumer
products, and novel materials with unique acoustic properties. Additional broad
impact will derive because students trained by this project will become skilled
in developing, extending, and harnessing numerical algorithms and interactive
design tools in a wide array of engineering design tasks. The investigators will
seek participation from underrepresented groups at the doctoral, masters, and
undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a complete
pipeline of computational design for manufacturing objects with high-fidelity
acoustic specifications. When provided with the desired acoustic properties of
an object such as sound spectrum and frequency scattering profile, the pipeline
will computationally design the object's geometric shape and structure to
realize its acoustic properties using digital fabrication. The proposed methods
will bridge the longstanding gap between parametric computer-aided design (CAD)
models and discrete finite-element meshes, and will embrace automatic
computational optimization of designed structures with the user in the loop.
Thus, they will reshape today's acoustic design, shifting from its current
"design then analysis" process to a "design with analysis" process. To this end,
the research will address a number of fundamental research questions including:
(1) accurate, efficient design-oriented simulation methods to predict sound
properties of a given design; (2) automated optimization algorithms that
translate desired acoustic properties to shape and material specifications; and
(3) efficient computer aided design systems with intuitive, interactive user
interfaces incorporating simulation codes. The approach will address all these
aspects in an integrated interdisciplinary research plan, leveraging the
expertise of both investigators in their respective
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.