* 1816777
* RI: Small: Variation and self-organization in multi-agent systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Annie Wu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 542,704.00

This project seeks to understand how to use inter-agent variation to improve the
ability of swarm-based systems to solve the decentralized task allocation
problem. Swarm-based systems consist of large numbers of independent agents that
act collectively to accomplish goals beyond the scope of a single agent. Such
systems may be applied to problems such as herding, forest fire containment,
crowd control, perimeter protection, and hazardous waste clean up, which consist
of multiple tasks with demands that may vary over time. The agents in a swarm
may be physical robots or virtual software agents. Because these systems are
decentralized and have no central controller, each agent decides independently
what task to take on and when. Effective and efficient allocation and
reallocation of agents among tasks (as task demands change over time) is crucial
to good swarm performance. In addition to maintaining an appropriate number of
agents on each task at any given time, swarms must also avoid or minimize
problems such as extreme responses in which too many or too few agents respond,
wasted energy when agents undo and redo each others' work, and deadlocks which
may prevent accomplishment of the overall goal altogether. Studies on social
insect societies indicate that inter-agent variation is a necessary element for
effective and efficient division of labor in biological swarms. Taking
inspiration from biology, this work investigates how inter-agent variation
affects the decentralized task allocation problem in computational swarms and
what types of variation are most effective in producing stable, robust, and
adaptable swarms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three phases.
First, carry out a systematic study to build a model of the relationship between
inter-agent variation and the self-organizing behavior of swarms. This phase
will examine how different types of variation in agent decision making
characteristics affect system level stability and adaptability. Second,
investigate methods for and trade offs of dynamically evolving system variation.
This phase will investigate how principles from machine learning methods such as
evolutionary computation may be used to dynamically learn and adjust inter-agent
variation in response to changing task demands. Third, apply and test
conclusions from phase one and two to a multi-agent herding problem. The multi-
agent herding problem is representative of a range of problems that require
division of labor involving search, gathering, containment, and coordinated
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.