* 1816793
* SHF: Small: Tools for Productive High-performance Computing with GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,718.00

Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) are widely and cheaply available and have
become increasingly powerful relative to general-purpose CPUs. Therefore, they
are attractive targets for compute-intensive applications in computational
science and data science. However, development of software to run on GPUs is
time-consuming and requires expertise held by only a very small fraction of the
application developer community. This project is developing a collection of
tools to assist in the productive development of high-performance software for
GPUs, so that the barrier to effective use of GPUs by the scientific community
can be lowered.

A central idea being pursued in this research is the identification of primary
hardware resource bottlenecks that limit performance of a GPU kernel, to guide
the modification of the kernel in a manner that seeks to alleviate the
identified bottleneck. Abstract kernel emulation along with sensitivity analysis
with respect to hardware resource latency/throughput parameters are used for
bottleneck identification. Three usage scenarios are targeted: (1) OpenMP
offload, (2) domain-specific code generators, and (3) CUDA/OpenCL kernels. The
offload model introduced in OpenMP 4.0 is an attractive approach for
transforming existing legacy codes as well as for newly developed codes, to
facilitate productivity and portability. Domain-specific library generators
exploit pattern-specific semantics in order to perform optimizing
transformations that are beyond the scope of general-purpose optimizing
compilers. Tensor contractions and stencils are two domains of particular
emphasis. For all targeted usage scenarios, the collection of tools is intended
to assist developers improve the performance of GPU code through a combination
of model-driven search and auto-tuning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.