* 1816330
* Deep-Learning for Galaxy Morphology in the Big Data Era
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mariangela Bernardi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2022
* USD 418,218.00

Astronomy is entering the Big Data era. The wealth of data which will soon be
available from massive surveys will be invaluable for understanding galaxy
evolution. However, extracting and interpreting information from enormously rich
datasets is a challenge with no sufficiently efficient, demonstrated solutions
to date. This is a project to tailor Deep Learning algorithms, which have been
used successfully in other fields where pattern recognition matters, to measure
galaxy morphologies quickly and accurately. The long-term goal is to develop
algorithms which transform Big Data into Big Discovery in astrophysics. All
algorithms and classifications will be made available for more general use. The
principal researcher is committed to supporting scientists from under-
represented groups, through hiring practices, teaching in the US and in other
countries, and by helping to build the capacity for developing countries to
produce cutting-edge science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morphology is a key
observable for constraining galaxy formation models, but quantifying morphology
is currently a time-consuming process, severely compromised by the big-data
transition. Deep Learning algorithms may be the answer. In the first phase,
algorithms will learn from the large set of morphological classifications
available from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). The next phase studies how
to transfer the knowledge gained from SDSS into analysis of images from the Dark
Energy Survey (DES). The use of simulated images to accelerate the learning
process will also be studied. This is the first step towards the automated
classification of other aspects of galaxy structure. The long-term goal is to
develop algorithms which transform Big Data into Big Discovery in astrophysics.
Work with Deep Learning derived morphologies will illustrate the data-to-
discovery process. Teaching expertise in using the SDSS and DES databases to
visiting astronomers, educators and masters-level students will help to ensure a
wider global impact of the investment in building these
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.