* 1816492
* Explosions Near and Far: Transients with low frequency radio arrays
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Kaplan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,436.00

Low frequency radio arrays are opening up a new window in discovery space.
Designed to maximize throughput, they have the survey speed and sensitivity to
find a significant number of sources absent in earlier studies. They can
systematically probe the radio sky for transient and variable sources, following
up exotic transients while characterizing the behavior of known sources. The
Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) and the Australian Square Kilometer Array
Pathfinder (ASKAP) are premier facilities well suited for detecting radio
emissions occurring on sub-second timescales using unique detection strategies
to overcome noisy environments. Detected transients will trigger mapping to
image the source of emission to locate and determine the emission mechanisms
giving rise to it. Some will be known sources with unexplained energetics while
others will be totally new sources. This grant funds a postdoctoral associate
and undergraduate students at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, who will
gain valuable Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education
in signal processing and analyzing massive amounts of data, which is a necessary
skill in today?s software industry. The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee?s
Astronomy Club will expand its STEM activities by involving undergraduate
students in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use the
abilities of the MWA?s and ASKAP?s as discovery engines to detect short
duration, less than one second, transient events and variable phenomena in
imaging surveys over the sky. Together MWA and ASKAP provide powerful and
complementary constraints on source?s astrophysics by providing data over an
octave in radio frequency. It will focus on the study of the emission mechanisms
of low mass stars and extrasolar planets, orphan gamma-ray burst afterglows,
multi-wavelength to multi-messenger prompt and coherent emission with MWA and
late time after glows with ASKAP, as well as unexpected sources/transients from
unknown progenitors. Detection strategies to overcome background emission will
include circular polarization detection and image subtraction against background
radiation. The discovery of significant events will be followed-up by
measurements at multiple wavelengths. If nothing is discovered, significant
limits will be established for future searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.