* 1816938
* NeTS: Small: Collaborative Research: Connected Barriers: Vehicle to Barrier Communication and Networking for Single-Vehicle Crash Safety
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mehmet Vuran, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 319,513.00

More than half of fatal vehicle crashes in the US today are "run-off-road" (RoR)
crashes and roadside barriers are the last means of mitigating their severity.
Yet, vehicles of tomorrow are slated to operate on roadside infrastructure
designed decades ago. This project aims to bridge this gap by establishing
wireless connectivity between vehicles and roadside barriers by developing a
novel vehicle to barrier (V2B) communication and networking paradigm called
connected barriers (CBs). CBs will (1) complement on-board sensor technologies
and existing physical barriers, (2) avoid RoR crashes, (3) minimize the severity
of a crash when it is inevitable, and (4) help develop mutual collaborations
between the roadside safety and vehicular communication and networking
communities, which will lead to robust technology solutions. Based on Department
of Transportation's value of a statistical life estimate in 2014, the societal
cost of a crash is $9.4 million per fatality, with approximately 10,000 fatal
ROR crashes each year. With widespread implementation, this research project
could reduce fatal and non-fatal crash rates by up to 70%, which could save as
many as 8,000 lives per year in the U.S. alone and billions of dollars in
economic losses. This project supports 2 graduate students and its results will
be incorporated into several courses at UNL and OSU. Insights from the project
results will help establish collaborative efforts to educate both industry and
academia in Nebraska and Ohio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the CB vision,
the project explores three main threads: (1) the foundations of V2B
communication will be established through analysis of wireless channel
characteristics in field measurements, actual car-crash tests, and channel model
development. (2) to enable reliable control reactions, very high-fidelity
barrier-assisted vehicle localization and vehicle-barrier synchronization
solutions will be developed. (3) novel communication algorithms and protocols
will be developed to disseminate periodic information about barrier and road
conditions, and to facilitate real-time information exchange during upcoming RoR
events, with an eye towards coexistence with existing communication standards.
The developed solutions will be evaluated through encroachment and vehicle crash
experiments in the Midwest Roadside Safety Facility, and system evaluations on
low-volume suburban and rural road segments in collaboration with the Village of
Eagle, Nebraska, and Nebraska's Cass County. Finally, a multi-time-scale
simulation platform will be integrated by including empirical measurements of
the wireless channel, vehicle and barrier dynamics, traffic dynamics, and
communication and network dynamics to provide effective evaluation tools of the
CB paradigm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.