* 1816315
* The Impact of Transcriptional Delay on Biochemical Circuit Dynamics: A Large-Deviations Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Andrei Torok, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

This project will use tools from mathematics, namely model design, model
analysis, and multi-scale simulation, to inform the design and testing of novel
synthetic biocircuit designs. Synthetic biologists construct such circuits by
rewiring organisms, using ideas from mathematics, biophysics, and
bioengineering. Applications include precisely-targeted therapeutic drug
delivery, cost reductions in drug production, biofuel advances, and new
bioremediation technologies for environmental pollutants. This project will
provide mathematical tools needed to understand and then harness the emerging
complexity of synthetic biocircuits. A particular focus will be circuits wherein
rare events play a crucial role as biological switches. The investigators will
train students and junior scientists as part of the project, perform curriculum
development, and enhance the scientific community in the greater Houston area by
community outreach via a student enrichment program known as Mathematics
Enrichment for Networking, Training, and Opportunities in Research (MENTOR).
MENTOR activities include a research methods class, a STEM lecture series,
summer research fellowships, and an annual undergraduate research conference
rotating between the University of Houston, Louisiana State University, and
Texas A&amp;M University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
quantifying rare-event behavior for complex, spatially-extended stochastic
systems wherein delay plays important roles. Motivation arises from the need to
understand the dynamics of genetic regulatory networks to inform the design of
novel synthetic biocircuits. In many cases, the essential function of such a
network involves rare events -- be they transitions between metastable states or
sudden bursts of activity. Since proteins serve as regulators, transcriptional
delay (the time from transcription initiation to the formation of functional
protein) is intrinsic to genetic regulatory networks and has been shown to
dramatically affect network dynamics. Mathematically, large deviations theories
allow for rare event quantification. What is the most likely transition pathway
between one metastable state and another? How often do rare events occur? Large
deviations theories can answer such questions, both theoretically and
computationally. This project aims to develop a comprehensive theoretical and
computational large deviations framework for nonlinear stochastic differential
equations with delay, particularly the nonlinear delay stochastic differential
equations that model genetic regulatory networks. Synthetic biologists have
recently focused on building genetic regulatory networks within synthetic
microbial consortia. This distributed approach offers modularity and the
potential to build ever more complex biocircuits. However, the resultant
dynamics are quite complex, as consortia feature spatiotemporal dynamics, cell
cycle effects, chemical signaling, population-level effects, and mechano-
sensing. This project aims to build a large deviations theory for spatiotemporal
delay systems, including microbial consortia. The investigators have been
developing a multi-scale platform for the simulation of consortia dynamics
within microfluidic environments, which will provide simulational support for
the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.