* 1816361
* SHF:Small:  EM-Aware Physical Design and Run-Time Optimization for sub-10nm 2D and 3D Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Sheldon Tan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 482,000.00

Electro-Migration (EM) has emerged as a major design constraint and reliability
issue for nano-meter-scale integrated circuits (ICs) and emerging three-
dimensional (3D) stacked ICs. Due to its importance, many advances have been
made recently in EM modeling and fast numerical assessment techniques. However,
those advanced EM models have not been fully exploited by existing EM-aware
physical design and optimization methods to reduce and mitigate the overly
conservative VLSI design practices. The new EM models can naturally consider
wire topology and structure impacts on the EM failures of interconnect wires and
recovery effects of EM aging process for the first time, thus opening new
opportunities for EM optimization at physical design stages. Novel EM
optimization techniques to be explored in this award will improve IC reliability
amid continued aggressive transistor scaling and increasing power density. The
research in this project will contribute significantly to the core knowledge and
technologies of EM-aware physical design and optimization for nano-meter VLSI
designs. This investigator will seek to recruit underrepresented minority
students to further contribute to the diversity in U.S. science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop advanced EM-aware
physical optimization techniques and run-time EM mitigation techniques for
traditional two-dimensional (2D) and emerging 3D stacked ICs in the nano-meter
regime. First, the research will develop new EM-aware optimization techniques
for power delivery networks of mainstream 2D and emerging 3D ICs based on the
newly proposed EM immortality-check rules for general interconnect trees. The
new optimization algorithms will also consider the EM-induced aging effects for
targeted lifetime optimization using more accurate EM lifetime estimation
methods. Second, the research will explore the run-time recovery effects of the
EM aging process to extend the EM lifetime of the signal and power/ground (P/G)
networks in 3D stacked ICs. The new optimization methods will, thus, help extend
the lifetime of the 3D stacked ICs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.