* 1816112
* NeTS: Small: Towards mmWave-based Vehicular Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Elias Alwan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

A new wave of industrial revolution is being witnessed, where vehicles evolve
from being controlled by human beings to fully autonomous cyber-physical
systems. Having connected vehicles that can communicate with each other, as well
as with highway infrastructure and management, is vital to the success of such
revolution. Therefore, the goal of this proposal is to design vehicular
communications and networks that can provide high data-rate, low-latency, and
security. Towards fulfilling this goal, the millimeter wave (mmWave) frequency
band will be utilized as the fundamental enabler to achieve the required high
data rates for vehicular communications. The proposed project will benefit the
global society by helping to realize safe and secure self-driving cars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main challenges facing the design and validation of
the proposed vehicular communication system are spreading across the
implementation of mmWave Radio Frequency (RF) front-ends, baseband processing,
and the network management. The design of mmWave RF front-ends requires high-
gain and low-profile antenna array for inconspicuous integration on the
vehicular platforms, RF beamforming techniques, and finally low-cost, hardware-
reduced, and power efficient electronics behind the antenna array. At the
baseband processing level, the main obstacles include physical layer secrecy, RF
impairment mitigation, and enabling simultaneous multi-vehicle to infrastructure
communication. Finally at the network level, novel network architectures are
needed to enable low-latency and fast local decision making. The proposed
research is transformative as it will advance fundamental knowledge in: 1) High-
data-rate RF transmission over mmWave through the design and validation of
mmWave multiple-antenna transceiver architectures along with RF beamforming
schemes that exploit both spatial and spectral diversity; 2) Enhanced physical
layer processing through the design and validation of digital beamforming
schemes that achieve physical layer secrecy, mitigate RF impairments, and
achieve high-data-rate simultaneous multi-vehicle communication; and 3) Edge
computing via a low-latency dynamic network management architecture by utilizing
the emerging SDN paradigm, which involves intelligent nodes with local decision
and machine learning capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.