* 1816331
* NeTS: Small: Eiffel: Efficient and Flexible Software Packet Scheduling
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Mostafa Ammar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Modern communication networks operate at high speeds that require sophisticated
control of the timing of data transmissions to enable efficient sharing of
network resources. The control of timing is performed by data packet scheduling
functions deployed in core network components as well as user systems. This
project considers the design and deployment of packet scheduling in network
component software. Such deployment allows for 1) short development cycles,
enabling the tracking of the state of the art, 2) enhanced flexibility of
operation, and 3) function portability enabling the scheduling function to be
deployed at multiple locations with minimal additional effort. The project will
address the challenges of the software deployment of scheduling functions by
developing and evaluating computation structures and algorithms that enable
efficient software packet scheduling as well as mechanisms that allow users to
tailor the scheduling functions to their needs. Advanced scheduling functions
are central to successful modern high-speed networks, the core component of
current and future advanced network applications infrastructure and data center
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Packet scheduling is the core component of many
recent innovations in optimizing network performance and utilization. The modern
networks rely on packet schedulers in two specific ways: 1) traffic shaping and
hierarchical bandwidth sharing at end-hosts, and 2) scheduling in hardware
switches. For future networks, the scale in terms of number of flows and
supported rates is expected to increase further with the growth of CPU (central
processing unit) capacity and rates supported by network interface cards.
Furthermore, network operators prefer programmable network components which have
shorter development cycles. The focus of this project is on the design and
deployment of efficient and flexible packet scheduling in software. While
hardware implementation of network functionality will always be faster than its
corresponding software implementation, software schedulers have several
advantages including a shorter development cycle and the ability to deploy them
on multiple platforms in multiple network locations. Software packet scheduling
is challenging because of the inherent computational complexity of scheduling
policy implementations, the difficulty of balancing efficiency with flexibility,
and the need to carefully manage memory usage. Motivated by the importance of
software packet scheduling and with these challenges in mind, the project aims
to develop and evaluate approaches for efficient and flexible software packet
schedulers. More specifically, the project seeks to: 1) Improve efficiency by
equipping schedulers with efficient data structures, developing data structures
that enable the scheduler to trade off accuracy for increased efficiency, and
developing backpressure mechanisms that control memory usage, and 2) Improve
flexibility without sacrificing efficiency by enabling the mapping of scheduling
policies that require per-flow ranking in addition to or instead of packet
ranking, and a re-ordering of packets or flows upon dequeue operation, and
arbitrary shaping policies. The project will also develop accessible educational
content for computer networking classes with specific emphasis on packet
scheduling on modern networks. Ultimately, the project's goal is to advance the
state of the art in software schedulers, making them feasible for practical use
in diverse locations in future networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.