* 1817614
* 2018 Controversies Colloquium: Stability of Nanostructures; Irvine, California; February 1-2, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Timothy Rupert, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

A new workshop series, called the Controversies Colloquium, is aimed at
providing a venue where thought leaders and subject matter experts can gather to
discuss long-standing or new "controversies" in scientific fields, where gaps in
knowledge exist that prevent the full understanding of critical scientific
phenomena. The first of these workshops is on the subject of the Stability of
Nanostructures, and is scheduled to occur February 1-2, 2018, at the University
of California-Irvine, in Irvine, CA. This award supports participation by early
career scientists and researchers in the Colloquium. The non-traditional small-
group presentation and discussion formats will encourage and promote free-
flowing scientific dialogue and critical debates, and participation by a diverse
group of attendees will provide broad perspective. The structure is intended to
inspire a highly active meeting where all participants are constantly engaged.
This workshop will move the field closer to achieving truly stable
nanomaterials, providing a service to the materials community and broad impact
to a number of industries where high strength, lightweight, damage-tolerant
materials are needed, including aerospace, automotive, and energy
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructured materials exhibit extreme strength,
wear-resistance, fatigue-life and other mechanical properties, but are often
limited by the instability of their microstructures. A recent point of focus in
the community has been the stabilization of nanoscale grain structures through a
variety of techniques that invoke both thermodynamic and kinetic approaches.
However, the field is relatively scattered and there is disagreement about the
best approaches and the fundamental scientific mechanisms. This workshop aims to
help guide the community to close the book on old issues in the field and
identify new outstanding problems, using an informal
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.