* 1817308
* Investigations of an invertebrate secreted immune effector that influences microbial communities of the gut
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Larry Dishaw, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 879,581.00

The gut of animals is colonized by a rich assortment of microbes and recent
research has demonstrated that microbial communities of the gut influence all
kinds of physiological processes of the host, from brain function, to
development, and obesity. Hence, understanding the interplay of microbial gut
communities and the host is highly important. The investigators will use Ciona
robusta (Ciona intestinalis type A), a marine filter-feeding organism, to
investigate how animals use elements of their immune system to regulate healthy
interactions with microbes that like to live in the gut. As Ciona is
transparent, it represents a unique model organism in which gut microbial
communities can be visualized directly. Ciona also is a great teaching tool for
students in the classroom and for public outreach in the PIs seasonal programs
like the St. Petersburg Science Festival or the Oceanography Camp for Girls. The
investigators will utilize animals reared in the lab under controlled conditions
to help students understand how distinct microbes colonize the gut, and
illustrate natural mechanisms used by animals to influence where and how these
microbes settle within the gut. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ciona robusta (Ciona
intestinalis type A), an invertebrate filter-feeding protochordate, will be used
to investigate how the host utilizes elements of innate immunity to negotiate
interactions with the gut microbiome. The proposal focuses on variable
immunoglobulin-like chitin-binding proteins (VCBPs). VCBPs are bifunctional; the
N-terminal Ig domains recognize bacteria and the C-terminal domain binds chitin.
VCBPs are a key to understanding complex dialogues between bacteria, fungi and
viruses of the gut microbiome. These proteins are expressed and secreted in high
abundance by the gut epithelium in Ciona, and exhibit functions that resemble
vertebrate IgA, including the modulation of bacterial adherence and formation of
biofilms on mucosal surfaces. Preliminary data reveal that when VCBP-C binds to
some lysogens, induction of prophages is observed, a process that shapes the
outcome of biofilm formation and may impact the growth of other bacteria that
may be targeted by the newly released phages. Various bacterial and fungal
isolates, derived from the gut of Ciona, have been cultured and will now be
studied both in vitro and in vivo utilizing germ-free animals. This project, via
a combination of in vitro and in vivo experiments, will examine the interaction
between VCBP-C and cultured isolates (bacterial and fungal) of the gut; we will
then examine transcriptomes of in vitro (bacterial) biofilm formation and
colonization of germ-free animals to help characterize the genetics of
colonization. As multi-functional proteins, the VCBPs likely bridge interactions
between bacterial and fungal communities of the microbiome; and because VCBPs
influence the induction of prophages, which in preliminary observations have
been shown to possess broad host ranges, it is likely that activation of these
viruses can re-shape the composition of the microbiome. The Ciona model presents
a unique opportunity to study how innate immunity not only protects against
pathogens but also modulates microbial ecology to achieve and maintain
homeostasis. Ciona will continue to serve as a platform to further explore the
hypothesis that immunity evolved not just to "defend" but to "modulate microbial
ecology" of the gut lumen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.