* 1817862
* Light-Induced Protein Quake of Visual Rhodopsin Investigated by Femtosecond Time-Resolved X-Ray Scattering
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Richard Kirian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

In broad terms the problem addressed is how biological signals are generated by
a class of membrane proteins known as G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs).
Rhodopsin is the major GPCR involved in vision, and serves as an archetype for
determining molecular movies of receptors in action. Research will investigate
the light activation mechanism of visual rhodopsin extracted from the retinal
rod disk membranes into detergent micelles or small lipid nanodiscs. To monitor
the protein shape and motion, the project will apply powerful new X-ray free
electron laser (XFEL) technology. The goal is to study how light affects the
protein shape and internal motions of rhodopsin over a range of different time
scales. The significance and impact are twofold. First, it will illuminate the
earliest events and photophysics of light activation process that occur in our
eyes, together with the protein changes that yield vision. Second, it will
showcase and drive the application of the new XFEL technology to membrane
proteins that are not amenable to standard crystallization approaches. The
primary benefit is to understand how light absorption by visual rhodopsin leads
to changes in its mobility followed by transmission of a nerve signal to the
brain. Time-resolved X-ray studies of rhodopsin in detergent solutions will
reveal the protein motions triggered by light absorption of its cofactor
(retinal, a derivative of Vitamin A). Computer simulations will further
interpret the experimental observations in terms of changes in the dynamics of
the protein molecules due to light. Important broader outcomes include training
of biophysical scientists at the postdoctoral, graduate student, undergraduate,
and high school levels, as well as teachers who will influence our society over
many years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of the
research involve time-resolved X-ray scattering studies of the light activation
of rhodopsin in detergent solutions and lipid nanodiscs. Changes in the
structural dynamics of rhodopsin due to its photoactivation will be established
over multiple scales of time and space: from sub picoseconds (10 C12 s) up to
milliseconds (10 C3 s), and from chemical bond lengths up to entire protein
molecules. Visual light from an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) will be used
as the pump, with the short intense X-ray pulses of an XFEL as the probe. Pump-
probe studies will establish how the ultrafast conformational changes of
rhodopsin are propagated by a multiscale mechanism into the activated state of
the receptor. The cofactor-induced changes in protein dynamics in the
Photorhodopsin and Bathorhodopsin intermediates will be probed from the
picosecond up to the nanosecond time scales to discover whether a "protein
quake" occurs immediately after the initial light absorption. We will then study
how the initial protein quake is propagated into the large-scale conformational
fluctuations that activate rhodopsin. The Lumi and Meta-I states will be studied
in the run-up to the active Meta-II state. We will discover how cis Ctrans
isomerization of the retinal chromophore is focused to the dynamical hot spots
of rhodopsin, which yield the activating conformational changes. Quantum
mechanical/molecular dynamics (QM/MM) simulations will compare the theoretical
difference-scattering profiles to experimental solution X-ray data to connect
the light-induced changes to the atomic-resolution structure. Lastly, we will
investigate binding of the C-terminal helix of the G-protein transducin in
relation to the structural and dynamical alterations. Establishing how the
ultrafast changes from light-induced isomerization of retinal are coupled to the
large-scale protein fluctuations will greatly improve our understanding of
rhodopsin activation and its role in visual signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.