* 1817315
* Why do eukaryotes have two Rad51/RecA family recombinases?
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Eric Greene, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Homologous recombination (HR) is an important DNA repair pathway that
contributes to both genome integrity and the generation of genetic diversity
during sexual reproduction. HR is catalyzed by proteins called recombinases. The
vast majority of eukaryotes have two recombinases: Rad51, which can be used for
DNA repair in most cells of the body, and Dmc1, which is required for the
production of gametes (sperm and eggs). Rad51 and Dmc1 are closely related at
the amino acid sequence level and they also catalyze the same basic reactions,
which raises the question of why do cells need both of these recombinases? This
seemingly simple question touches on broader questions about the evolution of
specialized functions in eukaryotes that are yet to be resolved. To help address
this issue, Rad51 and Dmc1 from the model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(Brewer's yeast) will be studied by state-of-the-art single-molecule imaging
methods. The research will yield insights into why eukaryotes have evolved both
Rad51 and Dmc1 by investigating the similarities and differences between these
two crucial DNA repair enzymes, in particular how they interact with DNA and
with other proteins. This interdisciplinary work will also provide students with
cutting-edge education in STEM fields and enable them to successfully contribute
to the scientific enterprise in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dmc1 is
expressed only in meiosis and is the catalytically active recombinase during
meiosis, whereas Rad51, which is constitutively expressed, is downregulated by
meiosis-specific regulatory co-factors. The two proteins are thought to have
arisen from a gene duplication event during the early evolutionary history of
eukaryotes, and they remain ~45% identical to one another across species.
However, Rad51 and Dmc1 both contain amino acids that are specific for either
the Rad51 lineage or the Dmc1 lineage. The overarching hypothesis is that
lineage-specific amino acids play crucial roles in defining the differences
between Rad51 and Dmc1. A detailed analysis of these lineage-specific amino
acids will be conducted to determine how they define the co-factor specificity
and DNA substrate interactions for each recombinase. The research will utilize
"DNA Curtains" and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM)
tools to visualize individual recombinase filaments during the early stages of
genetic recombination. This unique approach to single molecule imaging enables
rapid collection of statistically relevant information from individual molecules
by enabling parallel imaging of multiple reaction trajectories. The resulting
detailed mechanistic information on both recombinases will provide new insights
into evolution of their specialized roles in homologous
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.