* 1817625
* Pre-Alliance Planning: Puget Sound Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Ann Murkowski, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Romano
* 01/31/2020
* USD 123,072.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Puget Sound
Alliance (PSAlliance) project will establish a partnership between three
community colleges in the western part of Washington State, namely North Seattle
College, Olympic College and Pierce College, to create a long-term plan to
increase STEM degrees for traditionally underrepresented minority students. The
outcome of the 18-month planning activity is submission of a full proposal for
LSAMP Bridge-to-the-Baccalaureate (B2B)funding to further support community
college student success and transfer to four-year STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Seattle College will leverage knowledge
generated in prior NSF funded projects to bring expertise to the design and
implementation of a range of high impact practices that will serve to transform
PSAlliance STEM programs. Early Undergraduate Research Experiences (UREs) will
be a central theme, as well as the design of innovative recruitment and
retention strategies. The planning project will increase knowledge about what is
known about how early research experiences and supplemental supports impact
student STEM identity, persistence and engagement in underrepresented student
populations. Project outcomes will be disseminated locally and nationally
through conferences and on-line STEM education journals. Findings from the
planning project will benefit educational institutions and the STEM community
nationally in broadening participation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.