* 1817215
* A New Spin on M Dwarf Ages and Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Eric Gaidos, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 293,735.00

Small, relatively cool stars, less than half the mass of the Sun, are called M
dwarf (or red dwarf) stars. These are the most common type of star in the Milky
Way. M dwarfs are long-lived, and known to be reliable tracers of the
distribution of chemical elements in the Galaxy. They are also the most prolific
known hosts of planets, particularly Earth-size planets orbiting in the
"habitable zone". A research team at the University of Hawai'i at Manoa will use
a combination of new astronomical observations, results from space-based surveys
of stars, and computer models of stellar rotation to determine their ages.
Accurate ages of M dwarfs will permit tracing distribution of the elements in
the Galaxy and will track the planetary environments over Galactic history.
Moreover, this research will lead to a better understanding of the rapid
rotation and strong magnetic activity of young M dwarfs, which will improve
models of their emission of light at many wavelengths, important factors for the
environment of any planets that orbit them. The investigators will integrate
aspects of this project into an annual program at the University of Hawai'i at
Manoa that trains and mentors cohorts of demographically diverse high school
students to boost their confidence and understanding of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) subjects and stimulate their interest in
STEM-related careers. The students will work with an investigator on a project
based on data obtained at a telescope on Mauna Kea and receive ongoing mentoring
for six months while they complete their project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program seeks to develop a chronometer based on the rotation of M dwarf
stars and to study the connections between M dwarf rotation, multiplicity,
disks, and pre-main sequence evolution. It will use new observations, results
from space-based surveys, and models of stellar rotation to (1) establish a
rotational sequence (gyrochrone) of M dwarfs in two solar-aged clusters (M67 and
Ruprecht 147) as critical calibration points for spin-down models; (2) produce a
mass-rotation diagram for the Hyades, a key intermediate bench-mark for M dwarf
spin-down models, which is uniformly and more thoroughly vetted for binaries;
(3) confirm or refute a correlation between stellar companions and rotation
among pre-main sequence M dwarfs in the Beta Pictoris Moving Group as a test of
the disk-locking scenario; and (4) measure masses, radii, luminosities, and
magnetic fields of components in selected M dwarf binaries to quantify the
effect of rotation and magnetic activity on pre-main sequence
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.