* 1817603
* Numerical Methods for Parametric Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Ronald DeVore, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 369,192.00

One of the most significant scientific challenges of this century is the
accurate description and computation of complex processes such as climate
change, contaminant flow, genomics, and even social media and finance. While one
can create a mathematical model for these processes, the large number of
parameters in the model inhibits the use of traditional computational tools for
fast and reliable predictions. In addition, there is the question of the
efficacy of the mathematical model. The proposed research puts forward new
mathematical ideas, based primarily on model reduction, to determine the
importance of the various parameters and derive simpler models that still
faithfully describe the underlying process. This, in turn, leads to more
accurate and less costly computational models that can be implemented within
today's existing computing resources. The project also investigates how to
quantify uncertainty in both the model and the parameters from data observations
of the process.

This project investigates three demanding computational tasks in parametric
partial differential equations (PDEs). The first of these, called the forward
problem, seeks the creation of fast and accurate online solvers for the PDE when
given a parameter query. Such online solvers are used in a myriad of
applications that seek to optimize performance through parameter selection. The
second seeks optimal methods to compute the state of the PDE from observational
data. Related to this is the third problem of estimating the parameters of the
PDE from observational data. Because of the large number of parameters,
traditional numerical methods for such high dimensional problems face the so-
called "curse of dimensionality", i.e., they cannot obtain the desired accuracy
of computation in a reasonable computational time. The proposed research
circumvents this difficulty by developing novel methods of model reduction based
on sparsity ad highly nonlinear approximation such as n-term dictionary
approximation. Foundational results will also be established for inverse
parameter estimation that prove Lipschitz smoothness for the forward and inverse
maps under minimal smoothness conditions on the parameters. These foundational
results are then coupled with reduced modeling to create numerical methods for
parameter estimation and model verification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.