* 1817442
* Investigating Mechanisms of RNA Polymerase II Transcription and Regulation Using Single Molecule Fluorescence
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Kugel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2023
* USD 958,167.00

The expression of genes that are encoded by DNA is essential for sustained life.
This project will investigate how basic steps in gene expression occur. The
first step in gene expression is transcription: the process in which one strand
of DNA in a gene is copied to make an RNA molecule. This requires that many
different proteins and the DNA assemble into a complex, such that gene
expression can occur accurately, and in the correct cell type at the proper
time. This research will study the assembly and disassembly of complexes
containing proteins and DNA that are essential for transcription to occur. The
research will use experiments that allow single molecules to be observed.
Studying molecules one at a time will reveal new insight into the diverse
behaviors of proteins and DNA important for controlling gene expression.
Importantly, this project will promote the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, enable new educational curriculum to be developed, and
encourage participation of underrepresented minority and women scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the project are to investigate
mechanisms of steps in early mRNA transcription and to understand the pathways
by which the transcriptional activator protein p53 binds to DNA. The experiments
take advantage of single molecule fluorescence techniques, which have emerged as
essential contributors to revealing the dynamic behavior and heterogeneity of
biological complexes, thus providing unique insight into their function.
Experiments will investigate the mechanism by which the general transcription
factor TFIIB releases from early transcribing human complexes in vitro.
Importantly, distinctions will be made between active and inactive complexes,
thereby directly relating TFIIB release to activity. Studies will also focus on
understanding how p53 binds its DNA response elements, which is important for
controlling transcription of genes critical to regulating the cell cycle and
programmed cell death. The ability to resolve diversity in protein/DNA complexes
will reveal the allowable pathways by which p53 forms different oligomeric
complexes on DNA, as well as the kinetics of association and dissociation events
in these pathways. How different p53 response elements, as well as specific
regions and amino acids in p53, control modes of DNA binding will be determined.
The knowledge gained from this research will stimulate new models that will
broadly inform future studies of transcriptional regulation, both in vitro and
in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.