* 1817363
* EAGER: A Nanobiotechnology Approach to Study the Role of  Chloroplasts as Transceivers in Plant ROS Communication
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Juan Giraldo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,195.00

Most global rural land is affected by environmental stresses include drought and
extremes in temperature that strongly inhibit plant growth and lead to
significant crop yield loss worldwide. A major limitation to advancing our
knowledge of how plants respond to and tolerate stress is understanding the
movement and distribution of short-lived and highly reactive plant signaling
molecules both within and between cells. The project aims to study how plant
cells communicate types of environmental stresses through key signaling and
chemically reactive molecules of oxygen (ROS). Current approaches to monitor and
manipulate ROS are based on biotechnology tools limited to a few plant model
systems lacking the temporal resolution to sense rapid or long-term changes in
ROS in specific subcellular compartments. The study will utilize emerging
nanobiotechnology approaches for discovering novel mechanisms of plant ROS
communication mediated by specialized cellular structures such as chloroplasts.
Synthetic and versatile nanoparticle-based tools have the potential to be easily
translated from plant model systems to diverse plant species. The project will
disseminate the results at meetings to scientists across multiple disciplines of
plant biology and engineering and at local public science outreach events. A new
generation of undergraduate and graduate students from diverse departments and
underrepresented groups will be trained in the laboratory on plant biology
research and engineering with nanomaterials and in the classroom through a
nanobiotechnology course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROS are key signaling molecules
communicating and regulating fine-tuned plant stress responses. The mechanisms
involved in plant ROS communication between the plant apoplast and chloroplasts
are crucial to control the expression of abiotic stress gene clusters. It has
been proposed that abiotic stresses induce ROS apoplastic waves that are
transmitted to chloroplasts where they trigger a secondary increase in ROS
generation. It is unclear if chloroplasts act as transceivers both receiving and
transmitting ROS waves generated in the apoplast. The proposed project will
apply novel ROS monitoring and manipulating nanoparticles to gain a mechanistic
understanding of the hypothesized role of chloroplasts as receivers, amplifiers,
generators, and modulators of ROS oscillatory waves during abiotic stress. It
will test and model the idea that the amplitude, duration, and phase of
subcellular ROS waves in leaf epidermal cells are uniquely associated with high
light, heat, and ozone stress responses. Single walled carbon nanotubes will be
used as in vivo ROS sensors. These infinite lifetime nanosensors fluoresce in
the near infrared where living tissues are relatively transparent. They do not
photobleach and have the potential for millisecond temporal resolution and
single molecule detection. Cerium oxide nanoparticles that can act as catalytic
ROS scavengers will be targeted to the apoplast and chloroplasts for specific
ROS manipulation in these subcellular compartments. The study will demonstrate
proof of concept of unique nanobiotechnology approaches to study plant signaling
communication in vivo with unprecedented spatiotemporal resolution and
contribute to our understanding of how subcellular ROS signals encode source
specific signals regulating plant abiotic stress
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.