* 1817226
* CHS: Small: Improving Usability and Reliability for Motor Imagery Brain Computer Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Virginia de Sa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) allow a user to interact with the world
directly through brain activity. These systems are being developed to provide a
communication method for users with severe motor impairments who are not able to
control the movements of their arms, tongue, and even eyes well enough to
communicate in the usual ways. While the cognitive abilities of these
individuals are thought to be largely preserved, they are often described as
being "locked in" to their bodies, unable to interact with the outside world
through the usual means of typing, talking, etc. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
based motor imagery BCIs attempt to distinguish brain activity by measuring
electrical activity on the scalp caused by the user imagining moving different
body parts. Commonly, such systems try to distinguish when the user is imagining
moving their right or their left hand. Imagining different body parts can then
be mapped to different tasks to allow a user to interact with the world (e.g.,
to turn a light on or off, or to move a robot arm to one object or another). The
goal of this research is to make these types of systems easier for users to
learn and more reliable, by improving the feedback that is given to the user and
improving the classification of the brain signals. The work has the potential to
open up this method of communication for more people, and project outcomes may
have even broader impact by enabling us to learn more about brain signals that
can be used for communication in BCIs. In addition, diverse graduate students
will be trained in interdisciplinary research, and undergraduate students in the
BCI class will work on small related projects, some of which will be presented
to high school students to encourage and stimulate their interest in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of users to generate discriminable
control signals is very variable. Moreover, environmental effects such as other
brain processes, emotion and fatigue affect current BCI systems. The goal of
this project is to improve the usability of EEG-based motor-imagery brain-
computer interfaces. To this end, a multi-pronged approach will be used. First,
richer feedback will give users a better visualization of the effects of their
imagery and provide them with a better chance to learn how to discriminate the
motor imagery of different body parts. Second, the machine classification of the
EEG signal during motor imagery will be improved. This will include looking for
other signals that may provide additional insight into the top-level state and
goals of the user as well as developing new deep learning algorithms that can
benefit from multi-task learning and transfer learning between individuals.
Third, different closed-loop control methods will be explored to improve the
total information transfer rate of the BCI as well as to reduce the number of
training trials needed. The team's prior work has shown that interactive signals
that respond to the feedback provided by the system are more robust to system
estimation errors and non-stationarities. These signals can arise passively but
also can be actively used by exploiting interactive commands that vary with the
received feedback. Whether active control of interactive commands, or active
control of standard commands with passive interactive recognition, performs
better will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.