* 1817354
* Collaborative Research:  Next generation physiology: a systems-level understanding of microbes driving carbon cycling in marine sediments
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Brett Baker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 374,675.00

It is currently impossible to grow the vast majority (&gt;99%) of deep-sea
microbes under laboratory conditions. Because of this recalcitrancy of most
microbes to cultivation, linking specific genotypes with their in situ
phenotypes has been a problem in microbiology for decades - it has been very
difficult to figure out which members of microbial communities are doing what,
due to the complexity of these communities. The new techniques used in these
studies allow for a relatively straightforward labeling of the microbial cells
that are active under different conditions, allowing for these "next generation
physiology" techniques to be used to identify the individual cells actively
consuming different compounds. In this technique metabolically active cells are
labeled with aa compounds with the detection of these cells by fluorescence
staining. This allows for the metabolism of hundreds of taxa to be followed
under dozens of different conditions in parallel. These studies will focus on
the hydrothermally active sediments of Guaymas Basin in the Gulf of California.
There, a broad range of phylum-level lineages of uncultured archaea and bacteria
are hypothesized to engage in the degradation of complex organic molecules,
including hydrocarbons. The microbes that assimilate and break down these
molecules will be identified, and their metabolism will be correlated with their
genomes, allowing for an understanding of how these microbes are able to live on
a diet of hydrocarbons, and helping us to further understand how these compounds
break down in the environment. The investigators make use of topical blogs,
public talks and magazine articles to educate and inform the general public on
the importance of microbes in creating the world around us, and their
laboratories will provide undergraduate researchers with exciting research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to investigate
physiological controls of microbial carbon cycling in marine sediments and to
link specific genotypes with their in situ phenotype. The investigators recently
developed a new, highly parallelizable, and adaptable approach that allows for
the studying microbial function and metabolic interactions in uncultured
microbes at unrivaled throughput. To achieve this goal they combine the (1)
labeling of translationally active cells via bioorthogonal non-canonical amino
acid tagging (BONCAT), (2) sorting of individual, active cells by fluorescence
activated cell sorting, and (3) study of the identity and genetic makeup of
active cells by massive parallel gene sequencing. This results in a readout of
the translational activity of hundreds of uncultured taxa in parallel, which
allows for the functional activity of hundreds of taxa under dozens of different
conditions to be determined. Guaymas Basin sediments were chosen for these
studies due to their steep gradients in temperature, variety of electron donor
identity and availability, and the presence of hydrocarbon seeps supplying
aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons to the system. This means that these
sediments are likely to have highly diverse metabolic potential, and their study
will allow for a deeper understanding of carbon-cycling and other geochemical
processes in marine sediments. The researchers will identify those microbes in
environmental samples that are involved in hydrocarbon, complex substrate and
heterotrophic/autotrophic activity, and follow this with targeted whole genome
shotgun sequencing to directly identify the microbes actively utilizing those
lifestyles, and provide the genetic makeup of cells that are able to exploit
specific substrates. This work will provide a benchmark study for the developing
field of deep-sea sediment microbiology and lay the foundation for future
physiological studies in environmental microbiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.