* 1817347
* The origin and genetic architecture of desiccation tolerance in C4 grasses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Robert VanBuren, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 720,000.00

Resurrection plants can survive near complete drying during periods of prolonged
drought and resume normal growth with the return of water. Grasses provide the
bulk of human nutrition, and discoveries in resurrection grasses can be
translated to closely related crop species. The genetic mechanisms controlling
desiccation tolerance are largely unknown, but may be useful for improving
drought tolerance in crop plants. This research project focuses on resurrection
plants within an economically important grass family. The project involves a
detailed comparison between crop grasses and resurrection plants in order to
identify genes and cellular pathways that distinguish typical drought responses,
from those associated with desiccation. The interdisciplinary genomic, genetic,
and evolutionary aspects of this project immerse high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in the leading frontiers of plant science research. Projects
in collaboration with the Michigan State University 4H Children's Garden teach
students and citizen scientists about the impact of drought on agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Desiccation tolerance in angiosperms likely evolved
through rewiring pre-existing seed desiccation pathways, but the gene and
pathway level changes underlying this transition are unknown. In this project,
systems-level and comparative genomics approaches are used to understand the
genetic basis of desiccation tolerance in C4 grasses. The project focuses on two
species from independent lineages of resurrection plants: Oropetium thomaeum, an
emerging model grass, and Eragrostis nindensis, a wild South African grass
closely related to the orphan cereal tef (E. tef). In the first instance, the
role of gene and genome duplication in the evolution of desiccation tolerance is
explored and genes under adaptive evolution are identified. Second,
transcriptome, epigenome, and chromatin dynamics are surveyed at high temporal
resolution during the desiccation and rehydration processes. From these
datasets, a comprehensive atlas of the genes and regulatory elements controlling
desiccation tolerance in grasses is developed. Finally, transcriptome and
metabolite data are collected from six grass species that evolved desiccation
tolerance independently to test for convergent evolution and conserved pathway
rewiring. A series of educational outreach activities and teaching modules are
developed to explore drought and water relations in plants. Large-scale datasets
from this project are disseminated through peer-reviewed publications,
presentations, and deposition at the NCBI sequence archives and
CyVerse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.