* 1817249
* SaTC: NSF-BSF: CORE: Small: Increasing Users' Cyber-Security Compliance by Reducing Present Bias
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Serge Egelman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 558,018.00

Despite advances in computer security, there are still situations in which users
must manually perform computer security tasks (e.g., rebooting to apply
updates). Although many people recognize that these tasks are important, they
still procrastinate. Procrastination is often caused by the failure to properly
weigh the long-term security benefits against short-term costs and the annoyance
of interrupting the primary task. Researchers in decision-making and behavioral
economics have studied this phenomenon of biased weighting for decades and
yielded viable techniques for overcoming it in various domains, including
health, savings, and charitable giving. Through this multidisciplinary research
agenda, the investigators are empirically examining how these techniques can
best be applied to computer security. The initial focus of this research is an
investigation of how time commitments can encourage compliance with security
tasks such as upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various techniques to increase
security compliance rates have been examined but none address a root cause of
the problem: present bias. Present bias is the tendency to discount future risks
and gains in favor of immediate gratifications. Based on insights from the field
of behavioral economics, this project involves empirical studies to examine when
and under what conditions commitment nudges, amongst other persuasion techniques
aimed at countering present bias, can be used to improve security behaviors.
Through the research team's joint expertise in computer security, human-computer
interaction, decision-making, psychology, and behavioral economics, it is
performing experiments to yield actionable insights on the design of future
computer security user interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.