* 1817256
* New Cosmological Constraints from the Lyman-alpha Forest
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Simeon Bird, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,722.00

The investigators will use intergalactic hydrogen maps to better understand how
the Universe began. Hydrogen, the most common element in the Universe, is seen
when backlit by bright objects. The observed maps of hydrogen across the sky
yields important insights about how and why the Universe looks the way it does.
This project will use new computer simulation techniques to better explain the
observed hydrogen maps. These simulations will be made available widely to
scientists and the general public. The simulations will also be shown in public
talks and used to teach cosmology at UC Riverside. Additionally, this program
will develop a hands-on workshop for K-12 students, compatible with the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS), in both English and
Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will produce new constraints on
cosmological parameters from the distribution of neutral hydrogen in the
Universe. A suite of cosmological simulations will be performed, and a public
likelihood function made available to the community. The investigators will
prepare for the first major data release in 2021 by the Dark Energy
Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI). Improved models will be implemented for gas
temperature and for elements other than hydrogen. The program will constrain
neutrino mass and models of inflation. The results will enable a variety of
other work on extensions to the standard cosmological model. The astronomy
workshops for K-12 students will include activities adopting a cognitive
learning strategy, helping students to connect abstract concepts to concrete
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.