* 1817314
* The Ohio LSAMP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* James Moore III, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,695,442.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Ohio LSAMP program was
established in 2013 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled
technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in the
State of Ohio. The goal of the Alliance is to double the number of
underrepresented minority (URM) baccalaureate STEM degrees from partner
institutions within five years. The ten public institutions that make up the
Ohio LSAMP are diverse and include four community colleges and six four-year
institutions, including one partner that is classified as a Historically Black
College and University. The institutions are Central State University,
Cincinnati State Technical and Community College, Cleveland State University,
Columbus State Community College, Cuyahoga Community College, Miami University,
Sinclair Community College, The Ohio State University, University of Cincinnati,
and Wright State University. The Alliance goals include: 1) continuing the
innovative, evidence-based high-impact practices that have proven to be
effective in recruitment and retention of URM STEM students; 2) strengthening
pathways for smooth transitions from community colleges to four-year
institutions; 3) initiating innovative interventions that fortify mathematical
knowledge, reform mathematics curricula, and prevent mathematics from being a
barrier to progression of URM students in STEM; 4) increasing access to high
quality faculty-mentored research experiences for URM STEM students; 5)
preparing URM students for and facilitate their seamless transition into STEM
graduate programs; and 6) developing and implementing an alliance-wide
communications plan, including an interactive website, for effective
communication and dissemination of information. These goals support the National
Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly
inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy
of all citizens." In support of the goals, the alliance-wide activities consist
of the Annual Research Conference and the activities of the alliance task forces
for ancillary studies, communications, community college pathways, corporate
engagement, and mathematics curriculum reform. The high-impact practices at each
partner institution of the Alliance include advisement and transfer support
services, bridge/early arrival programs, tutoring, peer mentoring, faculty
mentoring and undergraduate research, and professional development. Of note,
each of the four community colleges is in the same city as a four-year
institution of the alliance, and a major emphasis of this alliance is to produce
viable community college pathways to STEM degrees for URMs. The said activities
will produce higher rates of retention and graduation; and moreover, lead to a
more talented and diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.