* 1817200
* CIF: Small: Modeling and Analysis of Microbial Signaling
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 506,037.00

Bacteria are single-celled organisms wherein the intracellular components such
as proteins, DNA and metabolites do not exist in individual components, but are
contained by the cell membrane. They constitute some of the earliest forms of
life (over three billion years old), and have an aggregate biomass that is
larger than that of all animals and plants combined, numbering over 5 x 10^{30}.
Despite their simplicity, the operations and interactions of bacteria are not
fully understood, yet microbial communities play a significant role in
bioremediation, plant growth promotion, human and animal digestion, disease and
drive elemental cycles, the carbon-cycle and the cleaning of water. Thus, it is
of significant interest to further understand microbial populations. An
interdisciplinary approach toward the understanding of cooperative and anti-
cooperative behavior in microbial populations with a focus on signaling methods
such as molecular diffusion and electron transfer will be undertaken. The
research objective is to investigate biological group behaviors that exploit a
variety of coupling mechanisms in order to form structures. In particular,
microbial communities that are able to form structures at different scales will
be examined. Problems relevant to two key applications motivate the research:
microbial fuel cell optimization and infection initiation and suppression and
the relationship to quorum sensing. In quorum sensing, when the concentration of
a compound produced by the bacteria exceeds a threshold, the bacteria express
new genes leading to new community behavior such as luminescing or
infection.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fruits of the research should result in
novel bio-inspired systems that naturally rely on principles of multi-modal
sensing and different modalities of control and environmental conditions. More
ambitiously, design methods by which structures in microbial communities can be
induced are sought. Ongoing collaborations with biophysicists that have been
instrumental in model design and validation via experimental data will be
leveraged. Given the expertise of key collaborators, two strains of bacteria
will be the focus: Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Shewanella oneidensis MR-1. In
particular: (1) can one optimize the operation of microbial fuel cells
exploiting electron transfer in bacterial populations and (2) can one design
strategies to understand quorum sensing and potentially prevent infection
without the use of antibiotics? Key questions to address include assessing what
is the minimal amount information needed in order for distributed entities to
form desired structures and geometries as well as engage in desired behaviors.
Bacteria have limited capabilities and the distinctions between communication,
respiration, and ingestion can often be minimal. These activities can provide
either explicit or implicit avenues of communication and thus can exact a
control. Specific problems include: molecular modulation design without the need
for timing information, bacterial cable formation via multi-terminal information
theoretic methods, models for quorum sensing including decision theoretic
approaches, game theory and multicellular interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.