* 1817120
* CSR: Small: Redshift: An Operating System for Pervasive Hardware Acceleration
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Anton Burtsev, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2023
* USD 468,000.00

In contrast to today's systems centered around general-purpose processors also
known as central processing units (CPUs), the next generation of high-
performance computers will inherently rely on diverse, heterogeneous hardware
ranging from many-core processors like Intel Xeon Phi that contains up to 72
processor cores and graphical processing units (GPUs) to specialized hardware
accelerators, like specialized machine-learning chips and field-programmable
gate arrays (FPGAs) re-programmed on demand for a specific task. In a hardware-
accelerated environment that consists of many diverse execution units, the
execution of a program is no longer a conventional thread tied to a single CPU,
but a graph of small computations scheduled on a set of hardware accelerators
each implementing a part of the program logic. Redshift is a new operating
system for developing applications that leverage performance of a heterogeneous
hardware-accelerated system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of Redshift is a
dataflow programming model that enables execution of commodity programs on a
network of heterogeneous hardware execution units with only minimal
modifications. Redshift implements programs as collections of asynchronous
invocations that transparently move execution between hardware functions. A
novel runtime maps computations to execution units, balances load among them,
and scales the hardware graph of computation in response to load.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of efficient computing environments has large
impacts on society as a whole: a rapidly growing share of scientific discoveries
is done in silico. As this trend continues, we as a society depend on
computational capacity of modern computers. Redshift will provide a foundation
for developing the next generation of computation intensive applications in the
areas of artificial intelligence, e.g., speech and image recognition, personal
digital assistance, big-data analytical applications, genomic and personalized
medicine, drug discovery, and many more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redshift will be
implemented as a practical layer compatible with de facto research and industry
standard Linux operating system, and will be open source, directly benefiting
the broader community. To make our approach widely available, Redshift will be
hosted in a publicly-readable repository, and will be available to anyone
(https://github.com/mars-research/redshift). Additionally, as parts of Redshift
will be developed in the openly-available National Science Foundation-funded
CloudLab and Emulab testbeds, Redshift will be available for a test drive via a
CloudLab profile (https://www.cloudlab.us/p/redshift/testdrive) that
automatically instantiates a collection of nodes running
Redshift).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.