* 1817332
* Accelerating conformational transitions in binding flexible proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jianhan Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Proteins are biological macromolecules that control virtually all aspects of
cellular functions, ranging from enzyme catalysis, response to external stimuli,
to control of cell cycle and cell fate decision. For function, proteins have
evolved to possess unique three-dimensional (3D) structural properties. This
project focuses on an important newly recognized class of proteins that exploit
highly flexible 3D structures for function. These proteins include so-called
intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) that account for about one-third of all
eukaryotic proteins and are key components of cellular signaling and regulatory
networks. This project will develop efficient computational methods for
simulating flexible proteins and uncover the fundamental principles of how
structural disorder mediates protein function. The new computational tools will
be made available to the broad scientific community and can be applied to study
biomolecular dynamics and interactions in general. Besides training of graduate
and undergraduate students, the PI will contribute to various outreach programs
in western Massachusetts that engage women and other under-represented
minorities in STEM fields. He will also help expand an informal science
education project known as the "Molecular Playground", which installs
interactive molecular displays in public spaces such as schools, museums,
shopping malls and airports. This project will add much-needed contents with
protein dynamics, such as to illustrate the fascinating phenomenon how extreme
conformational flexibility of IDPs support function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research objective of this project is to determine the fundamental
principles that allow flexible proteins such as IDPs to undergo rapid binding-
induced folding or unfolding for viable cellular signaling. Greater utilization
of flexible proteins such as IDPs have been associated with increasingly
sophisticated signaling in complex multicellular organisms. However, the
frequent requirement of large-scale conformational transitions for binding
flexible proteins can lead to a potential kinetic bottleneck detrimental to
effective cellular signaling. It is hypothesized that long-range electrostatic
interactions between enriched charges on IDPs and their binding targets play a
key role in promoting facile binding. A specific hypothesis to be tested is that
long-range electrostatic forces not only accelerate IDP encounter, but also
promote folding-competent encounter topologies to allow efficient folding upon
encounter. This project will also tackle an emerging phenomenon known as
regulated unfolding in cellular signaling and determine how transient
hydrophobic interactions may reduce transition barriers and contribute to
efficient coupled binding, folding and unfolding in Bcl-2 family proteins. To
test these hypotheses, new GPU-accelerated, implicit solvent-based atomistic
simulation techniques will be developed to enable efficient calculation of the
free energy, pathway and kinetics of binding-induced large-scale protein
conformational transitions. Results from equilibrium and kinetic simulations
will be validated using existing mechanistic and kinetic data as well as new
measurements performed in collaboration with experimental labs. This project is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences with partial co-funding from the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational methods (CTMC) Program in the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.