* 1817983
* NERCCS 2018: First Northeast Regional Conference on Complex Systems
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Shelley Dionne, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 01/31/2019
* USD 4,836.00

This conference support helps the organization of NERCCS 2018: The First
Northeast Regional Conference on Complex Systems. This conference will provide a
much-needed venue for interdisciplinary scholarly exchange for researchers in a
variety of disciplines who share common interests in complex systems, that is,
systems made of many interacting components. Complex systems arise in a wide
variety of disciplines, such as social and organizational sciences, biology and
medicine, computer science and mathematics, engineering and information
technology, and so on. Making such an interdisciplinary venue available to
researchers (especially those in early stages of their career) at a conference
will be particularly important and helpful for the promotion of
interdisciplinary, multi-institutional collaborations, leading to stronger
scientific research programs and future discoveries. The conference schedule
will also include a one-day educational session for students, postdocs and
junior faculty who are new to complex systems.

NERCCS 2018: The First Northeast Regional Conference on Complex Systems aims to
establish a venue of interdisciplinary scholarly exchange for complex systems
researchers to share their research outcomes through presentations and post-
conference online publications, network with their peers, and promote inter-
campus collaboration and the growth of the research community. NERCCS 2018 will
particularly focus on facilitating the professional growth of early career
faculty, postdocs, and students who have only limited resources but will likely
play a leading role in the field of complex systems science and engineering in
the coming years. To achieve this objective, registration fees will be waived
for all student/postdoc authors whose submissions are accepted for presentation,
and they will also receive an opportunity to publish their work after the
conference in a newly developed open-access online journal, free of charge. The
new online journal, Northeast Journal of Complex Systems (NEJCS), will be
created in collaboration with the Binghamton University Library. All of these
features of the conference will contribute to the professional growth and
retention of those young talents in system sciences, who will likely become the
leaders of US academia and industries in the next decades.