* 1817468
* The Role of Lipids in Different Cell Fates
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Gunes Atilla-Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 730,731.00

This project will shed new light on the role of lipids in cell biology. Lipids
form barriers that define cells and their internal compartments. They are also
recently recognized for their critical roles as signaling molecules, regulating
cellular processes. It is now clear that cells produce thousands of unique lipid
species with diverse functions. However, the individual functions of these lipid
species remain unclear. Within this context, this project applies state-of-the-
art chemical biology and analytical approaches to investigate the role of
specific lipids in different cell fates. By doing so, this study will reveal
novel mechanisms underlying fundamental cellular processes. The comprehensive
methodological tools employed in this project allows training a globally
competitive workforce across the educational spectrum involving participation of
underrepresented student groups and teachers in research and scientific
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the function of lipids
during cell death, providing a better fundamental understanding of different
types of programmed cell death, which are physiologically critical processes
that are involved in maintaining cellular homeostasis. These goals will be
achieved using an integrative set of approaches that merges lipidomics,
transcriptomics, and proteomics with structure-specific bioorthogonal lipids
probes. This research program will focus on i) the function of distinct
ceramides based on their structure during apoptosis and ii) the role of very
long chain fatty acids in permeabilization of the membranes during necroptosis.
A two component integration will be used for these studies: i) Determine
substrate specificity of different ceramide synthases and investigate the
function of specific ceramides using structure-specific probes and genetic
perturbations, ii) determine the localization and interaction partners of very
long chain fatty acids during necroptosis. The objectives will elucidate the
function of lipids during cell death, providing a better fundamental
understanding of these physiologically critical processes. The results from this
work will shed light on the functional roles of specific lipids based on their
precise chemical structure. They will specifically elucidate the role of
individual ceramides and fatty acids on membrane permeabilization and their
interaction with other biomolecules during apoptosis and necroptosis. This
knowledge will open the door to novel studies investigating the impact of
structural specificity on lipid function in cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.