* 1817891
* Dynamics of transcriptional regulatory complexes: Mechanism and function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Keith Yamamoto, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2020
* USD 398,734.00

This project will define a new mechanism for dynamic regulation of gene
expression. Turning a gene on or off is known to occur by assembly of a
"regulatory protein machine" on the DNA near the gene. Such machines are
composed of gene-specific combinations of proteins that work as a unit to switch
the gene on or off in particular cells in particular ways. Emerging results
indicate that mechanisms have evolved to actively disassemble these machines,
resulting in a dynamic process of machine building and breakdown. This project
will investigate how the dynamics of these regulatory protein machines alters
the expression patterns of specific genes. The study is important because gene
expression patterns have long been thought to be specified solely by the makeup
of the regulatory machines without considering the role played by dynamics of
machine building and breakdown. The results of this work will define factors
involved in regulatory machinery dynamics and how they selectively modulate gene
expression patterns. Notably, this research plan is integral to the career
planning, development, and advancement to independence of an outstanding woman
scientist, providing valuable experience in conceiving, executing and managing
an original, impactful research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), this project will test the hypothesis that
transcriptional regulatory complex (TRC) dynamics is a determinant of specific
gene expression. The steroid hormone cortisol, which gates GR activity,
circulates at levels that fluctuate according to circadian and ultradian (~1
hour) cycles, and spike in response to certain external cues. DNA-bound GR-
containing TRCs are highly dynamic in vivo, with disassembly driven by molecular
chaperones. This project will 1) define mechanisms of GR:DNA dynamics; 2)
identify factors that target chaperones to TRCs to confer disassembly; and 3)
determine effects of TRC dynamics on GR-regulated transcription. Mechanisms will
be pursued in vitro and in cultured cells using molecular biological,
biochemical, and proteomic methods to define how chaperone-mediated dynamics
confers specific transcription patterns in response to glucocorticoid
fluctuations. Revealing dynamics as a regulatory modality will advance
understanding of context-specific metazoan gene expression, the principle
mechanism that distinguishes cells types and shapes biological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.