* 1817949
* Collaborative Research:  Dissecting photoconversion in fluorescent proteins frame by frame
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Chong Fang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project will investigate the mechanism of irreversible color conversion, as
observed in a set of fluorescent proteins derived from jellyfish and reef
corals. This group of proteins, termed green-to-red photoconvertible fluorescent
proteins (pcFPs), has greatly advanced molecular and cellular imaging techniques
in the life sciences. Notably, the light-induced change in appearance has played
a critical role in the development of super-resolution methods to image
subcellular events beyond the diffraction limit of visible light. The objective
of this project is to unravel the connection between protein motion and the
rearrangement of chemical bonds, an interplay that is ultimately responsible for
the development of red color. Ultrafast spectroscopic methods and computer
modeling will be combined with time-dependent biochemical measurements on pcFPs.
The correlation of dynamical and chemical processes will help elucidate novel
principles in photobiology and enzymology. This work will facilitate the
training of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as the training of
post-doctoral researchers. In addition, this project will serve as a cornerstone
for a number of outreach activities. To enhance evidence-based instructional
practices, cutting-edge research on pcFPs will be integrated into formal
coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work
is to investigate how ultrafast atomic motions in a protein's active site are
linked to long-range dynamics and catalytic functionality. To develop a
mechanistic model that connects protein motions to key chemical events,
femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy (FSRS) will be combined with
photoconversion kinetic measurements and molecular dynamics simulations.
Currently, wavelength-tunable FSRS is the only table-top technique that can
track bond vibrations starting with photoexcitation. Mechanistic hypotheses will
be tested by evaluating rate and equilibrium constants of pcFPs engineered to
bear modified building blocks. With this synergistic approach, functional models
will be developed that integrate ultrafast atomic motions, local side chain
rotations and global chain dynamics on the pathway of color
modification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.