* 1817845
* RCN:  Extreme Biophysics - The Molecular Limits of Life
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Catherine Royer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Much of life on Earth exists in extreme environments. These environments can be
very hot or very cold, they can have very high pressure, they can be extremely
acidic or alkaline, and they can contain very harsh chemicals. Cells and the
large molecules (e.g. proteins, DNA, membranes) that keep cells alive are highly
sensitive to environmental conditions. In the laboratory it can be shown that
under extreme conditions these molecules are degraded and their biological
functions are abrogated. In contrast, in their natural environments, cells
manage to survive and thrive under extreme conditions. It is of interest to
understand the mechanisms whereby cells and biological macromolecules adapt to
tolerate extreme environments, and how changing physical and chemical
environments have affected evolution during billions of years on Earth. This
Research Coordination Network (RCN) will bring together scientists from very
different fields to examine the limits of life on Earth. Besides fundamental
understanding of the rules of life, detailed understanding of how biomolecules
and cells have evolved to function in extreme environments will help in the
development of novel industrial and biotechnological processes for green
chemistry applications, bioremediation and bio-therapeutics. Improved
understanding of life in the wide range of extreme conditions compatible with
life will also inform the search for life on other planets and provide clues
about the origins of life on Earth. This RCN will foster the truly novel cross-
disciplinary collaborations that are needed to understand life in extreme
environments. It will fund scientific meetings, workshops, and lab exchange
programs to foment cross-pollination. The RCN will also contribute towards the
development of training programs for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows at the interface between the very different disciplines
required to achieve convergence in this research area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the Earth's biosphere and biomass are found under
extreme conditions of temperature (T), pressure (P), pH and salt (I). It is
already well understood that the physical (e.g. structure, stability,
interactions, solubility) and functional properties of all biological molecules
(e.g. proteins, DNA, membranes) are highly sensitive to conditions of T, P, pH
and I. The molecular and cellular mechanisms used for adaptation for life under
extreme conditions are poorly understood. This Research Coordination Network on
Extreme Biophysics will stimulate the convergence of disciplines (e.g.
geochemistry, oceanography, astrophysics, computation, biochemistry,
microbiology and geomicrobiology, analytical chemistry, genomics, molecular and
cellular biophysics) needed to understand how life evolved for 4 billion years
in response to changing conditions on Earth. Genomes from a large number of
extremophilic organisms are now available, providing a useful starting point for
a systematic study of molecular evolution of organisms in different
environments. The moment is ripe for the development of the field of extreme
biophysics. The central goal of this RCN is to regularly gather scientists with
vastly different backgrounds to examine systematically the biophysical and
biochemical basis for life under extreme conditions. Meetings, workshops and lab
visits will be the vehicle for exchange and collaboration. The outcomes of the
RCN include (1) identification of critical questions in extreme molecular and
cellular biophysics, (2) identification of the promising research areas and
systems useful for study, (3) progress with technological and conceptual road-
blocks, (4) cross-disciplinary collaborative efforts to attract funding for
research in this area, (5) pathways for training of young scientists to prepare
them for a truly this multidisciplinary approach to study life on Earth and
beyond. This RCN is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems
Program in the Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.