* 1817512
* M13 Phage:  A Model System for Complex Control of Multicomponent Processes in Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* John Fisk, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 590,738.00

Naturally evolved systems often contain complex nested control mechanisms
involving coordinated and competing biomolecular interactions that translate
into a myriad of phenotypes and behaviors. One of the grand challenges in
biology is the development of a molecular level understanding of how
genetically-encoded instructions are converted into the behaviors observed in
living systems. However, tractable model systems for quantitatively
investigating the complex control of biological processes are generally lacking
but would advance the understanding of control in biology and translate, as
other model systems have, into tools for engineering complex control
architectures in designed biological systems. The focus of this project is on
improving the quantitative molecular level understanding of a simple biological
system, bacteriophage M13. Bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria, have
been central to the development of molecular biology. As model systems for
understanding molecular phenomena, phage systems remain at the forefront of
research in nanomaterials and nanomedicine and act as important component-
generating technologies for drug and material discovery through phage display.
The PI will develop a detailed model of the molecular interactions that govern
the behavior of phage systems, which will provide quantitative insight to enable
applications in synthetic biology, nanotechnology, bio-manufacturing and
medicine. The PI will use interactive platforms to engage K-12 students in
computational systems biology projects, integrate undergraduates in research,
and train students thus contributing to the preparation of the next generation
of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
previous work involving a simulation of M13 growth that integrates 50 years of
experimental observations, the goals of this project are to evaluate the nested
feedback control loops in the M13 life cycle and fill in gaps in the
quantitative understanding of M13 biology. The first objective of the current
project involves quantification of the poorly-understood M13 protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions that govern phage DNA replication and the system level
response to modifications of the DNA replication program. The second objective
involves the identification and quantification of the protein-RNA interactions
that regulate the timing and extent of phage protein production. Within this aim
the system level effects of modifying the protein-RNA control mechanisms will be
investigated. The final objective of the project is to integrate the results of
the experiments into the simulation model. This aim will focus on augmenting the
model with new quantitative data from Aims 1 and 2, and evaluating the present
state of understanding by comparing the results of the system level experiments
to predictions. Repeated cycles of theoretical refinement and experimental
testing are required to build an engineering design cycle for M13 phage. This
proposal will result in a greatly improved quantitative understanding of M13
biology and an infrastructure for the design and production of highly modified
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.