* 1817365
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: (Northern New Jersey Bridges to the Baccalaureate Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jacqueline Kineavy, Passaic County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,498,946.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northern New
Jersey LSAMP Bridge to the Baccalaureate (NNJ-B2B) project continue its
partnership between four community colleges in the state, namely, Passaic County
Community College (PCCC), Hudson County Community College (HCCC), Union County
Community College (UCCC) and County College of Morris (UCM), to increase
transfer rates to four-year STEM degree programs for traditionally
underrepresented minority students. PCCC leads the alliance which includes two
new community colleges - UCM, an emerging Hispanic-serving community college,
and HCCC during the three-year project. The goal is to increase the number of
transfers by 900 students during the project period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NNJ-B2B institutions will leverage knowledge generated
from prior NSF funded projects to bring expertise to the design and
implementation of a range of high impact practices that will aide in achieving
its transfer goal and transform its recruitment and retention interventions and
institutions. Students will benefit from early undergraduate research
experiences and mentoring activities in addition to social integration
activities with institutions in the Garden State Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation led by Rutgers University. Leadership and governance
activities of the alliance will continue emphasis on improving articulation
policies with four-year institutions. A longitudinal study of students
participating in the B2B project since 2014 is proposed along with process
evaluation. Project outcomes will be disseminated locally and nationally through
conferences and on-line STEM education journals. Findings from this LSAMP B2B
project will benefit educational institutions and the STEM community nationally
in broadening participation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.