* 1817307
* Cellular crowding effects on biomolecular stability and dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lisa Lapidus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

The research will connect the highly detailed atomistic views of the interior of
biological cells with their overall functional behavior. The ultimate outcome is
a model of biological cells based on basic physical principles that can be
queried to gain a comprehensive understanding of biological processes across a
wide range of scales. The research at interdisciplinary boundaries between
physics, chemistry, and biochemistry and between simulation, modeling, and
experiment provides unique opportunities for training future generations of
scientists. The involvement of undergraduate students is a central theme. Teams
of undergraduate students from different disciplines will come together under
co-mentorship by a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher to begin first
research experiences with a strong interdisciplinary perspective. The
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities is a major
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular environments consist of dense,
heterogeneous solutions of biomolecules where interactions are unavoidable yet
molecules have to remain fluid and in their native states to carry out
biological function. Computer simulations are combined with spectroscopic
experiments to characterize the effects of crowding on biomolecular dynamics,
stability, and diffusive properties. Dense protein solutions are studied along
with systems involving membranes, chromosomal DNA structures, and metabolites.
The focus of this project is on characterizing the transient interactions that
occur under such conditions and how they affect biomolecular behavior. That
insight will allow the construction of predictive models that can relate protein
chemistry to dynamic and diffusive behavior, and ultimately biological function,
under in vivo conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.