* 1817837
* Photoreceptor Dynamics Over Ten Decades of Time
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Peter Tonge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

Living organisms sense and respond to light using proteins called photoreceptors
which control processes such as the movement of bacteria and plants towards
sunlight and enable humans to see. Photoreceptors can be thought of as on/off
switches, and the goal of this project is to determine precisely how light
alters the shape of the photoreceptor to turn the switch on or off. The
knowledge that will be gained will be very useful for designing new light-
triggered switches that can have wide ranging applications ranging from
microbes, plants and animals, including humans. Project personnel will receive
rigorous training in STEM activities since the experimental and computational
methods used in this project are at the intersection of chemistry, physics and
biology. In addition, graduate and undergraduate students will travel to a
facility in the UK 2-3 times a year to collect data and interact with scientists
from a diverse array of disciplines. Training in STEM also extends to high
school students who will spend 10-12 weeks in the PI's lab each summer, jointly
supervised by a visiting high school teacher. Scientific research is becoming
increasingly more interdisciplinary, and an important outcome of the training
will be to enable project personnel to engage in cross-disciplinary research,
and thereby meeting the scientific challenges of the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoreceptors contain an embedded
chromophore, and the goal of this project is to determine precisely how
chromophore excitation couples to and influences protein dynamics, from the
initial absorption through the complete photocycle - i.e. over many decades of
time. Two groups of photoproteins will be studied: photochromic fluorescent
proteins that can be reversibly switched between bright and dark states, and
photoreceptors where excitation results in structural changes that ultimately
modulate and contribute to biological processes such as photosynthesis, visual
transduction and circadian rhythms. In each case, elucidating the underlying
mechanism of operation remains a central challenge, which will drive the
development of novel optogenetic tools and their deployment in applications such
as super-resolution microscopy. The objectives of the project will be met using
a combination of theory and experiment in which molecular dynamics simulations
will be informed by ultrafast measurements of proteins labeled with
spectroscopic reporter probes, to site-specifically time-resolve structural
dynamics from the sub-ps to ms-s time domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.