* 1817277
* Revealing Evolution of Electrons and Magnetic Field in Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 517,801.00

Modern solar physics explores the Sun through new observations with
fantastically improved spectral coverage and spatial, spectral, and temporal
resolutions relative to only a few years ago, brought about by recent advances
in technology. In parallel, the complexity and volume of the data have been
increasing proportionally. The main goal of this three-year project is to
tightly couple these multi-dimensional observations with theory, analysis tools,
and modeling to obtain new knowledge and make fundamental scientific discoveries
in solar physics, particularly about the nature of the physical drivers of the
solar activity. The solar activity depends critically on coronal magnetism,
which, broadly speaking, includes magnetic field generation, control of
morphology/topology, temporal evolution, and transformation into kinetic,
thermal, and non-thermal energies in the Sun's corona, as well as coupling
between the magnetic and thermal structures. The ability to measure the coronal
magnetic field and its changes on dynamic time scales is critically needed to
uncover fundamental physics driving solar flares, eruptions, and activity. While
reliable direct measurement of coronal magnetic fields has been lacking, this
project aims to radically change the situation by taking full advantage of the
large wealth of high resolution data and modeling that is finally becoming
available. Specifically, a practical opportunity for routine use of radio
observations of the Sun's corona for probing the magnetic structures involved in
solar flares has recently become available for the first time from the new,
fully functional microwave interferometer -- the NJIT's Expanded Owens Valley
Solar Array (EOVSA) -- which has started regular interferometric observations of
the Sun. To make sense of these highly demanding data, with progressively
increasing volume and complexity, and to integrate these data into a full
synthetic picture of the magnetic and thermal structure along with accelerated
non-thermal electrons in solar flares, this project will utilize sophisticated
models that combine the most advanced theories, computational codes, and
simulation tools with the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes broad
dissemination of the new knowledge gathered in solar radio-astronomy to enhance
scientific understanding not only in solar physics, but also throughout
astrophysics. The fundamental nature of EOVSA's observations ensures a broad
impact on the field of solar physics, including future instrument development
for the DIKIST, FASR, etc. The work will result in user-friendly software tools
that will be made widely available to the solar and space weather community
through the Solarsoft IDL distribution library. These modeling tools will be
used during the summer internships at the NJIT's Center for Solar-Terrestrial
Research (CSTR), where the project team recruits local junior high school
students to participate in cutting-edge solar research. In addition, being
performed within highly diverse environment provided by the CSTR at NJIT, the
various project activities will advance discovery and understanding, while
promoting teaching, training and learning. In particular, the easy-to-use tools
to be developed during this project make great learning tools that will be
widely used in graduate courses at the CSTR, such as "Radio Astronomy,"
&lt;br/&gt;"Solar Physics," and "Plasma Physics and
MHD."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year project emphasizes the unique ability
of EOVSA to quantify evolution of solar flares by dynamically measuring coronal
magnetic fields along with the thermal and non-thermal electron distributions
with high spatial and temporal resolution. The project objectives include: (i)
obtain evolving maps of coronal magnetic field and electron distributions in the
flaring loops; (ii) build consistent evolving three-dimensional models of solar
flares that, through forward fitting, simultaneously fit all available data,
including the magnetic field, radio, X-ray, EUV and others; and, (iii) provide
open access to these product to the scientists and the public. The project team
will adopt an integrated research approach that brings together new microwave
imaging data available from the EOVSA, data from other ground-based instruments
as opportunities allow, and data from the latest space missions, coupled with
advanced modeling and forward-fitting, to obtain the three-dimensional magnetic
field and particle distributions in flaring loops. The research and EPO agenda
of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.