* 1817934
* Mechanical signal transduction and growth control: role of osmoregulation and cell wall extensibility
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Gabriele Monshausen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 819,855.00

This research will analyze how plants sense and adjust to their mechanical
environment. Plants constantly experience mechanical challenges such as wind,
heavy rain or dense soils. Many plants respond to these challenges by developing
thicker, shorter stems and by tuning the architecture of their root systems for
enhanced stability and strength. In crop plants, such responses play an
important role in determining yield. To improve plant growth under adverse
mechanical conditions, it is essential to understand how plants perceive
mechanical challenges and how they translate this information into appropriate
developmental responses. This project will analyze how the activity of plant
membrane proteins is coordinated to modulate the mechanical properties of plant
cells and organs in response to mechanical challenges. Understanding such
processes should be of practical value in engineering more resilient and robust
agricultural crops. Furthermore, tools will be developed that will enable
researchers to identify which cells in a plant experience mechanical stresses
under different growth conditions. Finally, this project will provide training
opportunities in modern molecular biology and microscopy techniques for a
postdoctoral researcher, graduate and undergraduate students. It also includes
effective hands-on investigation of original hypotheses by large numbers of
students while introducing high school students to molecular biology research
and techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular perception of mechanical stress
is a key element of growth control in plants. Mechanical forces associated with
turgor pressure are harnessed to drive cellular expansion while mechanical cues
imposed by the environment typically cause a reduction in cell elongation. The
principal investigator's laboratory has identified the receptor-like kinase
FERONIA as both a key regulator of mechanical Ca2+ signaling and a control
element of cell expansion and growth responses to environmental mechanical
challenges. A major research goal is to identify targets of FERONIA-dependent
signaling and to understand how these signaling components impact cell
expansion. To this end imaging-based tools will be developed to quantify rapid
cellular osmoregulation, determine changes in viscoelastic properties of cell
walls, and characterize the distribution and magnitude of mechanical signaling
patterns in living tissues. This research aims to provide insight into the
molecular mechanisms of mechanical signal transduction, identify strategies to
enhance plant mechanical strength and provide the means to monitor mechanical
stress in situ during plant development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.