* 1817099
* Polarimetric Tomography of Supernovae: Observational Probes of the Explosion Physics, Progenitor Stars, and Extragalactic Interstellar Dust
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lifan Wang, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 289,990.00

A research team based at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) will carry out detailed
observational studies of supernovae (SNe), because the imagination is fired with
the awesome spectacle of stellar catastrophe. The maximum luminosity can equal
that of a billion suns and matter is thrown into space at a few percent of the
speed of light. As the explosion causes the star to expand and thin out, the
signals from successive layers reveal the nature of the interior of the star.
New insight into the formation of compact objects (neutron stars and black
holes) can be acquired. The ejected matter is enriched in new elements, thus SNe
are the main drivers of the nuclear evolution of the Universe. SNe may eject
matter from galaxies in SN-heated galactic winds. They are an important factor
in the physical evolution of galaxies. Finally, because they are so bright, SNe
also serve as exquisite indicators of extragalactic distances. They measure the
cosmic distance scale and determine the history of the cosmic expansion. The
research on supernovae will also be integrated into the extremely successful
TAMU Physics Festival, which attracts over 4,000 people nationwide each year.
The principal investigator of the project is also a key member of a
collaboration with artists and computer scientists in TAMU and other Texas
Universities to produce 3D presentations of astronomical data and concepts,
including research results from this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectropolarimetry, the method used by the TAMU group, is
the only practical means to tomographically map the composition-dependent 3-D
shape of distant SN explosions. The field of SN spectropolarimetry is now poised
to pass from the phase of constructing broad outlines of phenomenology to doing
detailed physics-driven probes of the explosions and their aftermath. Many
recent observations point strongly towards a double-degenerate progenitor
scenario for at least a significant fraction of Type Ia SNe. But the apparent
sphericity of the ejecta throughout different chemical layers poses a serious
challenge to the double-degenerate models. Very early observations of SN Ia
should yield new constraints on the progenitor systems and explosion mechanism.
Imaging polarimetry with high spatial resolution will also provide new insights
into the nature of circumstellar and interstellar dust, and the comparison of
interstellar dust particles in extragalactic space and the Milky Way.
Polarimetry of SNe therefore offers the best chance of directly resolving the
issue of dust extinction in supernova cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.