* 1817774
* The role of dynamics in E3 ligase function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Elizabeth Komives, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 899,905.00

The project will explore the motions of a large cellular machine that labels
proteins for destruction. The label is a small protein called ubiquitin (Ub),
which is attached to the condemned protein to target it to the proteasome where
it is degraded. The cellular machines (E3 ligases) that are responsible for
tagging proteins with Ub are very large, nearly 300 kilodaltons in size, and
they contain eight to ten protein subunits that all work together to put the Ub
tag on the condemned protein. These machines function in all higher life forms,
so it is essential to understand how they work. Structural and dynamic
experiments will explore the mechanism of how these machines work in vitro using
an assembled, purified, active machine. Two graduate students will work full-
time on the project, and they will learn both protein biochemistry and
biophysical experimental methods. High school students will work in the lab
during the summer months. The high school students, some of whom are from
disadvantaged backgrounds, will gain knowledge of cutting edge mass spectrometry
methods used to understand protein dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on ASB-CUL5-RING E3s (ASB-CRL), a large class of E3 ligases. They
consist of one of 18 Ankyrin and SOCS box proteins (ASBs) as substrate
receptors, elongins B and C (ELOB/C), cullin 5 (CUL5), and the E2-binding
protein (RBX2). Each ASB binds 10-15 substrates. No structures are available for
ASB-CRLs. The project aims to understand the structure, dynamics, and function
of the ASB9-CRL. Thus far, full-length ASB9-CRL has been purified following
strategic co-expression in E. coli. The purified complex is active in vitro and
ubiquitylation of two substrates, creatine kinase (CK) and histone octamers has
been demonstrated. Structural models of CRLs predict a distance of over 60
angstroms between Ub and the substrate, and it remains unknown how Ub is
transferred across such a long distance. Additionally, neddylation has been
shown to regulate the ubiquitylation activity of CRLs. In the first part of the
project, ubiquitylation assays will be used to quantitatively compare the rate
of Ub-transfer to CK and to histone octamers by the neddylated and un-neddylated
ligase. The Ub attachment sites and extent of poly-ubiquitylation will be
measured. In the second part of the project, hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry (HDXMS) will be used to probe the internal and global
conformational dynamics that drive the long distance conformational changes
required for Ub transfer by the ASB9-CRL. In the third part of the project,
cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) will be used to obtain high-resolution
structures of the full ASB-CRL complex and important sub-complexes. The
populations and rates of interconversion of the conformational states will be
investigated by single molecule FRET (smFRET). Together, the results will reveal
the internal dynamics and global dynamics of the ASB9-CRL that are required to
achieve processive ubiquitylation of protein
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.