* 1817321
* Discovering the Building Blocks and Structure Property Relationships of Grain Boundaries Using Machine Learning
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric Homer, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational, data-centric,
theoretical research and education aimed to include the effects of defects in
optimizing the properties of metal alloys. Defects in the structure of
materials, such as interfaces between constituent crystallites or grains, can
strongly influence their strength or resistance to corrosion and cracking.
Scientists and engineers have been able to create a limited number of materials
with enhanced corrosion and crack resistance by finding and increasing the
fraction of interfaces, or grain boundaries, that were correlated with these
properties. Unfortunately, these successes were limited to a small fraction of
real-world materials. The PIs' preliminary work suggests that through artificial
intelligence techniques - machine learning - grain boundary structures can be
identified that correlate with specific material behaviors. This award supports
the application of machine learning and other data intensive techniques to
correlate microscopic grain boundary structure with different macroscopic
properties. Specific attention will be paid to which methods provide the most
useful insight and which methods allow one to identify the physical processes
controlling grain boundary behaviors of interest. The work will enable the next
generation of materials to be tailored with properties unique to specific
applications. This could enable a range of optimized materials such as alloys
with superior corrosion-resistance and deformation-resistance, high strength-
high ductility materials, and enhanced fracture-resistant
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This project supports education and training of the future
workforce in data-intensive materials research. Software developed through
research and data created through research will be made available to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational, data-centric, theoretical research and education to combine
machine learning and multi-resolution representations to discover grain-boundary
structure-property relationships and advance materials design. Identifying the
microscopic features that affect macroscopic materials properties is essential
to materials design. Optimizing alloy performance where grain boundaries play an
important role is limited by current understanding of the microscopic structures
that affect macroscopic properties. The PI will combine machine learning and
multi-resolution representations to discover grain boundary structure-property
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results led to representations that retain
physical interpretability and suggest that the physical mechanisms that control
grain boundary behavior can be identified. The PI's aim to obtain grain boundary
structure-property relationships that incorporate both atomistic and
crystallographic structure. To pursue this goal, the PIs will: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Apply Statistical Mechanics to Grain Boundaries: Grain boundary potential energy
landscapes will be examined for their influence on both static and dynamical
properties;&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine Long-Range Effects of Structures on
Properties: A multi-scale representation will be used to predict properties,
such as shear coupling, which cannot be predicted well using only short-range
environments. The PIs aim to identify the short- and long-range structures that
correlate with various properties and verify their role using another
representation, scattering convolutional networks.&lt;br/&gt;3. Connect
Crystallographic Property Trends to Atomic Structure: Translate atomistic
property trends learned in this project into experimental, or crystallographic,
coordinates. This will connect microscopic structure to macroscopic properties
and advance toward grain boundary engineering.&lt;br/&gt;The research combines
modeling, theory, machine learning, and simulations to discover grain boundary
structure-property relationships and their governing physics. Two graduate
students will work closely with both PIs to form a cross-disciplinary team to
tackle this challenging problem and will be trained in data-intensive materials
research and other advanced methods of materials research. Software developed
through research and data created through research will be made available to the
broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.