* 1817448
* RUI:  Molecular Mechanisms of Short-Range Electron Transfer in Metalloproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Debra Mohler, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 449,881.00

This project will focus on understanding the molecular level mechanism of short-
range electron transfer in proteins. All living systems obtain energy through
electrons occupying high energy states, either through respiratory chains (food)
or from light (photosynthesis). Electron transfer is a vital function of the
many proteins responsible for storage, transfer, and transformation of this
energy. While there is some understanding of the factors controlling charge
transfer over longer distances, little is known about biological electron
transfer at distances shorter than 1 nm. Filling this gap will advance the
knowledge of the fundamental steps in bioenergetics. By developing computational
and experimental models to predict and explain the key parameters of these
reactions, a cohesive understanding of short-range biological electron transfer
will be obtained. In addition, the project will provide research training for
undergraduates and will support innovations in the science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system that will be studied is
PpcA, a 3 heme cytochrome from Geobacter sulfurreducens, genetically modified
and covalently labeled with a number of photosensitizers will be used as a model
system to study charge transfer reactions. The kinetics of the reactions will be
studied with time-resolved fluorescence and absorbance spectroscopies at room
and cryogenic temperatures. The structural integrity of protein-photosensitizer
complexes will be monitored with SAXS and CD spectroscopy. Extensive all-atom
molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to predict structures and to
evaluate structural dynamics. These predictions will be tested experimentally
with a number of structural techniques. The collected kinetic data will be
analyzed in the context of molecular structures and will be used to test and
revise currently available computational and theoretical approaches for the
prediction of electron transfer rates and pathways. This project will also
facilitate curricular updates in a number of upper level laboratory courses at
James Madison University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.