* 1817962
* Molecular mechanisms of degradation of environmental organoarsenical herbicides and growth promoters
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Masafumi Yoshinaga, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 465,000.00

This award is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to understand soil bacterial activities that
significantly increase toxicity of environmental arsenic introduced through
agricultural practices. The results may provide useful information for lessening
environmental arsenic pollution. Other project outcomes could furnish useful
information for the development of more effective herbicides and anti-infective
drugs for farm animals and herbicide-resistance crops. The project involves the
use of biochemical and genetics methods that examine the degradative pathways
for organoarsenicals. The project contributes to the education and research
training of students. The project is performed at Florida International
University which is a minority-serving urban public research institution in
Miami. There are opportunities for broadening the exposure students of
underrepresented groups to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methyl and aromatic
arsenicals have been used as herbicides and anti-infective drugs respectively,
for farm animals. These organoarsenicals are degraded into more toxic inorganic
forms through microbial activities, leading to environmental pollution.
Previously the Principal Investigator (PI) identified a novel organoarsenical
degradation pathway that is composed of multiple steps catalyzed by a soil
bacterial community. The PI further identified one novel gene involved in
organoarsenical degradation and biochemically characterized the encoded enzyme.
However, the pathways and molecular mechanisms of organoarsenical degradation
are still largely unknown. The project employs combined approaches of genetics,
analytical chemistry, biochemistry, microbiology, molecular and structural
biology to identify and characterize major molecular components in the
degradative pathways for environmental organoarsenicals. The knowledge obtained
through this project may elucidate the ways that microbes change the environment
through biotransformation of anthropogenic
organoarsenicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.