* 1817697
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Investigation of cell-cycle regulated roles of CSLD proteins during plant cytokinesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Heather Mayes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2022
* USD 728,296.00

Cellulose is one of the most abundant biological polymers on the planet, is an
important structural component of plant cell walls, and is the main component of
wood, cotton, and paper. Cellulose is also an important renewable material with
diverse industrial uses, including as feedstock for sustainable biofuels.
Despite its centrality in nature and industry, we still know little about how
cellulose is constructed. This project uses integrated experimental and
computational modeling approaches to investigate the functions of a recently
characterized family of cell wall synthases, called cellulose synthase-like D
(CSLD) proteins. CSLDs play pivotal roles during plant cell division, and are
essential for plant growth and development. Understanding CSLD function will
provide critical insight into how cellulose and similar biomolecules are formed.
This project will be carried out in a collaboration involving U-M and UGA-CCRC
laboratories that will provide graduate students unique interdisciplinary
training experience. Additionally, the project has been designed to offer
research opportunities for undergraduate participation, providing societal
benefits through the education of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates the functions of
CSLD synthases during plant cell wall deposition in Arabidopsis. CSLD proteins
were recently shown to play novel roles during plant cytokinesis, and both
subcellular targeting and stability of CSLD5 are cell-cycle regulated. The
experiments outlined in this project will address the following questions: 1)
Are CSLDs a distinct class of cellulose synthases? 2) Does loss of CSLD impair
cell wall integrity during cytokinesis? 3) What regulates targeting and turnover
of CSLD5? Question 1 will be addressed using a combination of biochemical
reconstitution and computational simulations of plant cell wall synthases.
Question 2 will be addressed using quantitative cellular imaging to monitor cell
wall dynamics during cell division. Question 3 will be addressed using a
proteomics-based approach to identify post-translational modifications
regulating CSLD5 stability during cytokinesis, and a forward-genetic screen for
cellular components involved in destabilizing CSLD5 during M/G1 transitions, a
cell-cycle step largely uncharacterized in any eukaryotic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.