* 1817650
* Moving toward an accurate molecular dynamics force field for intrinsically disordered proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Brigita Urbanc, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2023
* USD 554,614.00

The goal of this project is to improve the accuracy of molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations for studying the structure and dynamics of intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs). Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) make up about a third
of the proteins found in eukaryotic cells (cells of more complex organisms than
bacteria), and are involved in many essential cellular processes, but as their
name implies, their structures are not well defined. In this project, the
investigators will develop force fields, the physics based laws that describe
how atoms interact with each other, that can be used for IDPs in MD simulations.
This work will contribute to understanding how IDPs contribute to the machinery
of life. New MD force field parameters will be made publicly available such that
others can use them in their simulations. The interdisciplinary research will
carried out by three graduate students who will gather expertise in MD,
biophysics, physical and organic chemistry, and a variety of spectroscopic
techniques. The project will foster an international collaboration among the
laboratories of Profs. Urbanc (PI) and Schweitzer-Stenner (Co-PI) at Drexel
University in Philadelphia and Harald Schwalbe at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe
University in Frankfurt/Germany. PI and Co-PI will organize summer workshops on
MD simulations of unfolded peptides at Drexel University and an effort will be
made to attract students and faculty targeting underrepresented minorities from
neighboring institutions to attend this event. The research outcomes will be
featured through the annual Kaczmarczik Day event, which offers demonstrations
of research conducted at the Physics and Chemistry Departments at Drexel
University to the general public, mostly high school students from the local
Philadelphia area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental research on unfolded
peptides demonstrate that for most amino acid residues in water the backbone
dihedral angles are restricted to two predominant regions in Ramachandran plot
corresponding to polyproline II (pPII) and beta-strand. Of all amino acids,
alanine shows the highest pPII propensity, which is important in the context of
molecular dynamics (MD) force field development that routinely uses alanine-
based short peptides as reference systems. Current MD force fields consistently
fail to reproduce the high pPII content of alanine-based short peptides observed
in vitro. The PIs and collaborators have acquired multiple experimental data for
most naturally occurring guest residue x in GxG (G-glycine, x-all amino acids
other than Q, G, P and W) peptides in water, which allowed them to uniquely
determine residue-specific intrinsic conformational ensembles. This proposal
will utilize this comprehensive set of experimental data to test the existing MD
force fields and water models with respect to their ability to reproduce the
conformational propensities of guest residues x in GxG peptides in water (Aim
1); derive a new parameterization of the existing MD force field, AMBER ff99SB,
and combine it with the water model that best captures the intrinsic
conformational propensities of guest residues x in GxG peptides to obtain the
new force field AMBER ff99SB EXP-GxG (Aim 2); and conduct a systematic five-step
assessment of the resulting AMBER ff99SB EXP-GxG force field that will test its
transferability to longer unfolded peptides and its ability to capture protein
folding and protein self-assembly into soluble protein oligomers (Aim 3). These
advances in MD force field development will improve predictions of MD
simulations of IDPs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences and the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in
the Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.