* 1817835
* Molecular mechanisms of cell polarity and development of distinct plasma membrane domains during formation of pollen apertures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Anna Dobritsa, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2023
* USD 975,044.00

To perform their functions, cells often need to create regions on their surface
which will differ from the surrounding areas in their protein and lipid
composition. These regions are known as cellular domains. How cells direct
molecules to specific positions and produce such domains is poorly understood.
Pollen grains provide a beautiful example of a cells' ability to precisely form
domains on their surfaces. Pollen surface is typically covered by a protective
structure, pollen wall exine. However, in the majority of plants, certain
regions on the pollen surface do not receive deposition of exine and instead
develop into characteristic gaps, the apertures. To produce apertures,
developing pollen consistently marks future aperture sites as different from the
rest of the surface and protects them from exine deposition. This project will
investigate molecular mechanisms through which pollen creates aperture domains.
In the course of this project several young scientists (a postdoc as well as
graduate and undergraduate students) will be trained. In addition, pollen
biology will be used as a tool to engage and educate the general public through
a variety of platforms, including activities at a local science museum, arts
class, and a botanical garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formation of distinct
cellular domains is critical for cell functions, but the mechanisms involved in
creating these domains are still poorly understood. Pollen provides an excellent
model for studying these mechanisms. In most plant species, the outer cell wall
of pollen grains, called exine, is deposited on the pollen surface non-
uniformly, with certain surface areas excluded from exine deposition and
developing into characteristic openings, the apertures. Existence of apertures
indicates the presence of tightly controlled mechanisms used by developing
pollen to specify cellular domains. In this project, the roles of several
aperture genes recently discovered in Arabidopsis will be studied to understand
the mechanism of aperture formation. Through a variety of genetic, imaging,
biochemical, and computational methods, the proposed work will define cell-
biological and molecular events involved in this process. It will also explore
the questions related to the evolution of pollen aperture diversity and will
characterize molecular players that could be responsible for the interspecies
similarities and differences in the process of aperture
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.