* 1817125
* Feeding and Feedback:  Understanding the Assembly of Galactic Disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/31/2018,08/31/2023
* Crystal Martin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2023
* USD 505,601.00

The growth of galaxies occurs as the galaxies gather gas from their surroundings
to produce stars. The stars will then produce a 'wind' that is driven by
starlight and energetic particles along with supernovae from the explosion of
more massive stars. This wind serves to drive gas away from the galaxies which
slows down the star formation rate. This project will study the flow of gas in
and out of star forming galaxies by looking at how the light from distant
quasars is absorbed as it passes through the gas surrounding the more nearby
star forming galaxies. The project will also compare their results with
cosmological simulations to better understand both the simulations and the
status of the galaxies. The project will also enhance the educational
opportunities for underrepresented minorities from elementary school to the
graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As galaxies grow, they accrete gas from
their surroundings to feed their star formation. As they form stars, they
produce a galactic wind that drives gas away. This project will study the flow
of gas in and out of star forming galaxies. The flow of the gas will be measured
by observing absorption lines from circum-galactic gas lying along the line-of-
sight to distant quasars. This will give us a better understanding of how gas
flows in and out of galaxies as they grow. The project will analyze 50 new
sightlines, sampling the circum-galactic medium (CGM) around several typical
star forming galaxies. The project will then compare these results with
cosmological simulations of galaxy formation, using the EAGLE simulations. The
project will also perform a ?Look Back Study? by comparing galaxies at redshifts
of ~0.2 with their lower mass progenitors a redshifts of 2. In this part, the
project will look at clumpy distant galaxies and statistically determine if the
clumpiness can be related to different outflows of gas. The project will also
enhance the educational opportunities for underrepresented minorities from
elementary school to the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.