* 1817873
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Convergent extension in a dynamically patterned epithelium
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Terri Williams, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 445,344.00

For an embryo to develop from a fertilized egg into an adult, cells must
elongate in a coordinated and orderly manner. Elongation is required for
processes as basic as extending the body axis or as specific as growing the tips
of tubules inside of kidneys. This research will examine the process of
elongation in the flour beetle, Tribolium, throughout the time that the embryo
is forming the repeated parts, called segments, which make up its
anterior/posterior body axis. Although an apparently seamless process, previous
work showed that segmentation slows down, then speeds up as the body elongates.
Corresponding to this switch in rate, cells behave differently during early and
late elongation stages. This work will build on those preliminary observations
and, first, carefully describe the switch in how clusters of cells elongate and,
second, investigate how it is controlled. This kind of discontinuity or switch
in tissue elongation in a progressively elongating body axis is unusual and
likely to provide insight into novel mechanisms of elongation. The research is a
collaborative effort between a type 1 research university and a teaching
college. A major impact of this work is to rigorously train undergraduates in
interdisciplinary research, combining computer modeling of elongation with
hands-on experimental manipulations of the beetle embryo. Undergraduates from
the teaching college are linked to the research institution through both on-site
visits and extensive online interactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis
underlying this work is that the elongating Tribolium embryo represents a tissue
that transitions between two mechanisms of convergent extension during early and
late stages of embryo elongation. Based on preliminary data, a model of
elongation in Tribolium is proposed in which anterior cells undergo ordered
intercalation analogous to what is known in Drosophila embryo extension, while
posterior cells move in a less orderly fashion relative to neighbors, directed
by tissue-level boundaries in the elongating posterior. The work integrates
experimental approaches with computational models to test these hypotheses. It
combines live imaging of mutant embryos, that differentially affect the
alternate models of elongation, with in silico modeling to provide mechanistic
insights into Tribolium elongation. This research highlights Tribolium as a new
model of elongation. It will develop a basic understanding of the unique genetic
and cellular mechanisms that contribute to the discontinuous changes in tissue
elongation in Tribolium's progressively elongating body axis. The proposed
dynamic feedback between computational models and experiments will improve
understanding of how upstream regulatory networks translate into discrete cell
behaviors shaping morphogenesis. This work will also allow comparisons to the
well-studied insect model, Drosophila, as well as vertebrates, which also
elongate progressively. Such comparisons can identify variable versus conserved
mechanisms of elongation, providing information about the evolution of
fundamental processes that drive morphogenesis. Additionally, the project will
generate RNA Seq data, genetic tools, and models of embryo and tissue elongation
useful to the community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.