* 1817612
* I-Corps: Citizen science technology platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Gregory Newman, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project capitalizes on
the current growth in citizen science to explore the commercial potential of a
technological platform that streamlines data capture, collection, integration,
hosting, visualization, analysis, and sharing for citizen science projects.
Although widely popular, the tasks necessary to do citizen science well are
onerous, complex, and frustrating leading to inefficiencies, lost time, and
added expense. Project managers need tools that help them and their volunteers
execute research in a fast, easy, and cost effective method. They need to easily
tailor the governance of members and data and be able to quickly recruit,
communicate with, and oversee members. They need data collection tools flexible
enough to support their specific and evolving needs; they need data to be high
quality, secure, backed up, curated, and accessible all in a centralized place.
They need to easily detect outliers, be able to fix errors, upload data, create
reports, and efficiently automate the sharing and delivery of data to
stakeholders.

This I-Corps project explores the market need for an online platform to realize
the full potential of citizen science. Citizen science engages the public in
scientific research and is growing rapidly. Currently, thousands of citizen
science projects engage millions of participants. However, there is a disconnect
between software features and project needs. Current projects remain fraught
with inefficiencies and software and data systems are ad hoc and disjointed.
This results in software and data silos. Current solutions limit observations to
single points, lack support for rigorous scientific experimentation and
analysis, and cannot deliver data to consumers in a readily usable format. This
platform streamlines data collection and sharing through flexible, fully
customizable, and synchronized real-time web and mobile applications. It
improves project data management, analysis, and visualization. It amplifies the
impacts of projects by increasing awareness, collaboration, and sharing across
projects.