* 1817358
* RUI:  Catalytic and non-catalytic targets of lysine deacetylases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Terry Watt, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 314,896.00

The goal of this research project is to define the functions of two lysine
deacetylase enzymes from human cells that modify the chemical structure of other
proteins. These changes in chemical structure alter cellular functions;
therefore, lysine deacetylases impact many biological processes. However, it is
not known which lysine deacetylase controls which cellular function and how,
because the specific interactions with each protein within cells have not yet
been determined. Better knowledge of the workings of lysine deacetylases will
enhance our understanding of how important biological processes such as cellular
growth and development are regulated. The project will also strengthen the
research environment at Xavier University of Louisiana, a Historically Black
College or University, by enabling the participation of undergraduate students
in hypothesis-driven, high impact research. Participants will receive training
relevant for progression into graduate programs and the scientific workforce.
Additionally, the research infrastructure and results will be used to support
training of undergraduate students in advanced laboratory
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lysine deacetylases (KDACs) have both enzymatic
roles (deacetylation of proteins) and non-enzymatic roles (association into
complexes that regulate gene expression and protein function). Despite the
widespread acetylation of proteins in human cells, few specific substrates or
indirect targets of KDACs have been identified. The project will clarify the
specific functions of two KDACs and whether those functions involve catalysis in
vivo. The target proteins of the two KDACs will be identified; these targets
could be directly deacetylated and/or these targets maybe affected via other
regulatory functions. Cell lines containing genomically encoded catalytically
inactive KDACs will be used to evaluate the acetylation of intracellular
substrate proteins, and these will be validated to verify direct deacetylation,
evaluate selectivity, and correlate in vitro reaction rates with in vivo data.
The project will also determine the intracellular specificity of KDAC inhibitors
believed to target a single KDAC. Overall, this project will greatly expand
understanding of how KDACs function in vivo and provide insight into the
different mechanisms and pathways through which KDACs exert their
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.