* 1817691
* Finite Element Approximations of Bending Actuated Devices
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrea Bonito, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 09/30/2022
* USD 272,414.00

The ability to generate complex deformations from relatively small energies has
tremendous applications in micro-engineering and biomedical science. This
research focuses on developing and implementing mathematical algorithms able to
predict and optimize the deformation of elastic films, chosen for their
potential in the production of robust and light-weight micro-scale devices. The
deformations considered are triggered by exposing to external stimuli either
polymers with different expansion characteristics or manufactured gels with
residual stresses. Devices based on these technologies are, for instance,
employed as drug delivery vesicles, cell encapsulation devices, sensors, bio-
muscles and as proxies for tissue growth. In addition to these applications in
biomedical science, the development of autonomous foldable structures such as
self-deployable sun sails in spacecraft or deployable aircrafts, photovoltaic
devices, actuators, micromotors, microgrippers, microvalves, microswimmers are
very popular interests in the engineering community this research is likely to
have impact on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study focuses on thin devices
where bending is the principal mechanism for, possibly large, deformations. The
mathematical models are derived as the two dimensional limit of thin three
dimensional hyper-elastic solids. They are characterized by energy densities
dominated by bending, expressed geometrically as the film's second fundamental
form. In addition to the difficulties inherent in the non-divergence form of
this fourth order system, fully non-linear geometrical constraints must be taken
into account in the context of large deformations. The aim of this research is
to derive mathematical models when not available for the targeted application,
and to design, analyze and implement finite element based algorithms for their
approximations. The entire process from the mathematical analysis to the actual
highly parallel implementation of finite element algorithms is covered. Hence,
analytical tools borrowed from differential geometry and calculus of variation
are blended with numerical analysis and delicate computational efforts to
achieve efficient and practical algorithms. The ability to generate complex
deformations from relatively small energies has tremendous application in micro-
engineering and biomedical science. The algorithms resulting from the proposed
research - and in particular their relatively effortless implementations - are
likely to have impact in these areas. To mention a few applications, devices
based on bilayers of polymers or prestrained films are employed as drug delivery
vesicles, cell encapsulation devices, sensors, bio-muscles and as proxies for
tissue growth. In addition to these applications in biomedical science, the
development of autonomous foldable structures such as self-deployable sun sails
in spacecraft or deployable aircrafts, photovoltaic devices, engineered
scaffolds, actuators, micromotors, microgrippers, microvalves, microswimmers are
very popular research interests in the engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.