* 1817764
* Analysis of the Ribonucleases of Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Pamela Green, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 768,695.00

Changes in gene expression are crucial for plant growth, development and
resistance to pathogens. A better understanding of how gene expression is
regulated is fundamental to the process of plant engineering and hence to
improved agricultural production. Plants regulate gene expression at multiple
levels and the aim of this project is to characterize proteins called
endoribonucleases, which regulate gene expression at the level of mRNA
degradation. An important aspect of this project is to determine how these
endoribonucleases impact the biology of plants, including plant growth and
development. This project will train young scientists on fundamental aspects of
gene regulation. The young scientist will receive interdisciplinary training
through interactions with collaborators who are experts in systems biology and
chemical engineering. A Shadow a Scientist program will give middle school
students the chance to meet scientists, tour a research laboratory, and to see
experiments for this project in progress. Other outreach activities aim to
engage the public and to inspire scientific interest in people from a broad
range of backgrounds and age groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this project is to elucidate the roles of ribonucleases (RNases) that
participate in mRNA degradation in Arabidopsis. Examining the roles of
endoribonucleases in post-transcriptional control of genes is an underdeveloped
area of research, but a timely one. The hypothesis underlying this proposed
research is that elucidating the targets and post-transcriptional impact of
endoribonucleases will enhance our understanding of key players in plant mRNA
decay, such as the exosome, as well as lesser known or putative
endoribonucleases whose role is yet to be discovered. To test this idea and
others, the project will first create a set of double mutants to stabilize mRNA
decay intermediates produced by endoribonucleases so they can be deeply
sequenced; single endoribonuclease mutations will be introduced into an xrn4
null mutant background to achieve this. Second, to identify substrates of the
endoribonucleases, RNA decay intermediates and RNA levels will be analyzed on a
global scale in the double mutants and controls using Parallel Analysis of RNA
Ends and RNA-Seq data. Should any of the endoribonucleases act on nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay (NMD) targets, that would be intriguing given that plants
lack the metazoan NMD endoribonuclease, SMG6. Third, new biological impacts of
the endoribonucleases will be hypothesized and tested in the single mutants on
the basis of the functional associations of their cleaved substrates. Fourth,
post-transcriptional mechanisms that involve the endoribonucleases will be
investigated. Localization of the endoribonucleases, the identification of
proteins interacting with them and other post-transcriptional data will refine
phenotypic hypotheses and models. Beyond making use of The Virtual Plant for
this pursuit, this project will enhance its power with new post-transcriptional
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.