* 1817712
* Quantifying Single Molecule DNA-ligand Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Megan Nunez, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

DNA interactions are critical aspects of the life cycle of the cell, but the
mechanisms that govern many of these interactions are not well understood at the
molecular level. There are many examples of important DNA interactions that are
difficult to study using traditional biophysical methods. For these cases the
investigators develop new methods in which small forces are applied to stretch
single DNA molecules in the presence of proteins and small molecules. By
quantifying force-dependent DNA interactions, the investigators can determine
the molecular properties that regulate these interactions. The results from
these measurements provide unique insights into important biological processes.
The project also involves training and professional development of undergraduate
and graduate students from a variety of backgrounds. This includes full-time
undergraduates working in the lab as part of Northeastern's co-op program,
scientific training at a women's college, and providing opportunities for
students from a regional university with a majority of first-generation college
students and a high percentage of low-income students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses DNA stretching with optical tweezers to
probe biologically important molecular-level nucleic acid interactions that are
particularly well-suited to probe with single molecule methods. Small molecule-
DNA interactions will be studied, particularly for cases in which significant
DNA structural rearrangements are required for DNA binding and dissociation. The
properties of these small molecules that determine the DNA unfolding landscape
will be measured, revealing critical information needed for the design of useful
new ligands. LINE1 is a retrotransposon that is active in human cells. Recent
studies probed the interaction between an essential LINE1-encoded protein,
ORF1p, with nucleic acid, showing that its universally conserved coiled coil
motif facilitates ORF1p oligomerization on nucleic acid. This project will probe
the biophysical mechanism responsible for oligomerization, a process that is
essential for retrotransposition. Finally, the activity of several E. coli DNA
polymerases and polymerase manager or accessory proteins will be studied. These
studies will reveal detailed interactions that are part of the bacterial
response to DNA damage, a response essential for all life. This project is
jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the
Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.