* 1817708
* Multiplexing Autonomous Metabolite Valves
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Kristala Prather, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2022
* USD 480,789.00

Biotechnology promises to provide access to many of the things that society
needs, such as medicines, materials and fuels from renewable resources. This
project aims to accelerate these efforts by providing tools to make biological
production from microbes more efficient. Microbes and other biological systems
naturally produce a wide range of chemical compounds, though not all are useful
for human needs. Many of these compounds are essential for microbial growth, and
their production decreases synthesis of target molecules of interest. The tools
developed in this project will allow for the dynamic control of pathways that
are essential for growth and that lead to target molecules. These control
mechanisms will not require a person to make any alterations to the system to
switch pathway function, so the system will operate autonomously. This research
will significantly advance the ability to dynamically control metabolic
pathways. In addition to the scientific advancements, this project will
facilitate training of one graduate student through the end of her doctoral
studies along with at least one undergraduate student. The PI will also engage
in outreach activities with K-12 students, undergraduates in summer research
programs in residence at MIT, and female graduate students and post-docs in the
"Path of Professorship" program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop multiplexed Metabolite Valves to enable the independent control of
two or more genes in a cell without the need for exogenous inducers. Coupled and
independent quorum-sensing systems will be used to construct the circuits.
Multiplexed circuits will initially be characterized using fluorescent
reporters, and configurations will be developed that enable both OFF-to-ON and
ON-to-OFF switching. Two target pathways have been identified for validating the
approach, providing the test cases necessary to demonstrate broad utility of the
constructed devices. Finally, the circuits will be interfaced with CRISPRi
actuation to achieve an even higher order of control. These valves will
contribute to the advancement of efforts at the intersection of metabolic
engineering and synthetic biology. The device toolkit will be (i) well-
characterized with respect to common variables employed in microbial cultivation
and (ii) generalizable across many pathways. The development of valves to both
independently and autonomously control two or more genes will represent a new
level of complexity in the design of synthetic gene circuits for metabolic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.