* 1817513
* iSTEM: A Multi-state Longitudinal Study of the Effectiveness of Inclusive STEM High Schools
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Barbara Means, Digital Promise Global
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2020
* USD 828,569.00

Researchers from SRI and George Washington University are studying the
effectiveness of inclusive STEM high schools in three key geographic regions
including Texas, North Carolina and Ohio. STEM schools continue to be an
important policy area and test bed for one indication of what STEM education can
accomplish under the most optimal conditions in which STEM is the focus of
students' learning experiences. The President has called for the creation of an
additional 1,000 STEM schools with relatively little evidence about the impact
of such schools or the evidence of which configurations and elements of such
schools are important. The study's focus is on the extent to which inclusive
STEM high schools contribute to improved academic outcomes, interests in STEM
careers, and expectations for post secondary study. The research study engages
in implementation research to examine the elements of the STEM schools' design
and implementation and other contextual factors, including state policies, which
are associated with superior outcomes.

This is a quasi-experimental study of the effects of attending an inclusive STEM
high school comparing outcomes for students in these schools with those of their
counterparts attending other types of schools in the same states. The study
includes all students in the 9th or 12th grade in the inclusive STEM high
schools and students in samples of same-state comparison schools identified
through propensity score matching. Data are collected longitudinally using
student records and surveying students at regular intervals. The study follows
the 12th grade students after graduation into postsecondary study and the
workforce. The states identified in this study have the requisite administrative
data systems to support the proposed study. By using a combination of data
available in state-level data bases and new information obtained through project
surveys, the researchers are identifying students who are matched not only on
demographic variables and academic achievement before high school entry, but
also on indicators of pre-existing interest and expectation such as self-
efficacy and prior participation in informal STEM-related activities. Impacts on
student achievement are analyzed separately for each state. Data on the elements
of STEM schools are collected through teacher and administrator surveys and
interviews. State STEM school history and policy data are collected through
document analysis and interviews. The study utilizes hierarchical regression
models, with separate models of each outcome measure and adjustments for tests
of multiple comparisons. Student attrition is monitored and findings are
examined to determine influence of attrition.

This project focuses on inclusive rather than selective STEM schools so that the
population of students more typically represents the population of the students
locally. The study provides a source of evidence about not only the
effectiveness of STEM schools, but also contextual evidence of what works and
for whom and under what conditions.