* 1817966
* Collaborative Research:  Developing a multi-scale understanding of microtubule dynamic instability
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Holly Goodson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,030,160.00

Most cells in a wide range of organisms contain a dynamic substructure called
the cytoskeleton, a network of protein-based polymers and associated proteins
that has fundamental roles in cell movement, DNA partitioning, and internal cell
organization. A key aspect of many cytoskeletal polymers is that they require
chemical energy in the form of ATP (or GTP) to maintain a polymerized state. The
harnessing of this energy allows the cytoskeletal filaments to do work, respond
dynamically to internal and external signals, and self-organize. The major goal
of the work in this project is to use a combination of experiments and
computational modeling to develop an improved theoretical framework for
understanding and predicting the behaviors of these dynamic cytoskeletal
polymers as observed at different scales. More specifically, the proposed work
sets out to establish how the biochemical properties of the polymer subunits
(including the rate at which they burn ATP or GTP) relate to the behaviors of
the individual filaments and to the overall behaviors of populations of
filaments. In addition, the project studies how filament binding proteins work
together to regulate filament dynamics. While this work is basic science, it has
the potential to have practical applications in nanotechnology and synthetic
biology. Through this project, graduate students and undergraduates will receive
interdisciplinary training in both computational modeling and experimental
biology. High school teachers and students will also be engaged in the research
process. Freely available, open-source software and tutorials produced through
this project will help students and researchers at all levels gain an intuitive
understanding of dynamic polymer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical
perspective, the project has four specific goals, most of which focus on a type
of cytoskeletal filaments known as microtubules. Individual microtubules exhibit
a dramatic behavior known as dynamic instability, in which they stochastically
alternate between extended periods of growth and depolymerization. (1) The first
project goal is to develop and test hypotheses for the mechanisms of the
transitions in microtubule dynamic instability by relating the behaviors of the
filaments to the subunit-level structure of their tips. The approach will
utilize a combination of work with a previously established detailed
computational model of microtubule dynamics, a novel data analysis tool for
identifying and statistically categorizing the microtubule behaviors, and
experimental data acquired at high temporal and spatial resolutions. (2) The
second goal is to establish a predictive understanding of the relationships
between the biochemical characteristics of the subunits (kinetic rate
constants), the behaviors of the filaments (e.g., dynamic instability,
treadmilling) and the attributes of the polymer systems (e.g., critical
concentrations, steady states). The approach will utilize a combination of
computational modeling (performed with variants of the model used in Goal 1) and
experiments with a bacterial relative of tubulin called PhuZ (chosen because
wildtype and altered versions of this protein can be expressed in bacteria and
characterized in vitro). (3) The third goal is to use a combination of
experiments and computational models to test a set of hypotheses for how a group
of filament binding proteins known as +TIPs (microtubule plus-end tracking
proteins) work together to regulate microtubule behavior. (4) The final goal is
to create for broad distribution packages of our software and associated
analysis tools used in Goals 1 to 3. These packages will include software
targeted at both the research and teaching communities. While the focus of our
studies is on microtubules, the resulting multi-scale understanding of
polymerizing filament systems should apply to steady-state (energy-utilizing)
polymers more generally, including actin, bacterial filaments, and polymers
created through biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.