* 1817083
* CIF:Small:Machine Learning Based Turbo Detection for Two and Three Dimensional Magnetic Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Benjamin Belzer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 516,000.00

This project investigates two and three dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR and
3DMR) for next generation hard disk drives. In TDMR, bits are written on two-
dimensional patches of a magnetic storage disk, whereas in 3DMR bits are written
on multiple disk layers. TDMR is an emerging technology that promises up to an
order of magnitude increase in information bits per unit of disk area, without
requiring radical redesign of the disk. 3DMR is an even newer technology that
has the promise of significant areal information density increases over TDMR. A
key problem in TDMR and 3DMR is that, at high densities, some bits are not
written to any of the magnetic grains on the disk. Moreover, one must contend
with signal dispersion: along-track, across-tracks, and between layers. This
project investigates machine learning for turbo detection of TDMR and 3DMR
channels at high densities of between 1 and 4 magnetic grains per coded bit. The
considered machine learning topics include design of local area influence
probabilistic model detectors, recently introduced by the investigators, and
design of deep neural network detectors for TDMR and 3DMR. Through established
collaborations, the investigators will validate the developed techniques with
realistic waveforms and will facilitate technology transfer. The project also
includes educational and outreach components. The investigators will work with
the Voiland College of Engineering Diversity Programs office to identify
potential undergraduate researchers from underrepresented groups to participate
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific technical objectives of this
project are: (i) developing information-theoretic design techniques for deep
neural networks, (ii) designing machine learning based media noise predictors
for TDMR turbo-detectors, (iii) designing deep neural network detectors that
handle both two-dimensional intersymbol interference and media noise, (iv)
generalizing the machine learning based detector designs for 3DMR, and (v)
evaluating the developed designs with TDMR and 3DMR waveforms derived from
realistic micromagnetic simulations, obtained from international collaborators.
This work is expected to provide significant progress toward the industry's
information density target of 10 Terabits per square
inch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.