* 1817282
* Implementation Project: Achieving Greater Confidence and Competence in Quantitative and Computational Skills in STEM Disciplines at Fisk University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Princilla Evans, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,214,490.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthen education and research. The
project at Fisk University seeks to build on previous successful efforts to
increase participation of African-American students in STEM disciplines. The
goal of the project is to increase the quantitative and computational confidence
and competence of undergraduates, with a particular emphasis on biologically
relevant sciences in all STEM disciplines, to meet the evolving needs of those
disciplines so as to attract, prepare and sustain under-represented
undergraduate STEM majors for post-graduate training and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the objectives to: increase
faculty confidence and competence in quantitative and computational approaches
in the natural sciences and, reciprocally, increase awareness of contemporary
problems in the biologically relevant life sciences for faculty in mathematics
and computer science; develop and study the transdisciplinary Community of
Practice model, which is modified to include a reciprocal, semi-structured
instructional component; increase student confidence and competence in
quantitative and computational approaches by early introduction of these tools
into the required curriculum; and sustain and enhance deeper learning in
gatekeeper courses using Supplemental Instruction. Each objective is supported
by a set of evidence-based strategies and activities, some of which will be
studied for effectiveness in the setting of this university. The project will be
advised and evaluated for effectiveness by internal and external advisory boards
and by an evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.