* 1817297
* Catalytic Hydrodeoxygenation of Sugar Acids to Dicarboxylic Acids
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Yomaira Pagan-Torres, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Exploratory research will be conducted to assess the feasibility of potentially
transformative catalyst technology for manufacturing dicarboxylic acids from
renewable sources of carbon such as lignocellulosic biomass. Current industrial
processes for these acids - which are used widely in the production of polymers,
pharmaceuticals, solvents, textiles, and plastics - rely on petrochemical
feedstocks derived from fossil sources, and utilize relatively harsh conditions
and energy-intensive separations. Biomass sources potentially offer a more
direct synthesis route while contributing to energy sustainability. The study
will address challenges associated with specific chemical reactions at oxygen-
containing groups in the carbon structure, while also exploring catalyst
formulations that decrease the need for expensive precious metal catalyst
components. Recently, interest has surged in the production of dicarboxylic
acids from renewable sources, mainly via fermentation of glucose or through
further processing of waste byproducts from natural bio-processing such as
tartaric acid from wine-making. Specifically, the study will target two model
tartaric acid reactions: deoxydehydration to maleic acid and hydrodeoxygenation
to succinic acid, both carried out in commonly available solvents. The study
will address two overarching objectives, 1) the development of a heterogeneous
catalyst comprised of rhenium oxide supported on gallium-promoted cerium
dioxide, and 2) a study of the catalytic performance of the rhenium oxide
catalysts, prepared in various ways, on the deoxydehydration and
hydrodeoxygenation of vicinal diols in tartaric acid. A key aspect of the study
is the extent to which supporting the rhenium oxide on the gallium-promoted
cerium dioxide can enhance the stability of the catalyst while eliminating the
need for common precious metal components such as palladium or iridium, thus
paving the way for more durable and lower cost catalysts. Successful
demonstration of the proposed catalyst formulation depends on the extent to
which the gallium-promoted cerium oxide support can both stabilize isolated
monomeric rhenium oxide species (of varying oxidation state) and achieve the
facile dissociation of hydrogen gas, as required for the sequential
hydrogenation reactions and for regeneration of the active rhenium site. Both of
those functions are typically achieved through the incorporation of palladium in
the catalyst synthesis. Data suggesting the possibility of eliminating the
expensive noble metal component, while stabilizing the active rhenium species,
would open a path to transformative catalyst technologies for producing
dicarboxylic acids from biorenewable carbon feedstocks. The study also includes
an education plan aimed at increasing the involvement of undergraduate Hispanic
women in research, and enhancing undergraduate curricula at the PI's institution
in key areas related to nanotechnology, engineering materials, and renewable
energy.