* 1817552
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Use of Material Remains to Trace Cultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Katelyn Bishop, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 19,589.00

Animals figure prominently in prehistoric ritual and religion throughout the
world. Because of their unique colors, behaviors, and their ability to fly,
birds in particular have been one of the most symbolically important types of
animals throughout time. This is especially true in the prehistoric Americas,
where the study of their remains from archaeological sites can help address
questions concerning prehistoric ritual and religion. Katelyn Bishop, a PhD
Candidate at the University of California, Los Angeles, will examine prehistoric
Pueblo ritual and religion through an analysis of the use and ideological
significance of birds in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico between AD 850-1150.
Ethnographic, ethnohistoric, and archaeological research have demonstrated the
centrality of birds in Pueblo ritual and cosmology; avifaunal remains, which are
frequently under-studied, should therefore be considered strong indicators of
ritual practice, the analysis of which can speak to ideological perceptions and
belief. The reconstruction of ritual practices in Chaco Canyon, a major social
and ceremonial center in what is now New Mexico, during the Pueblo II period (AD
900-1150), will contextualize these traditions in the long development of Pueblo
ritual and religion, and within broader regional context in the greater
Southwest. The results of this research may have relevance to modern descendent
communities, and can enrich the experience of visitors to the Chaco Canyon
National Historical Park through the creation of an interpretive exhibit on the
past and present importance of birds in the Pueblo world, and online material
for those who cannot access the remote location of the park. This project will
bring together material from widely disbursed institutions, and demonstrate the
importance of bringing to light old and unpublished collections from historic
excavations.

Through the analysis of both avifaunal remains and the depiction of birds in
art, Bishop seeks to address three major goals: (1) to understand the nature of
ritual practice and ideologies that involved birds; (2) to understand how ritual
was organized across the canyon, within and between multiple great houses and
small sites; and (3) to examine change over time in the nature of ritual and its
organization. In the process of achieving these goals, this project will
synthesize all avifaunal remains and bird imagery from the nearly 130-year long
history of excavation in the canyon. Bishop relies on the theoretical
perspective of ritual as a form of social practice, where ritual is a dynamic
activity that is both structured by and can restructure existing social and
belief structures. This theoretical perspective makes it possible to understand
what ritual practices may have looked like, and how they may have changed over
time. She also employs ethnographically-based models to understand the
organization of this ritual practice, with expectations derived from modern and
historic organizational principles of ritual. Under the guidance of Dr. Gregson
Schachner, Bishop's research will advance our understanding of Pueblo ritual and
religion, the nature of the Chaco regional system, and the value of birds in
prehistory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.