* 1817324
* Triacylglycerol and lifespan control in a model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Min-Hao Kuo, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 875,550.00

The overarching goal of this project is to delineate how triacylglycerol (TAG),
a ubiquitous storage fat in eukaryotic systems, preserves the longevity of the
underlying cells. This lifespan preservation function of TAG is independent of
its canonical role of energy provision, thereby potentially transforming the
understanding of the interplay between a well-known but long-overlooked
biomolecule and cellular pathways pivotal to long-term survival. Interestingly,
while analyzing microalgal lipases, the PI's group made the unexpected discovery
that yeast cells deficient in TAG lipases have a prolonged chronological
lifespan. These observations formed the basis for the hypothesis that fat
storage droplets may serve as sinks for reactive oxygen radicals (ROS) that are
known to be toxic to cells and hence reduces lifespan. The proposal is founded
on a set of strong preliminary studies that correlate increased chronological
aging in yeast with accumulation of TAG and decreased chronological aging with
reduced TAG levels in stationary phase cells. Three yeast strains already
available to the PI (wild type, 'lean' and 'fat') will be used to test the
hypothesis and make a positive outcome highly likely. The project will train
doctoral and undergraduate students to become critical, independent, and ethical
researchers. In addition, this project further broadens its impact by
integrating the core concept of lifespan preservation by TAG into an advanced
biochemistry laboratory course offered to senior students (~90 each year) that
major in biochemistry and biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of
lifespan control in model organisms have revealed key pathways shared by species
from yeast to humans. However, despite decades of research, the molecular causes
underlying cellular senescence remain elusive. The Kuo group discovered that the
intracellular TAG of budding yeast S. cerevisiae is a key determinant for
chronological lifespan (CLS), a quantitative measurement of viability of post-
mitotic cells kept in the stationary phase. Genetically engineered strains with
higher TAG content survive much longer, whereas those deprived of TAG die
shortly after entering the stationary phase but exhibit normal vegetative
growth. Blocking TAG hydrolysis for energy extraction leads to TAG accumulation
and lifespan extension, arguing strongly for a novel function outside energy
utilization. Because TAG is a ubiquitous lipid species in eukaryotes, these
findings may provide a clue explaining "obesity paradox," that is, adult humans
deemed overweight have the lowest all-cause mortality. In this project, the Kuo
group proposes to use yeast as the model to uncover the mechanistic details and
functional relationship between TAG metabolism and lifespan regulation.
Specifically, the following hypotheses will be tested: (1) TAG protects aging
cells by acting as a sink that traps free radicals that are detrimental to
lifespan preservation (= Radicals Sink Hypothesis). (2) Enzymes key to TAG
metabolism are regulators of chronological lifespan and genetically interact
with other lifespan regulatory pathways. Genetic experiments will help construct
an integrative lifespan regulation network in yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.