* 1817556
* Molecular Mechanisms of Spontaneous and Hsp 70-assisted Renaturation of Misfolded Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Weitao Yang, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 924,210.00

Proteins play numerous fundamental functions within a living cell. They are
polymers that fold into unique 3D structures to support specific protein
functions. Under non-ideal circumstances such as heat shock, the structures may
become denatured, in which case proteins cannot function or even become toxic to
cells. All cells have evolved mechanisms to correct the structures of denatured
proteins with the help of enzymes termed chaperones. One important chaperone
system is Hsp70, and the mechanism by which Hsp70 chaperones refold and rescue
denatured proteins remains unclear. Understanding the Hsp70 mechanism is of
fundamental significance, as failure of chaperones makes cells vulnerable to
changes in the environment and is associated with age-related diseases such as
Alzheimer's or Parkinson's. The goal of this project is to resolve the Hsp70
mechanism by novel research strategies involving Atomic Force Microscopy and
cryogenic electron microscopy that allow examination of the behavior of
individual protein and chaperone molecules. In addition, computer modeling will
be used to examine interactions between denatured proteins and their rescue
chaperones to identify key mechanistic actions of chaperones. This project will
advance understanding of the mechanisms responsible for preserving protein
structure and function, and will contribute to training graduate and
undergraduate students, developing a new cadre of scientists educated in
molecular biophysics. The project will also broaden basic knowledge among the
general public about molecular mechanisms responsible for life self-
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will exploit a combination of
protein engineering with Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)-based single molecule
force spectroscopy (SMFS), single-particle cryogenic electron microscopy (SP-
cryo-EM) and computational modeling. The focus will be on elucidating the
differences between spontaneous refolding pathways of misfolded proteins and
refolding pathways steered by mechanical forces and by chaperones. SMFS
measurements will examine proteins' propensity to misfold and will capture
spontaneous refolding intermediates, which will be further characterized by SP-
cryo-EM. The hypothesis about the "unfoldase action" of Hsp70 will be tested by
emulating this action with AFM. These measurements will determine whether the
unfoldase action is necessary and sufficient for spontaneous refolding. The
forces between Hsp70 and its substrates, which are currently unknown, will be
directly measured and their magnitude will be compared with computational
predictions in order to evaluate the current "power stroke" model of Hsp70, in
which the protein mechanically clamps on its substrate to remove non-native
contacts. A new alternative model proposing that Hsp70 action resets the
structure of misfolded proteins to their "nascent chain-like form" will be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.