* 1817122
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Machine Learning for Effective Fuzz Testing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Dawn Song, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

In recent years, fuzz testing has evolved as one of the most effective testing
techniques for finding security vulnerabilities and correctness bugs in real-
world software systems. It has been used successfully by major software
companies for security testing and quality assurance. State-of-the-art fuzz
testing tools have found numerous security vulnerabilities and bugs in widely
used software such as Web browsers, network tools, image processors, popular
system libraries, C compilers, and interpreters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fuzz
testing works by generating random input data for a program under test. A key
reason behind its huge popularity is that it has low computation overhead
compared to other sophisticated techniques such as dynamic symbolic execution.
While fuzz testing has been highly successful in practice, it has been mostly
implemented in ad-hoc ways by incorporating a collection of hacks and best
practices. As such, fuzz testing techniques usually generate many redundant test
inputs and take several days to weeks to find bugs. For complex input formats,
such as for random C program inputs for a C compiler, a huge amount of manual
tuning is required to make fuzz testing generate valid test inputs. This project
proposes to make fuzz testing smarter and more effective by applying machine
learning with customizable testing objectives. The proposed techniques will use
probabilistic machine learning models, such as n-grams, recurrent neural
networks (RNN), recursive neural networks, or multi-armed bandits, to generate
inputs from scratch or to mutate a set of seed inputs. The model will be trained
in such a way that the inputs generated by it will maximize the custom testing
objective. We expect that such a model will generate fewer redundant inputs and
can be customized to user-provided testing objectives. This project aims to
contribute to the development of reliable, secure, and trustworthy software. The
tools and techniques developed in this project will make it easier for
programmers to write correct and secure programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.