* 1817942
* Large scale ancestral reconstruction of protein sequence, structure and molecular function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Bryan Kolaczkowski, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 361,265.00

Using statistical models to infer the sequences of ancestral molecules allows
researchers to directly study ancient molecules in the laboratory. These studies
have greatly improved our understanding of how molecules work and are being used
to generate new therapeutics and inform biochemical engineering efforts.
However, errors made when inferring ancestral sequences could undermine
downstream laboratory studies. The goal of this project is to characterize how
and why ancestral sequence reconstruction might fail and to develop new methods
that overcome these problems. The primary benefit of this research is two-fold.
First, understanding the causes of sequence reconstruction errors will help
researchers better evaluate the reliability of their results, so that erroneous
sequences are not inadvertently used in costly functional studies. Second, the
development of more reliable methods will allow researchers to study the
functions of ancient molecules that could not otherwise be examined in the
laboratory. By improving the methods used to infer ancestral molecular
sequences, the results of this research are expected to improve our
understanding of molecular evolutionary processes and empower studies using
these approaches to develop useful biological molecules. Broader impacts
activities include developing new courses to train the next generation of
scientists in ancestral sequence reconstruction and its
uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing robust ASR methods depends on
understanding when and how ASR can fail. Using analyses of simulated and
biological sequences, this project will test the hypothesis that ancestral
sequence reconstruction is sensitive to alignment ambiguity and will develop new
methods to incorporate alignment ambiguity into the ASR process. High-throughput
ASR depends on accurate prediction of molecular function. This project will test
the hypothesis that structure-based function prediction is sensitive to
uncertainty in the underlying structural model, but accuracy can be improved by
optimizing structures. This project will integrate ASR methods with structure-
based function prediction to characterize the large-scale evolution of double-
stranded RNA binding domains, which mediate protein-RNA and protein-protein
interactions across a variety of gene contexts throughout all domains of life.
By determining the links between protein sequence substitutions, structural
changes and functional evolution across large protein families, this work has
the potential to transform our understanding of the general principles by which
molecular function evolves, fundamentally advancing molecular-evolutionary
theory and providing a foundation for rational protein
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.