* 1817652
* Specificity of chemotaxis-driven motility in Sinorhizobium meliloti host interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Richard Helm, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 991,202.00

Chemotaxis enables motile bacteria to move away from harmful and towards
beneficial chemicals. One unique group of motile soil bacteria are rhizobia,
which can live freely in the soil, as well as engage in specific symbiotic
relationships with leguminous plants such as peas, soy beans, and alfalfa. This
symbiosis supplies the host plant with nitrogen, which is the most limiting
nutrient for plant growth. The process of chemotaxis in the model rhizobium
Sinorhizobium meliloti allows the organism to recognize its host, which improves
the symbiotic relationship, and consequently, enhances plant growth. The PI
discovered multiple and diverse chemoreceptors in S. meliloti, which are used to
sense chemical compounds. However, little is known about the attractant spectrum
or the specificity of rhizobial chemoreceptors. The overarching goal of this
project is to characterize the specific adaptations of S. meliloti
chemoreception to the range of host-derived attractants. Results from this
research will transform our current concepts of bacterial behavior in soil
through discovery of emergent properties of legume-rhizobia interactions.
Chemotaxis of the soil bacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti is a critical
prerequisite for the establishment of its symbiotic relationship with alfalfa.
The discovery of a new type of bacterial chemotaxis, namely attraction to plant-
borne betaines, and the identification of the rhizobial chemoreceptor for these
compounds expands our understanding of plant-bacteria communication. The results
of this research will open avenues for developing novel and innovative
strategies to enhance chemoreception in the symbiotic bacterium S. meliloti,
which will increase symbiotic efficiency, result in higher level of nitrogen
fixation, and may ultimately increase crop yields. This project can directly
benefit future agricultural and environmental issues by reducing the use of
chemical fertilizers. Broader Impacts activities will involve the
interdisciplinary training of graduate students. The team is committed to
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, especially underrepresented
minorities and women. Public outreach activities include hands-on demonstrations
for elementary and high school students, both on- and off-campus, and
involvement of high school students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the
Alfalfa-S. meliloti interaction as a model system, the investigators aim to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms that govern legume-rhizobia communications.
Understanding these mechanisms could open important new avenues for addressing
daunting agricultural and environmental issues. This research will characterize
S. meliloti chemoreceptors for which functional understanding is lacking. In an
orthogonal approach, the investigators will define the nature of plant-derived
compounds responsible for the recruitment of S. meliloti to the host
rhizosphere. The composition of compounds exuded by plants into the rhizosphere
has specifically evolved to attract symbiotic microbes to the roots of their
corresponding hosts. First, the investigators propose to characterize the
diverse phytochemicals secreted by the S. meliloti host alfalfa using mass-
spectrometric metabolome analysis and quantitative chemotaxis assays. This study
will uncover the S. meliloti attractome and establish the contributions of
individual compounds to chemotaxis. Second, they propose to identify receptor
ligands for individual chemoreceptors and determine receptor-ligand interaction
through behavioral, genetic, biochemical, and structural analyses. The already
highly advanced biochemical and structural characterization of McpX serves as
blueprint for these analyses. The proposed research will advance our knowledge
of the role of exuded root metabolites in the dialogue between plants and
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project is jointly funded by Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (CDF Cluster) and Integrative Organismal Systems (PBI
Cluster), with additional support provided by the Directorate's Rule of Life
Venture Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.