* 1817976
* Environmental stress and heritable protein aggregation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Yury Chernoff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 786,019.00

The goal of this project is to decipher the relationship between environmental
stress and protein-based inheritance. Protein-based heritable elements, best
understood in yeast and other fungi, provide a new mechanism for inheritance and
memory. Traits controlled by these elements are not directly encoded in DNA
sequences. Instead, they depend on the presence of an altered (typically,
aggregated) protein isoform (termed a prion), which can convert a normal
cellular protein of the same amino acid sequence into a prion state. This work
will investigate the role of stress in protein-based inheritance. The work could
have broad significance for the industrial use of yeast, for example in
production of alcohol and biofuels (processes associated with severe stresses).
Additional outcomes will come from integration of the research with course
development, teaching, and mentoring (including students from underrepresented
groups), which will contribute to education in the areas of genetics,
biochemistry and biotechnology. The project will also provide support for
research infrastructure by strengthening the interdisciplinary centers and
groups at Georgia Institute of Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formation and
propagation of yeast prions is modulated by other proteins (termed chaperones),
that are normally involved in protein folding and defense against environmental
stresses. This project investigates how stresses, such as heat shock, influence
protein-based inheritance, what is the role of chaperones in these effects, and
what is the impact of protein-based stress "memory" on stress resistance. The
unifying hypothesis tested in this project is that prion-like aggregation could
be adaptive due to generation of a subpopulation of cells, with a prion-based
"memory" of stress, that are induced under stress conditions and possess
increased resistance to subsequent stresses. Toxic prion aggregates may occur as
by-products of such adaptive aggregation and are counteracted by the cellular
stress defense machinery. Mechanisms of the effects of heat shock on prions and
the role of intracellular relocation of chaperones in these effects will be
investigated using a combination of genetic, cytological, biochemical and
proteomic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.