* 1817437
* RAPID: Documenting the temporal variance of the isotopic signature of detrital sediments following massive stochastic events using Hurricane Maria as a case study
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Amanda Schmidt, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2019
* USD 8,800.00

Hurricane Maria's direct hit on Dominica caused thousands of landslides and
debris flows that coursed down stream beds and poured sediment into coastal
waters. Such massive and episodic sediment erosion and transport is important
both as a geologic hazard affecting communities on the island, and because the
impact of rare events on erosion rates determined from isotopic tracers measured
in detrital sediment remains a major uncertainty in these methods. The
scientific team is in a unique position to quantify the effect of this
catastrophic storm on the utility of detrital sediment as a landscape-scale
erosion monitor, having collected fluvial sediment from 31 sites on Dominica in
June 2017. By resampling these sites as soon as practical, they can compare
nuclide activities in sediment before and after the major change in surface
process regime occasioned by the storm. Flights to Dominica route through Puerto
Rico, allowing the team to also resample the Luquillo area, thereby obtaining
post-storm data for all 10Be-derived erosion rate sites in the Caribbean. Using
remotely-sensed images as a guide, the team will measure volume, thickness, and
extent of selected storm-related deposits. The team will work with a researcher
at the University of the West Indies (the institution responsible for natural
hazard management on the English-speaking islands), and with the Dominica
disaster management office, using their network to reach the wider community.
Two undergraduates will be involved in field work, will engage with the local
researcher, and will analyze data for their senior theses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is challenging to find natural experiments that give
clear information about temporal variability in isotopic concentration of
sediment caused by pulses of material moving through the sediment system. the
researchers propose to collect sediment to be analyzed for in situ and meteoric
10Be, 210Pb, 137Cs, and 7Be to infer both the depth of erosion and sediment
sources, defining the temporal and spatial variance of nuclide concentration in
fluvial sediment. The samples collected will provide valuable information about
the effects of episodic erosion, particularly landslides, on the concentration
of nuclides used to interpret erosion rates over space and time, a long-standing
issue. These methods have been widely applied at thousands of sites around the
world but the effects of large, stochastic events on the data have rarely been
tested. The opportunity to sample immediately following an unusually intense
storm allows for better understanding of the frequently observed mismatch
between measures of erosion that integrate over different times - short-time
period data often do not capture major events that, when integrated over
geologic time, drive erosion rates. Hurricane Maria provides an ideal natural
experiment for understanding temporal variability in erosion and sediment yield
due to a single event.