* 1817338
* Structure and mechanism of an exceptionally powerful molecular motor
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Brian Kelch, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 974,931.00

Multimeric ATPases drive the mechanics of biology, facilitating critical
biosynthetic pathways and controlling cellular and viral dynamics. An
exceptionally powerful multimeric ATPase is the terminase motor that pumps DNA
into viral capsids during assembly of dsDNA viruses. These extremely powerful
terminase enzymes provide unique opportunities for uncovering how the force of
motor output is governed. Understanding of motor mechanism could lead to
development of new nanomaterials that respond to the environment, or nanodevices
for targeted delivery of nucleic acids. Furthermore, these motors are of
interest in development of novel sequencing technologies using nanopores for
reading out nucleic acid sequence. This innovative research and outreach
platform will explore the terminase's nanotechnological potential, while also
providing educational opportunities at the high school and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structural mechanism of terminase motors at the
atomic level will be elucidated using a combination of x-ray crystallography,
cryo-electron microscopy and molecular modelling to determine three-dimensional
structures of terminases and their complexes. New structures will be used to
generate hypotheses for motor mechanism, which will then be tested using
innovative biochemical and biophysical assays. These studies will complement the
investigators research on AAA+ ATPases to reveal how ATPases couple chemical
energy to mechanical motion, providing broad and novel insights into the
mechanisms, regulation, and evolution of molecular
motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.