* 1817342
* Viral micro-epidemics and evolutionary dynamics in bacterial biofilms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Carey Nadell, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 725,000.00

Bacteria build microscopic communities, termed biofilms, and much like human
communities, biofilms provide bacteria with stability and increased resilience.
Biofilms can be beneficial, for instance in industrial wastewater treatment
systems, or as part of a healthy gut microbiota. However, biofilms can also
cause damage to various industrial and health systems, even resulting in
potentially lethal drug-resistant infections. An important new approach in the
control of biofilm populations is the prescriptive use of viral parasites,
called phages, to attack harmful bacteria within the biofilms. Though biofilms
and phages are ubiquitous in nature, little is known about biofilm-phage
interactions. In this project, investigators will develop new techniques to
spatio-temporally track the real-time spread of phage infections within biofilm
colonies. Using an integrated computational simulation and experimental
platform, researchers will investigate mechanisms by which phages infect
biofilms, the existence and evolution of infection-resistance within biofilm-
dwelling bacteria, and explore the possibility of leveraging the knowledge
gained in the control of microbial community composition. In addition, as part
of the educational broader impacts of the project, the PI will develop hands-on
teaching modules for K-12 students in surrounding rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are stress-tolerant bacterial communities
composed of cells embedded in a secreted matrix of extracellular adhesives. The
biofilm mode of growth is commonplace, existing within the microbiomes of living
surfaces of plants and animals. Another ubiquitous feature of bacterial biofilms
is exposure to bacteriophages. While biofilm-dwelling bacteria presumably
encounter phages often, very little is known about bacteria-phage interactions
within biofilms on the cellular scales that are crucial for understanding
microbial evolution. This gap in understanding is due in part to the absence of
appropriate theoretical and experimental techniques for interrogating phage-
biofilm interactions. To address this gap, the PI proposes to develop and use
techniques from individual-based modeling to simulate biofilm-phage
interactions. Investigators will also develop a new experimental system to mimic
biofilm-phage infection. The system will consist of Escherichia coli and phage
T7 co-cultured in a microfluidic platform to enable direct visualization of the
phage infection process using high-throughput confocal microscopy. Investigators
will leverage their novel, integrated theoretical and experimental platform to
study (1) the influence of phage exposure on the evolution of biofilm formation,
and (2) the influence of biofilm architecture on the evolution of phage
resistance. Anticipated outcomes from this research will lead to an increased
understanding of the relatively unquantified bacteria-phage interaction dynamics
within biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.