* 1817948
* Computational modeling of the mechanisms of microtubule disassembly by biological nanomachines
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Ruxandra Dima, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2024
* USD 787,940.00

Cells contain molecular machines consisting of protein complexes that convert
chemical energy into mechanical work. These machines use the work to help either
assemble or disassemble cellular structures during vital cell processes.
Understanding the mechanisms of action of these biological machines and their
relationship with conformational changes in their substrates are among the
challenges of modern molecular biology. This project uses computational modeling
at multiple scales to elucidate how a class of molecular machines associated
with microtubules accomplishes the severing of this largest structure in the
cytoskeleton, whose dynamic organization and rearrangement is an essential
process of cell division, motility, and development. This research will address
a critical gap in our understanding of the dynamic properties of microtubules
and their complexes with microtubule associated proteins undergoing wear and
their dependence on the magnitude and geometry of mechanical input and will lead
to a better understanding of how molecular machines work. The project will
provide education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in
computational biophysical chemistry by involving them in interdisciplinary
scientific projects and increase the participation of groups underrepresented in
science through the outreach at local Cincinnati Public School and through
research experience opportunities for freshmen students participating in the
"Women in Science and Engineering" program at the University of Cincinnati. The
results of the project will be disseminated to the public by the investigator,
postdoc, and students through publications, conference presentations, and visits
to local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate the major
remodeling action of microtubules performed by severing enzymes from the ATPases
Associated with various cellular Activities (AAA+) family. The multiscale
simulations will determine molecular and thermodynamic parameters that
characterize the breaking of a microtubule filament according to the proposed
severing mechanisms. Because the action of AAA+ proteins is known to involve the
application of pulling forces on their substrate proteins, in this project
simulations that can reach the long time and length-scales required to follow
the action of severing enzymes, primarily katanin in its hexameric functional
states, will be complemented by experiments conducted by collaborators to
extract markers of the unfoldase action on microtubules. Furthermore, the
contribution of allosteric transitions between the active states of these
hexameric enzymes to microtubule disassembly will be established. The
combination of coarse-grained simulations and experiments will ultimately
provide quantitative insight into the power stroke action of severing
enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.