* 1817621
* Understanding the molecular determinants and regulation of toxin activity in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Rebecca Page, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Newcomer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 257,771.00

Research on biofilms, bacterial communities that coat our teeth when we sleep,
has been ongoing for decades. However, even today, the only certain way to
remove biofilms is by mechanical force, i.e. a toothbrush. While brushing teeth
is routine, removal of biofilms from ships, pipes, medical devices etc., is
exceedingly difficult. Formation of biofilms is one of the major survival
mechanisms utilized by bacteria, but knowledge of how it occurs is rudimentary.
Bacterial persisters, a genetically identical sub-population of quiescent cells
that express protein toxins and exhibit multidrug tolerance, are at the core of
biofilm formation and in enabling bacteria adapt to changing environmental
conditions. Gene pairs known as toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems have emerged as key
components of this adaptation process. This project will determine how toxins
block bacterial growth by discovering how they inactivate substrates, how they
are inhibited by antitoxins and how bacteria remove toxins in order to exit
persistence. In addition to helping discover novel approaches for controlling
biofilms, the project will provide research training opportunities for students
and STEM education opportunities for high school students through implementation
of the Protein Science Workshop in the UA BIOTECH outreach
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many TA toxins, including MqsR, the focus of this
proposal, are ribonucleases (RNases). In order to control biofilm formation, an
understanding of how RNase toxins regulate bacterial growth and arrest must be
obtained. The research will determine how MqsR recognizes and cleaves mRNA
substrates. Preliminary data suggest that this information will lead to a novel
mechanism used by RNases to digest mRNA. The project will also identify how
antitoxin MqsA inhibits MqsR activity, facilitating development of new
approaches for toxin inhibition/modulation. Finally, the molecular determinants
that direct MqsA and MqsR proteolysis and turnover in bacteria will be
determined. These will define protein recognition sites that can be used to
control TA turnover in cells, and provide new insights into the mechanisms used
by bacterial proteases to recognize their endogenous substrates. An integrated
structural, biochemical and cellular approach will be utilized to address these
fundamental questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.