* 1817189
* NSF-BSF:RI:Small:Collaborative Research:Next-Generation Multi-Agent Path Finding Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Sven Koenig, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 313,134.00

With the increased use of automated vehicles in manufacturing, warehousing, and
other environments, it is important to ensure that the plans taken by the
automated agents controlling these vehicles are both efficient and safe. That
is, we want to minimize the cost of travel while ensuring that agents will not
collide with each other or the environment. This project will focus particularly
on approaches for planning in environments where the number of agents is
limited, but the cost of failure is high. For instance, in an airport there are
relatively few airplanes moving on the tarmac at any one time, but the cost of
collisions is large. The project will develop efficient and robust approaches
that can be used to control agents in these environments. When these approaches
are complete, this will enable new applications for the deployment of automated
agents that can reduce the cost and pollution of current systems while
increasing their efficiency and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing algorithms
for centralized control of agents have three drawbacks. First, they often make
restrictive assumptions about the environment, such as axis-aligned movement
with unit-cost actions. Second, the optimal approaches do not scale to large
numbers of agents and the fastest algorithms have poor solution quality. Third,
these algorithms are only well-defined in fixed scenarios where there is a clear
distinction between plan formation and execution. This project will address
these limitations by developing new algorithms. These approaches will handle
more realistic agent models, such as robotic movement on a state lattice, they
will compute near-optimal solutions to ensure that they scale to significantly
larger scenarios, and they will be adapted to run on online problems where
agents can enter or exit the world and where plan execution is imprecise and
must be adapted based on real-world restrictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.