* 1817020
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Oblivious ISAs for Secure and Efficient Enclave Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mohit Tiwari, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,971.00

Computing on personal data is critical for both personal and social good. For
example, we write programs that predict early onset medical conditions and
detect the spread of diseases before they become epidemics. However, such
computing is fraught with privacy concerns because programs, and the hardware
they run on, create a trail of clues that an attacker can observe to reconstruct
personal data without ever seeing the data directly. This project will create
computer systems that proactively leave no clues, i.e., no side-effects that can
leak personal secrets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is to
introduce a new Oblivious Instruction Set Architecture (OISA) for side-channel
secure execution. The key idea in OISAs is to decouple the programming model
from the concrete techniques that prevent information leaks. The first project
thrust will investigate a range of Oblivious instructions---from simple
oblivious instructions like an oblivious conditional move or oblivious load to
more complex instructions like oblivious sort or floating point operations---to
improve performance. The second project thrust will investigate how each of
these instructions can be ported across threat models, e.g., digital and power
side channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By decoupling threat model from programming
model, OISAs will unlock innovation on both software and hardware fronts.
Programmers can focus on identifying secret variables that are intrinsic to
applications, while abstracting out micro-architecture and threat model details.
Hardware architects can focus on how to efficiently protect those secrets, and
how to patch existing implementations when new threats emerge. To support this
philosophy, the project will train a new class of students and researchers who
can work across circuits, micro-architecture, compilers and applied cryptography
to build secure systems and, in the future, apply the lessons learned to other
high-impact problems that require cross-layer
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OISA project will store all publications,
code, and data-sets on public-facing websites, hosted at both University of
Texas and Illinois for at least 3 years after the end of the project. This
information will be made available via commercial websites. Links to these
websites will be mirrored at http://spark.ece.utexas.edu/oisa and
http://cwfletcher.net/oisa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.