* 1817646
* Frequency, magnitude, and mechanisms of collateral fitness effects of mutations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Marc Ostermeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2022
* USD 774,762.00

A complete understanding of the effects of mutations is important for
understanding biology and the treatment of disease. Deleterious mutations are
generally understood to cause negative effects by disrupting what the mutated
protein was originally supposed to do. However, the deleterious effects of
mutations might also arise from causing the mutated protein to do things it
should not do, such as interfere with unrelated biological process. These are
known as collateral effects. Very little is known about the extent to which
mutations cause deleterious effects by the latter mechanism. In this research,
the investigators will comprehensively quantify the collateral effects of
mutations in two antibiotic resistance proteins and uncover mechanisms for the
mutational effects. This will contribute to the understanding of how proteins
evolve and the mechanisms by which mutations can affect the physiology of the
cell, which is important for understanding normal biological function as well as
human disease and the evolution of antibiotic resistance. Each year of this
research, two graduate students, two undergraduates, and one high school student
will be trained in research. The graduate students will attend scientific
conferences to present their research and gain mentorship experience supervising
the undergraduate and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collateral
fitness effects of mutations are those effects which do not derive from changes
in the ability of the gene/protein to perform its physiological functions. The
contribution of collateral fitness effects of mutations to protein evolution is
unknown. In this research, collateral fitness effects of all single missense
mutations and all single-codon insertion/deletion mutations in two antibiotic
resistance proteins will be measured using a combination of large scale
mutagenesis, growth competition, and deep sequencing technology. The data will
also be used to identify mutations to test hypotheses of the mechanisms behind
collateral fitness effects. For example, since protein evolution rates anti-
correlate with protein expression levels, one possibility is that deleterious
collateral fitness effects occur when mutations cause the protein to misfold or
misinteract with other proteins. Very little is known about the frequency,
magnitude, and mechanisms of collateral fitness effects, but such information is
critical for understanding the distribution and origins of fitness effects of
mutations and interpreting the rates of protein evolution. The systematic and
comprehensive study of such effects in two proteins will generate a wealth of
data from which to understand the contribution of collateral fitness effects to
the distribution of fitness effects of mutations and to protein evolution
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.