* 1817508
* LSAMP Pre-Alliance Planning: C6: California Central Coast Community College Collaborative
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Dominic Dal Bello, Allan Hancock College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2021
* USD 124,777.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. Allan Hancock College
(AHC), Cuesta College (CC) and Santa Barbara City College (SBCC) - the three
community colleges that serve Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo Counties - will
collaborate in a pre-alliance planning project (C6: California Central Coast
Community College Collaborative) to develop a full Bridge to the Baccalaureate
(B2B) LSAMP Alliance proposal. The planning project will 1) convene faculty,
staff and administrators from the colleges to share challenges and best
practices, as well as goals to support URM student success; 2) analyze
institutional retention and success data to identify equity gaps and bottleneck
courses; 3) conduct student surveys and focus groups to drill down into specific
obstacles and challenges faced by underrepresented minority students; 4) perform
literature reviews to learn best practices; and 5) visit an existing B2B LSAMP
project, and California State University and University of California LSAMP
sites. To generate a successful and sustainable full proposal, the core team of
AHC, CC and SBCC will consolidate data and information from these various
inputs. The full alliance intends to provide common but flexible support
programs that allow member colleges to work together in increasing the quantity
and quality of transfer-ready URM STEM students. Thus, the fundamental goal of
C6 is to ensure a sufficient pool of prepared STEM students that reflects the
diverse nature of our population as well as diversification of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.