* 1817634
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:Synchronization and Deduplication of Distributed Coded Data: Fundamental Limits and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Salim El Rouayheb, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 87,338.00

Part 1: Coding for distributed storage systems has garnered significant
attention in the past few years due to the rapid development of information
technologies and the emergence of Big Data formats that need to be stored and
disseminated across large-scale networks. As typical distributed systems need to
ensure low-latency data access and store a large number of files over a set of
nodes connected through a communication network, it is imperative to develop new
distributed coding schemes that protect the systems from undesired component
failures. The two key functionalities of codes used in distributed systems,
namely the reconstruction of files via access to a subset of the nodes and
repair of failed nodes, need to be retained when the files are accessed and
processed by the users via symbol/block insertion, deletion, or substitution
edits. Deletions frequently arise due to system-level data deduplication: when
parts of files are deduplicated or edited, the changes in the information
content need to be communicated to the redundant storage nodes with minimum
communication cost. Current solutions for synchronizing data that underwent
edits assume that data is uncoded and they do not fully exploit the distributed
nature of information. Furthermore, they mostly ignore the presence of
deduplication protocols. This makes distributed storage architectures
inefficient in terms of storage, user access times, and error protection. Hence,
the goals of the proposed research program are to develop a new set of protocols
and coding schemes that will support a new generation of versatile and updatable
coded distributed storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Building on the
preliminary work of the investigators, this proposal aims to set the foundations
of the new field of coded synchronization and deduplication, with the goal of
deriving fundamental performance limits, developing efficient algorithmic
solutions for the two families of problems, and constructing new distributed
storage codes that enable synchronization of coded data and coded deduplication.
In particular, the proposal addresses the following comprehensive issues:
&lt;br/&gt;1) Characterizing the communication rate limits of known and new
(un)coded synchronization schemes, trade-offs between deduplication and data
repair performance for different structured or encoded data formats and
different types of communication channels.&lt;br/&gt;2) Introducing and
analyzing the communication rate-distortion (CRD) function for approximate
synchronization and deduplication of structured/encoded data, with a special
focus on delay-sensitive applications.&lt;br/&gt;3) Developing dynamically
updatable synchronization and deduplication algorithms cognizant of the network
topology and of different prioritization needs of the users, as encountered in
image and video data coding.