* 1817602
* AF: Small: RUI: Unifying Self-Assembly Through Tile Automata
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Schweller, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2022
* USD 511,042.00

Self-assembly is the bottom-up process by which simple unorganized components
autonomously combine to form large complex structures. This process is abundant
in nature as a key underlying mechanism for the construction of biological
organisms. The local interactions of simple self-assembling systems are often
capable of simulating general purpose computation as well, leading researchers
to begin using self-assembly technology as a tool for the precise algorithmic
manipulation of matter at nano-scales. This project introduces and explores the
Tile Automata abstract model of self-assembly to serve as a framework for
unifying the diverse set of established and experimentally motivated models of
self-assembly. The work develops fundamental theoretical results within this
framework, and connects various established experimental models using Tile
Automata as a central hub - yielding surprising connections between previously
disparate models. Beyond providing a foundation for a theory of self-assembly,
this framework also provides an important tool to influence and simplify
experimental work. Some aspects of the DNA-based model are implausible, but by
using the connections with Tile Automata, the work will show that the power of
the unrealistic features may be attained within a more plausible limited version
of the model, thus providing a guide for experimental implementation. A major
goal of this work is to provide undergraduate research opportunities and
increase Computer Science research participation among underrepresented groups.
Another outcome of this work will be the continued development of software
simulators for various models as well as the implementation of new models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces a mathematical model termed Tile
Automata that combines the local interaction rules from Cellular Automata
systems with self-assembly properties from tile-based self-assembly models.
Although the majority of self-assembly models are motivated by experimental
techniques, the abstractions may unintentionally limit or unrealistically extend
the power of the system. Part of the research is to identify and remove these
properties. The first focus of this work is on the DNA based signal tile model
where unrealistic aspects of when signals fire may be exploited to achieve
results within the model that are impossible experimentally. The investigators
address these issues by proposing multiple small variations to signal passing,
which each remove the issue with the original model. Each variation is then tied
to the unifying framework and equality is achieved within a scale factor for
each variation and for the original signal tile model, thereby providing an
experimentally feasible path for achieving the full power of the model. The
second focus is on repulsive forces within self-assembly models, which provide
an enormous amount of power and allow for unrealistic communication across
arbitrary distance within the model. The project seeks to show that repulsive
forces may be simulated within the Tile Automata framework if assemblies are
allowed to temporarily connect to check compatibility and then disconnect if
not, which shows equivalent capabilities can be achieved without the improbable
communication. The third focus is on other common self-assembly models and
active or movement-based models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.