* 1817154
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Limits of Caching Networks with General Topologies
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Rong-Rong Chen, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Today, Internet data traffic is experiencing a tremendous growth and the
majority will be content-oriented application such as video-on-demand services.
Conventional technologies, however, are severely limited towards the goal of
achieving such a dramatic throughput gain. Coded caching is an effective way to
smooth out network traffic during peak traffic hours. If one jointly designs
cache placement and coded delivery schemes, coded caching has the potential to
turn (relatively) cheap memory into expensive bandwidth, i.e., the total traffic
load in the network becomes inversely proportional to the per user memory.
Despite a significant amount of work in the past few years, most studies on
coded caching focus on relatively simple symmetric network topologies such as
shared link, device-to-device, and hierarchical networks, and mainly exploit the
global multiplicative caching gain due to the aggregate memory over the network.
In practice, users and servers may communicate under general network topologies,
e.g., via intermediate switches/routers. It is critical to study general
topology caching networks because network topologies add a valuable new
dimension to caching designs. This enables new global caching gains from network
topologies beyond those from the aggregate memory. Due to the technical
challenges associated with general topologies, the study of fundamental limits
of coded caching for general networks has very few attempts in the literature.
The information theoretic converse for these works are either missed or are
based on highly restrictive assumptions. Hence, the fundamental limits of
general topology caching networks are largely unknown. This project takes the
first major step to tackle the challenges of general caching networks by
studying their fundamental limits. The main goal is to develop topology-based
coded caching schemes and the information theoretic converse to exploit the
additional global multiplicative gain as a function of network
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main research thrusts: 1)
Topology based design of achievable schemes for general wireline caching
networks; 2) Characterization of information theoretic converse for general
wireline caching networks. For Thrust 1, our methodology is a joint design of
cache placement, coded multicast message generation, and delivery based on
specific network topology via novel combinatorial design methods. The proposed
approaches will lead to unique achievable coding schemes that can exploit the
coded caching gain from both caches and network topologies. These will
significantly improve existing designs that separate caching, message
generation, and delivery, and can achieve the information theoretic outer bounds
under certain parameter regimes. For Thrust 2, our methodology is establishing
information theoretic outer bounds (impossibilities) based on novel information
theoretic inequalities derived from network topologies and allowing joint
generation and delivery of coded multicast messages depending on network
topologies. While this project focuses on developing new methodologies towards a
deep understanding of the fundamental limits for general topology wireline
caching networks, it also lays a strong technical foundation for further studies
of general topology wireless caching networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.