* 1817089
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Tuning Extreme-Scale Storage System Through Deep Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Forrest Sheng Bao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2023
* USD 230,767.00

Many research domains, such as high-energy physics, climate science,
astrophysics, combustion science, and computational biology, need to process
large amounts of data. Such domains are heavily relying on the capabilities of
high performance computing (HPC) systems to manage and efficiently process
massive amounts of data. Consequently, applications in the aforementioned
research domains require highly optimized performance on the HPC storage systems
that store, manage, and manipulate data. This project aims to utilize deep
reinforcement learning methods to fine-tune the HPC storage system for optimized
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the feasibility of
leveraging deep reinforcement learning to optimize HPC storage systems by: (a)
Creating a deep learning based HPC storage stack model; (b) Remodeling existing
HPC storage stack to support automated configuration and tuning; (c) Collecting
training datasets and training the storage stack model; and (d) utilizing the
model as a responsive and playable virtual environment to learn the best policy
to tune parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a collaborative project, this
research aims to advance the domain knowledge of both HPC storage systems and
machine learning. The enhanced performance on the HPC storage stack will in turn
benefit scientific discovery and thus our society. The investigators will
integrate research, education, and outreach efforts during the course of this
project, including recruiting and retaining of underrepresented students,
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, integrating research findings
into curriculum, and publishing and disseminating
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data collected to train the storage stack
model will be shared at https://discl.cs.ttu.edu/tuningstorage while the code of
machine learning at https://github.com/forrestbao/DL4SC. Results and data will
be made available by the time of publication. The data will be annotated as
appropriate to facilitate interpretation. The principal investigators will
strive to maintain the repositories as long as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.