* 1817460
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: DAPPR: Diffusion Analytics for Public Policy Research
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jason Windett, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 73,154.00

Stability in social, technical, and financial systems, as well as the capacity
of organizations to work across borders, requires consistency in public policy
across jurisdictions. However, progress depends upon innovative policy solutions
to society's problems. The transmission of laws and regulations across political
boundaries averts a conflict between the incentives for innovation and
consistency. The current project will offer a database that allows the tracking
of the spread of policies through the US states. The database will be
disseminated through project webpages. The web interface will also include
advanced analytics that illuminate the pathways through which policies spread.
Users will be able to download the data and software for their own custom
analysis of policy transmission in the US states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy
diffusion has been a topic of focus across the social sciences for several
decades, but due to limitations of data and computational technology,
researchers have not taken a comprehensive look at patterns of diffusion across
many different policies. The investigators propose to combine cutting-edge
methods of text and network analysis to understand how policies, as represented
in digitized text, spread through networks connecting the American states. The
investigators will develop both data and computational methods that address the
most pressing limitations to the study of policy diffusion networks. The project
will result in two key contributions: (1) a comprehensive source of data with
which to track the movement of policies from one state government to another,
across three governing branches, and (2) a user-friendly, open source software
package for understanding and visualizing diffusion networks from digitized
records of policies. These resources will help researchers, public officials,
advocacy groups, and other relevant stakeholders understand how to balance the
competing goals of innovation and consistency in public policy.