* 1817242
* SHF: Small: Differential Policy Verification and Repair for Access Control in the Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Tevfik Bultan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2023
* USD 515,992.00

Due to ubiquitous use of software services, protecting the confidentiality of
private information stored in compute clouds is becoming an increasingly
critical problem. Users frequently trust sensitive personal information such as
financial or medical records to software services. Protection of such private
data is of paramount importance for users. In order to prevent disastrous data
breaches (which do happen), software developers must accurately specify who can
access the data resources and in what ways. Although access control
specification languages and libraries provide mechanisms for protecting
confidentiality of information in software systems, without automated techniques
that can assist developers in writing and checking access control policies,
complex policy specifications are likely to have errors that lead to unintended
and unauthorized access to data, possibly with disastrous consequences. This
project will expose graduate and undergraduate students to security and analysis
problems in cloud-based systems through a variety of educational activities
including courses, seminars and individual research
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops automated techniques that
help software developers in protecting users' data and preventing dangerous
exposure of&lt;br/&gt;private information. In particular, the investigators
develop automated techniques that help software developers in identifying and
eliminating errors in access control policies by converting policy
specifications to logical constraints and identifying inconsistencies among
policies using constraint solving techniques. The project also investigates
methods to automatically generating inputs that demonstrate inconsistencies
among policies, and automatically generating repairs that remove the
inconsistencies among the policies. Within the scope of this project the
investigators develop and use novel constraint solving techniques for policy
analysis, particularly focusing on analysis of complex numeric and text
manipulation operations that are error-prone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.