* 1817105
* NeTS: Small: Intelligent Optical Networks using Virtualization and Software-Defined Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Byravamurthy Ramamurthy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 615,996.00

Software-defined networking (SDN) is a promising paradigm that has the potential
to enable Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to achieve a high level of network
automation and therefore significant cost savings. Indeed software-defined wide
area networks (SD-WANs) are emerging in industry and are projected to account
for 25 percent of WAN traffic by 2021. However, many challenges remain. The
networks of large ISPs such as AT&amp;T are complex, and most Internet traffic
traverses multiple network domains. It is highly desirable, then, to extend the
software control paradigm to enable fast, efficient, cost effective end-to-end
provisioning of services and resources over heterogeneous, multi-domain networks
in an integrated and unified way. The goal of this project is to address
research challenges in this area, leveraging SDN and investigating novel
strategies for expediting efficient data transfer across the fiber optic
backbone networks underlying the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unified
network architecture for a software defined optical network (SDON) will be
developed that features: (1) End-to-end provisioning of services, and (2)
Expediting data transfers over multiple domains that use heterogeneous transport
layer technologies using inter-domain tunnels. SDONs will usher in
virtualization and intelligence as the new features of future networks. The
project will explore different strategies for dynamic resource allocation
including the creation and use of virtual transport links (VTL) and associated
bandwidth-on-demand (BoD) techniques. The project will also explore a Resource
Delayed Release (RDR) strategy to reduce the dynamic service provisioning time
and multi-domain tunnels to expedite data transfers in multi-layer networks
involving Optical Transport Network (OTN), Wavelength Division Multiplexing
(WDM) and Elastic Optical Networking (EON) layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.