* 1817331
* The physical and functional interplay between telomere and repair proteins: mechanistic and evolutionary insights from an unconventional model
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Neal Lue, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 796,000.00

The physical and functional interplay between telomere and repair proteins:
mechanistic and evolutionary insights from an unconventional
model&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic information that the cell uses to encode
normal functions resides on thread-like molecules called chromosomes. The tips
of these chromosomes, named telomeres, play especially important roles in
protecting the integrity of the genetic information. Telomeres can be likened to
aglets, the metal or plastic caps at the tips of shoelaces; when the aglets are
missing, the shoelaces (chromosomes) become frayed and fall apart.
Paradoxically, the DNA at telomeres is difficult to maintain during the process
of chromosome duplication, which occurs each time a cell divides. Many protein
molecules, working together are required to ensure the proper maintenance of
telomere DNA. This research will utilize a variety of techniques to investigate
how these protein molecules work together, how they interact with one another,
and how these interactions are regulated to promote telomere integrity. The
study will be carried out using a fungus called Ustilago maydis, which is easy
to manipulate and has telomere features that are shared by many animals. This
research will also train many undergraduate students and a postdoctoral student,
allowing them to acquire the technical and critical thinking skills necessary
for future careers in science. The undergraduates will be recruited from Hostos
Community College, an institution that serves primarily under-represented
minority students. Training these students will benefit society by promoting a
more diverse scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomeres are
specialized nucleoprotein structures that protect and stabilize the ends of
chromosomes. Telomere DNA is maintained through periodic addition of a
repetitive sequence by a special reverse transcriptase named telomerase. A key
function of the telomere nucleoprotein complex is to allow the cells to
distinguish normal chromosome ends from double strand breaks by suppressing
inappropriate DNA repair. However, repair proteins paradoxically help to promote
telomere maintenance in two circumstances. First, telomerase-negative cells can
utilize an aberrant recombination/repair mechanism (called ALT) to add telomere
repeat tracts onto chromosome ends. Second, in telomerase-positive cells,
multiple recombination repair factors promote the maintenance of telomere tracts
by enhancing telomere replication (e.g., by stabilizing stalled forks or
surmounting replication barriers). We showed recently that both of these
functions of repair proteins at telomeres can be faithfully reproduced in
Ustilago maydis, a model fungal system for studying fundamental cellular
processes. Moreover, we discovered in U. maydis several conserved and
functionally significant interactions between telomere proteins and repair
factors. Consequently, we are poised to address how the direct physical
interactions between telomere and repair proteins channel the enzymatic activity
of repair factors to promote telomere maintenance while suppressing aberrant
repair. This is a level of regulation that has not received detailed
examinations. We have also uncovered in U. maydis two duplex telomere binding
proteins with distinct functions and interactions with repair proteins. We will
therefore examine how the telomere and repair proteins co-evolve through
comparative analysis of these factors in different fungi.&lt;br/&gt;Objectives
and Methods:&lt;br/&gt;1) Use binding and activity assays to define the
molecular basis of telomere-repair protein interactions and examine how the
interactions affect the repair activities of these proteins in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;2) Use genetic and cell-based assays to determine the
mechanisms and function of the telomere-repair protein interactions in promoting
telomere replication and ALT in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;3) Characterize the properties
of duplex telomere-binding protein homologs in budding yeast and Ustilago to
determine the evolutionary path of duplex telomere-binding proteins and their
interaction with repair factors in fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.