* 1817046
* III: Small:  Explaining heterogeneity within and across evolving networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Ambuj Singh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,999.00

This project will develop novel methods for analyzing and modeling
&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous dynamic networked data. Network data arises in a number
of &lt;br/&gt;application domains ranging from Internet of Things, cloud
computing, software analysis, &lt;br/&gt;neuroscience, biology, geography, to
social sciences. Accordingly, network &lt;br/&gt;analysis has emerged as a major
paradigm for exploring complex processes &lt;br/&gt;behind observed data.
Compared to high dimensional data, analysis of network &lt;br/&gt;data is more
challenging due to interdependencies between entities, the &lt;br/&gt;presence
of attributes, and the natural evolution of networks over time. The
&lt;br/&gt;goal of the project will be to understand and model the heterogeneity
of &lt;br/&gt;behaviors in dynamic networks. The project will have a
transformative impact &lt;br/&gt;on big data problems that are enabled by a
network-centric approach to &lt;br/&gt;exploiting dynamic, heterogeneous data,
such as brain networks. The project &lt;br/&gt;will integrate research and
education by introducing methods and results of the &lt;br/&gt;project into
courses and seminars, and train a diverse group of undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's focus will be on
heterogeneity in dynamic networks: &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity of node behaviors
across network structure and time, &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity of the coupling of
structure and attributes, and heterogeneity &lt;br/&gt;across networks. Against
this backdrop, the project will consider the basic &lt;br/&gt;problems of
clustering (partitioning), classification/regression, decomposition
&lt;br/&gt;of networks into its basis elements, and the problem of explaining
global &lt;br/&gt;network behaviors by small network fragments. These problems
will be &lt;br/&gt;considered for a single network and for multiple networks.
Within a network, &lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity is observed when nodes or clusters
exhibit different behaviors, &lt;br/&gt;for instance due to hidden or missing
data. Across networks, heterogeneity is &lt;br/&gt;observed in the diversity of
subject populations or among network instances. &lt;br/&gt;The first research
thrust will apply spectral theory for partitioning attributed &lt;br/&gt;and
dynamic networks. The second research thrust will apply convex
&lt;br/&gt;optimization to find clusters while tolerating heterogeneity across
network &lt;br/&gt;structure and time. It will also develop methods for
estimating graphical models &lt;br/&gt;for multiple dynamic networks. The final
research thrust will focus on the &lt;br/&gt;discovery of succinct sub-networks
that are predictive and that evolve &lt;br/&gt;concurrently with the underlying
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.