* 1817239
* III: Small: RUI: Designing Structure-Phenotype Query-Retrieval and Analysis Systems for Microscopy-Based Whole Organism Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Rahul Singh, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 532,000.00

An emerging challenge at the intersection of informatics and life sciences is
constituted by data generated from studies that involve analyzing the effect of
molecular probes at a system-wide organism level. This complex data comprises
two distinct components: structural description of molecules and image or video-
based record of phenotypic responses exhibited by the organism(s) being studied.
Such (structure-phenotype) data is increasingly being generated in both basic
and applied sciences across a wide spectrum of research activities ranging from
those that aim to understand the functional role of genes in model organisms to
studies that seek to discover new drugs against diseases. There is however, a
singular lack of methods and systems at the state-of-the-art which allow
integrated storage and analysis of such structure-phenotype data. This research
will address this problem by designing algorithms and systems for content-based
representation, storage, querying, and analysis of structure-phenotype
information. In particular, scientists working on both basic and translational
problems where structure-phenotype data is generated will be able to query and
reason with the information within a single framework the likes of which
currently do not exist. The methods and systems developed under this award will
be validated through collaborations with domain specialists. Furthermore, these
systems will be made publicly available. Finally, this project will attract and
train students to work at the interface of computer science, biology, and
chemistry, with a focus on broadening participation both at the undergraduate
and graduate levels and engage public audiences in high-quality learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue an integrated
research, educational, and outreach program to develop the area of structure-
phenotype (SP) data management and analysis encompassing algorithmic techniques
in structure representation, image analysis, query-retrieval, and analysis of
information related to conjugated SP data. Reasoning with SP data is
increasingly becoming critical in bio-chemical sciences and plays an important
role in understanding the basis of life as well as in development/improvement of
therapeutics against diseases. From the computer science perspective, SP data
consists of complex, multidimensional entities which present critical challenges
for effective and efficient design of representation, retrieval, modeling, and
analysis techniques. The research envisaged in this proposal will investigate a
series of interrelated problems, under three foci: (1) Designing techniques for
robust representation of structure-phenotype data, (2) Development of a unified
indexing approach to support content-based query-retrieval of structural and
phenotypic data, and (3) Designing techniques for analysis of structure-
phenotype data from whole-organism microscopy studies as well as building
publicly available proof-of-concept systems for focused biological domains and
data-sets. The techniques, systems, and results developed as part of this
investigation will be tested and verified in collaboration with domain
specialists. The educational component of the proposal includes activities aimed
at attraction and intensive mentoring of women and underrepresented minority
students. Finally, the plan includes curriculum development to educate students
about SP data analysis and engaging public audiences in high-quality learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.