* 1817447
* Mechanistic study of single mRNA translation dynamic in live cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Bin Wu, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Translation is the process by which the genetic information in mRNAs is read and
used by the ribosomes to generate proteins with specific cellular functions. A
novel approach for monitoring translation of individual mRNAs has been developed
for this project. Using this approach, a number of fundamental questions about
translation will be addressed. For example, are single mRNAs translated
constitutively or in a burst-like fashion and do mRNAs encoded by the same gene
behave homogeneously or heterogeneously? This work has the potential to
influence the current understanding of the central dogma of molecular biology.
The research and educational activities associated with this project will
provide students at various levels with training in cutting edge molecular
techniques. This project also includes efforts to increase diversity in STEM and
outreach to the local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal aims
to address temporal dynamics and control mechanism of translation at the single
molecule level in live cells. mRNA transcribed from the same gene may be bound
by different protein factors, non-coding RNAs, or may adapt different
conformations, which results in heterogeneity or noise in their behaviors. In
agreement with this concept, it was previously observed that translation appears
to be regulated at the level of single-mRNAs, as indicated by idiosyncratic
"bursting" behavior. Ensemble biochemical approaches cannot be used because they
average millions of cells and molecules. An in vivo, single-molecule technique
is the only way to uncover the origins of this previously unexplored facet of
gene expression regulation. Researchers have previously developed ways to
visualize single mRNAs and their nascent peptides. However, further developments
in experiment and theory are needed to study the temporal translation dynamics.
First, single mRNAs and their translation status will be imaged for an extended
period of time to capture the long-term translation dynamics. Second, the
binding of trans-acting factors to mRNAs will be imaged. It is generally
accepted that the fate of mRNA is determined by factors associated with it, such
as RNA binding proteins and microRNAs. By correlating the trans-factor binding
with translation activity, the mechanism of translation regulation could be
uncovered. Third, a quantitative biophysical model of translation will be
established to extract physiological parameters from the proposed single-
molecule imaging experiments. After careful measurement of steady state,
translation dynamics will be perturbed chemically or genetically to
systematically vary cis- or trans- acting factors on mRNA, and to monitor the
intramolecular mRNA conformation. A mechanistic model of translation will be
built to elucidate the innate temporal heterogeneity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.