* 1817573
* NSCI: Advancing U.S. Competitiveness through Public-Private Partnerships for Advanced Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Charles Evans, Council on Competitiveness
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 453,997.00

Advanced computing is a foundational technology that has an enormous and growing
impact on America's science, security and economic interests - all of which are
interrelated. This project aims to: identify strategic public-private research
areas for American leadership in advanced computing, optimize the way the public
and private sector collaborate so research advances are deployed in meaningful
ways that serve America's security and prosperity, and engage many stakeholder
groups and help them prepare a diverse community of Americans to lead this shift
in computing. By helping the United States field a more competitive advance
computing ecosystem, the project would also advance scientific knowledge that
underpins that same security and prosperity, and build the resulting industry of
the future - along with the accompanying jobs - in the United States.

High performance computing represents a foundational technology and business
asset for improving United States? competitiveness. However, the United States,
a long-time leader in the supercomputing realm, has been falling behind other
nations in the development of advanced computing resources potentially ceding
leadership in this space and as the global innovation leader to other countries
investing in the resources to power innovation. This project will improve and
expand collaboration between public and private sector groups to use the limited
resources available to the high-performance computing community effectively, and
strengthen the ability of firms to leverage advanced computing for economic
advantage by developing skills within the American workforce, new software
partnerships, and greater access to advanced computing resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.