* 1817292
* Molecular Mechanisms of Topological Rearrangements in Integral Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Reid Van Lehn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 319,733.00

This project investigates the mechanisms by which membrane proteins (i.e.,
proteins that reside within the cell membrane) obtain correct orientations with
respect to the membrane after protein synthesis. Membrane proteins are critical
for cellular functions including transport, signaling, and enzymatic activity.
To function properly, a membrane protein must fold into its correct topology,
which requires all structural elements of the protein to obtain specific
orientations with respect to the membrane. Membrane proteins that fail to obtain
a correct topology are rapidly degraded in the cell. This project uses molecular
simulation techniques to address gaps in the knowledge of how membrane protein
topology is established. This knowledge will inform engineering approaches to
maximize correct protein production. The research team will incorporate
undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented groups, to
train the next generation of researchers in an interdisciplinary research
environment. Learning modules based on this project will be developed for
outreach initiatives targeted at middle-school students to inspire young
students to pursue research careers. Results from this project will also be
incorporated into graduate and advanced undergraduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use molecular dynamics simulations to
study experimentally characterized topological rearrangements in a series of
representative membrane proteins. Recent experimental results have indicated
that certain membrane proteins undergo topological rearrangements in which
hydrophilic protein elements directly cross the membrane, even though this
process should face a large energy barrier. Atomistic and coarse-grained
simulations, accelerated by enhanced sampling techniques, will be performed to
characterize the pathways by which hydrophilic protein elements cross the
membrane. These simulations will elucidate the interplay of protein, lipid, and
water interactions that facilitate topological rearrangements on biologically
relevant timescales. Based on simulation insight, sequence mutations will be
tested for each of the model systems to generate experimentally verifiable
predictions. The simulation methods developed and applied in this project will
also be of value for studying similar bilayer translocation processes relevant
to lipid flip-flop, membrane protein conformational changes, or the delivery of
drug carriers to cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.