* 1817653
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanism of Polarized Budding in Chlamydia
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Steven Abel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2022
* USD 129,231.00

Understanding the mechanisms underlying the process of cell division is
fundamental to defining the rules of life, and this research will determine the
events necessary for the polarized division process used by a subset of the
bacterial kingdom to generate daughter cells. This collaborative research
endeavor will be carried out by investigators from the University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and the
University of Nebraska Medical Center, and it will allow for the training of
graduate students at the interface of molecular cell biology and computational
biophysics. The research projects at the University of Tennessee Health Science
Center will be supported by undergraduate researchers from the Biotechnology
Program at Southwest Tennessee Community College (Southwest), who will gain
hands-on experience that will contribute toward their degree. In addition to
their interactions with each of the investigators on the project, the Southwest
students will interact extensively with graduate students who will obtain
valuable experience in one-on-one teaching and mentoring. The investigators on
this project will also make yearly presentations to all participants in the
Biotechnology Program at Southwest to expose all students in the program, many
of whom are from underprivileged backgrounds, to career options in the STEM
fields. The results generated from these studies will be broadly disseminated
and developed as a tool that teachers can access to illustrate to undergraduate
students the diversity of cell division processes utilized by members of the
bacterial kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria of the genus Chlamydia divide
by a novel process termed polarized budding, as do a subset of the other members
of the Planctomycetes-Verrucomicrobiae-Chlamydiae superphylum of bacteria. The
bacteria that undergo polarized budding do not express the protein FtsZ, which
is critical for the process of binary fission that the vast majority of bacteria
use as a mechanism for cell division. The regulatory events that control cell
division in FtsZ-less bacteria are not understood, and the studies in this
research project will define underlying molecular mechanisms that govern
polarized budding. Specifically, the project will define the role of
phospholipids in generating changes in membrane curvature that arise in
Chlamydia during cell division. The research will also determine the role of
phospholipids in regulating the localization of membrane and cytosolic proteins
in cells undergoing polarized budding. The project will bring together
researchers from multiple institutions with distinct and complementary expertise
to define molecular mechanisms that regulate discrete steps in the polarized
budding process that Chlamydia use to divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.