* 1817893
* Upgrading the mammalian translation system to probe multi-site post-translational modifications
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Abhishek Chatterjee, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2022
* USD 474,998.00

Proteins are molecular machines that drive the processes underlying biology. The
function of proteins are frequently regulated by a wide-variety of reversible
chemical modifications, such as acetylation of lysine residues. While numerous
such acetylations have been identified on various human proteins, their role in
biology remains unclear. Many human proteins are acetylated at multiple
different sites, but how these individual modifications contribute to regulation
remains poorly understood. The current inability to generate target proteins
homogeneously acetylated at a set of chosen sites is a major challenge. This
limitation will be overcome by establishing a novel technology. This technology
will allow direct modification of a target protein during its synthesis in human
cells. This will enable systematic elucidation of how multi-site acetylation
regulates protein function. A cross-disciplinary summer research program will be
developed to train and motivate high-school students from the greater Boston
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last two decades, rapid advances in
analytical techniques have identified numerous human proteins that are
acetylated at multiple sites. However, the daunting challenge of producing
recombinant proteins in a homogeneous state of acetylation been a major
roadblock. The genetic code expansion technology offers a powerful strategy to
overcome this limitation, by allowing co-translational site-specific
incorporation of N (epsilon)-acetyllysine (AcK) into recombinant proteins using
an engineered nonsense suppressing aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair. However,
it is currently challenging to incorporate more than one AcK residue per protein
in mammalian cells. To address this limitation, systematic engineering of the
components of the mammalian translation system that limit the incorporation
efficiency of AcK, will be carried out. A novel directed evolution platform for
engineering these components based on their performance in live mammalian cells
will be developed. The enhanced AcK-incorporation system will be used to
interrogate how the function of HMGCS2 is regulated by the acetylation of three
different lysine residues. Outreach efforts include a summer research program
targeted to local high school students. This program called "You Evolve a
Protein!(YEP!)" highlights the use of laboratory evolution to engineer proteins
with desired properties. Starting from a fluorescent protein that emits green
light, the participant will create engineered variants with altered
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.