* 1817735
* Investigating the impact of lipid-protein interactions in membrane protein structure and conformational dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Linda Columbus, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 729,803.00

Membranes are the walls around cells and membrane proteins are the doors and the
windows that allow passage of information and molecules across the wall. How do
the walls (membrane) and windows (membrane protein) interact? Membranes are a
complex mixture of lipids that interact directly with membrane proteins. The
general principles of these interactions and how these interactions modulate
membrane protein structure and function is largely unknown. In the last decade,
there has been a surge of membrane protein structures that provide snapshots of
what these proteins look like and provide a platform to hypothesize how these
proteins carryout their functions. Often neglected in these hypotheses is the
role of the lipid bilayer because of the lack of general principles describing
lipid-protein interactions and straightforward experimental methods for
determining these interactions. A systematic analysis of the impact of lipids on
structure and conformational dynamics is needed and is provided in this project.
The results of this research will impact many fields beyond molecular biophysics
such as cell signaling and regulation, molecular assembly, and lipid metabolism
and homeostasis. Through the research and educational goals of the project, the
PI will impact the broader community by focusing on initiatives that (i)
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in undergraduate STEM
research and (ii) catalyze the use of effective and inclusive practices in
undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate general
principles, two very different membrane proteins (both in structure and
function) are investigated. The use of systematic variation of physical aspects
of the membrane environment have been established to design experiments which
address specific questions associated with lipid segregation and membrane mimic
properties. Combined, the approaches, which utilize a variety of biophysical
methods described in this project will determine if the lipid boundary is
critical to membrane protein structure and function. The results of this
research will provide a fundamental understanding and establish general
principles for the role of lipid - protein interactions in (i) stabilizing
membrane protein folds and (ii) facilitating conformational dynamics involved in
catalysis. These results will impact the in vitro preparation of membrane
proteins, the interpretation of membrane misfolding mutations, the assemblies of
biomolecular complexes in the context of membranes, clustering in the membrane,
and much more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.