* 1817241
* CIF: Small: Information and Coding Theory for Random Access
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Michelle Effros, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Access points like WiFi hot spots and cellular base stations are, for wireless
devices, the gateway to the network. Accordingly, access points are also the
network's most critical bottleneck. The choke point is especially severe in the
uplink, where a chaotic mix of potentially interfering received signals from a
potentially unknown number of transmitters must be disentangled prior to
transmission across the network. The challenges are myriad: an access point is a
random access channel, but multiple-transmitter channels are well understood in
information theory only when the number and identity of transmitters is fixed
and known. Access points must run efficiently and at high speed, but even for a
fixed number of transmitters optimal multiple access codes are too complex to
implement, and efficient codes are unknown. As more and different devices become
network-reliant, both the number of communicating devices and the diversity of
their communication needs grow, yet little is known about how to code under high
variation in the number and variety of communicators. The protocols currently in
place are ill-suited to handling these challenges. Most rely on collision
avoidance, which is achieved either through coordination and scheduling among
communicating devices or by using random transmission times and back-off
schedules for re-transmission when attempts to avoid collisions fail. These
strategies are known to be grossly suboptimal, but both a general theory for
random access channels and low-complexity codes to implement that theory in
practice are currently unavailable. The goal of this work to build a generalized
theory and practical codes for random access channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work is organized into three thrusts: (1) a coding-theoretic approach to random
access, whose goal is to design low-complexity codes for random access that
approach the performance promised by the theory, with and without channel state
information; (2) an information-theoretic approach to random access, which aims
to generalize existing theory from multiple access to random access channel
codes, with particular focus on rateless codes and robustness to unknown or
varying channel characteristics; and (3) bridging information and coding
theories, which brings together the information theoretic tools and new coding
strategies developed in the previous two thrusts to develop low-complexity
variable-rate codes and to enable information theoretic analysis of codes with
constraints on complexity and/or delay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.