* 1817682
* The Central Protuberance Region of the Yeast Mitoribosome and its Role in Regulating OXPHOS Complex Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Rosemary Stuart, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2023
* USD 899,682.00

Mitochondria are commonly referred to as the 'powerhouse' of the cell because
they produce the vital energy currency of the cell, ATP. The synthesis of ATP
occurs through a process termed oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), catalyzed by
multisubunit enzymes composed mainly of proteins encoded by the nuclear genome.
A small, but enzymatically important, subset of OXPHOS proteins are encoded on
the mitochondrial genome and synthesized by mitochondrial ribosomes
(mitoribosomes). This project seeks to understand the molecular mechanisms that
regulate mitoribosome activity, and thus has important implications for the
OXPHOS complex assembly and the bioenergetic capacity of the cell. Providing
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students, this project seeks
to advance STEM discovery while promoting hands-on learning and training.
Professional development opportunities to aid students with career and/or
graduate school preparedness, with a focus on women, underrepresented minorities
and first-generation students, will also be
promoted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionarily related to prokaryotic ribosomes,
mitoribosomes have evolved to contain novel mitospecific features, the functions
of which are largely unexplored. This project is focused on the molecular
dissection of the mitospecific protein MrpL35/mL38, and its partner Mrp7/bL27,
located in the central protuberance (CP) region of the yeast mitoribosome. The
PI's recent findings have highlighted the CP as a key regulatory region of the
mitoribosome, serving to ensure coordination of the translational process with
the downstream, chaperoned events of OXPHOS complex assembly. The outcomes of
this project will be directly applicable to those working on mitochondrial
biogenesis, OXPHOS, and the function and evolution of ribosomal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.