* 1817665
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Origin and Development of Cryoplanation Terraces
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Kelsey Nyland, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,631.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will determine the age and
development rates of cryoplanation terraces, terraces formed through the erosive
action of snow and frost. Cryoplanation terraces are large upland landform
features that give the impression of gigantic staircases, found in periglacial,
or cold but nonglacial environments. Although these elevated bedrock terraces
have been identified and discussed in scientific literature for more than a
century, debate continues about the nature of the processes responsible for
their formation. Development rates, calculated from dates of rock exposure
across terrace treads, will be used to test one of the more prominent hypotheses
advanced in the literature. This hypothesis states that these terraces are
formed through intensified erosion associated with snowbanks that last well into
the summer months. Recent methodological developments in geochemistry,
specifically the method known as cosmogenic nuclide dating, will provide the
infusion of contemporary technology necessary to make progress on this long-
standing scientific issue, and has the potential to make transformative advances
in the understanding of landscape development in periglacial regions. Results
from this research will be shared with the U.S. National Park Service and used
to enhance park management as well as the experiences of park visitors through
development of interpretive displays and trail guides in several national parks
and monuments. Further, the project will enable a graduate student to establish
an independent research career.

The great antiquity of cryoplanation terraces makes terrestrial cosmogenic
nuclides the most appropriate dating method for determining their age and rates
of development. Rock samples for cosmogenic nuclide dating were collected from
two locations in the interior of Alaska using a transect-based sampling strategy
across individual terrace treads. Dating the exposure of the clastic rocks
(clasts) will facilitate calculation of erosion rates for individual terraces,
and can be compared to known erosion rates at existing late-lying snowbanks. The
PIs hypothesize that: (a) calculated development rates will be comparable with
those of measured snowbank erosion; (b) exposure dates for individual rock
clasts will coincide with Quaternary cold intervals; and (c) terrace treads are
time-transgressive surfaces with the exposure age of clasts increasing toward
the outer edge of terraces. The landforms in this region where the rocks for
this analysis were collected are representative of those in the much larger
domain of unglaciated landscapes of the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, the
methodologic and analytic approach adopted for this project are potentially
applicable throughout this vast region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.