* 1817519
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation - Only Alliance: The Southwestern Georgia STEM Pathways Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Samuel Peavy, Columbus State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,388,492.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The Southwestern Georgia STEM Pathways
Alliance (SGSPA), under the leadership of Columbus State University, will
implement a new five-year LSAMP STEM Pathways Implementation Only (SPIO) project
that consists of two technical colleges (Columbus Technical College and South
Georgia Technical College), one state college (Abraham Baldwin Agricultural
College) and three state universities (Columbus State University, Georgia
Southwestern State University and Valdosta State University) in southwestern
Georgia over the next five years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SGSPA has the goal
of increasing traditionally underrepresented minority students that transfer
from two to four year STEM degree programs, increasing graduation rates in STEM
baccalaureate degree programs and increasing student entry into graduate STEM
degree programs, in addition to transforming the STEM learning environment at
these institutions. The project embeds an evidence-based theoretical framework,
the Possible Selves Theory, at each alliance institution through initial and
ongoing faculty professional development. Project evaluation, conducted by the
Center for STEM Education, University of Texas, incorporates both process and
outcome evaluation in formative and summative approaches. Project findings will
be disseminated at local and national STEM professional conferences and through
the alliance and partner institution websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.