* 1817537
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Kansas Pathways to STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Beth Montelone, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,999.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. Kansas Pathways to STEM
LSAMP program was established in 2013 in response to the need for a more diverse
and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly
acute in the state of Kansas. The overall goal of the project is to double,
during the five years of the project, the number of underrepresented minority
(URM) students receiving STEM baccalaureate degrees at the two universities. The
seven institutions that make up the Alliance are diverse and include five
community colleges and two four-year institutions -- Barton County Community
College, Dodge City Community College, Donnelly College, Garden City Community
College, Seward County Community College, Wichita State University (WSU), and
Kansas State University (KSU), the lead institution. The Kansas Pathways to STEM
Alliance objectives include to: 1) further develop a successful STEM pathway to
the baccalaureate degree through the partnership of KSU and WSU with five Kansas
community colleges with 2-year transferable programs; 2) work together to
develop innovative and culturally appropriate recruitment materials and
activities for high schools and college STEM programs; 3) develop and evaluate
systematic approaches to assuring successful transfer to KSU, WSU, or other
Kansas 4-year institutions with high quality science and engineering programs;
4) develop or improve academic, curricular and co-curricular activities that
impact persistence and retention of URM students at 2- and 4-year partner
institutions and at KSU, including special focus on critical pathway junctures
(e.g., advising, financial assistance, campus integration); and 5) provide
formative evaluation to assure continuous project improvement and to conduct
summative evaluation to describe the results and impact of the project on
students and institutions. These objectives support the National Science
Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive
science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all
citizens." To accomplish this, the alliance institutions will review and improve
their current practices in recruiting URM students into STEM majors, evaluate
efforts to improve student persistence in these majors, and conduct student
enhancement programs demonstrated to increase STEM self-efficacy. Attention will
be paid by all alliance partners to the critical junctures in post-secondary
education such as transition from high school, institutional transfers, and
career preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.