* 1817499
* The Interplay of Replication and Transcription in Fragility of Structured DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Catherine Freudenreich, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2023
* USD 856,300.00

The integrity of DNA is fundamental to life, but sometimes DNA can break,
leading to loss of genetic material or even cell death. Interestingly, certain
areas of chromosomes, known as fragile sites, tend to break more frequently.
These fragile sites are a frequent source of DNA mutations, for example loss or
gain of genetic material. Thus, an understanding of the basis of chromosome
fragility will provide insight into causes of disease and of genome evolution.
This topic is of great interest to college students studying molecular biology
and genetics, and a Molecular Genetics Project Laboratory was developed to
provide a research experience to 16 students a year, investigating the causes of
chromosome fragility using a yeast model system. The goal of the course is to
identify new pathways that protect against fragility, and give the students an
authentic research experience. This project will support both the laboratory
class as well as follow-up experiments by undergraduate and graduate students,
to gain new knowledge about important pathways that prevent deleterious
mutations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many fragile sites in the human genome are
associated with both DNA structures that interfere with replication and
transcribed regions. It is suspected that the co-incidence of structure-forming
DNA sequences, transcription, and replication may combine to cause these regions
to be prone to fragility, however the interplay between them is poorly
understood. Genetic systems have been developed in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to measure chromosome breaks that are induced at specific structure-
forming repetitive DNA sequences that cause DNA fragility. In this system,
transcription state and replication timing through the DNA structure can be
controlled, to directly measure the consequences for DNA breakage. The role of
proteins in causing or protecting against DNA breaks will be determined,
including the action of identified nucleases Mlh1-Mlh3 and Mus81. These tools
will be employed to elucidate the contributions and interplay of transcription
and replication in causing fragility at two physiologically relevant fragile
sequences: (1) expanded CAG repeats and (2) a long AT repeat from the human
fragile site FRA16D. The knowledge gained will enhance understanding of
mechanisms of fragility and the resulting genome instability that leads to
chromosomal deletions and rearrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.