* 1817116
* CSR: Small: Towards Programming Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project seeks to redefine how developers can exploit the computational
power of modern datacenters. Today, developers must specify how each compute job
is split across the many machines in a datacenter. This project will allow
programmers to merely write programs intended for a single machine; these
programs are then transformed (by the technologies developed in this project)
into a form that can take advantage of the abundant parallelism available in
datacenters. Thus, in this approach, developers are not just programming a
single computer, but the entire datacenter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages the recent advances in serverless computing, and extends its
generality by addressing several fundamental questions, such as:&lt;br/&gt;- How
can one provide fault tolerance and improved Input/Output performance for both
existing and emerging serverless applications?&lt;br/&gt;- How can one
efficiently ensure consistency when running serverless applications which might
access the same data? &lt;br/&gt;- Can one automatically translate code written
to be executed on a single server so it can run in a serverless environment
where each execution is only allowed to run for bounded time (after which it is
terminated)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serverless computing is an increasingly
popular paradigm, since it allows application developers to deploy applications
without managing individual virtual machines. However, the current approach is
incomplete which both impacts its generality (by limiting applications that can
be executed) and correctness (since correctly implementing applications requires
developers to reason about runtimes and resource access times). This project
will eliminate these limitations of serverless computing, thus enabling a larger
set of applications to be deployed as serverless applications. This will make it
easier to harness the power of datacenters, thereby enabling progress in myriad
areas of significant social and commercial importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work developed in this project will be placed on a public github repository,
with the appropriate documentation so that the technologies are available to all
interested parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.