* 1817796
* Decoding intramembrane aspartyl protease substrate preferences and activity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Matthew Torres, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 715,643.00

Cells communicate through chemical signals. The fidelity of signaling in the
cell is critical to maintaining overall health and is controlled by signaling
molecules that are generated by a variety of enzymes. Of interest here is the
category of signaling molecules generated via the action of the breakdown of
proteins or peptides, known as proteolysis, performed by intramembrane proteases
(IPs), which are enzymes found in the water-depleted lipid membrane of the cell.
Although proteolysis performed by proteases is well-known, IPs conduct this
water-dependent chemistry in the water-depleted cell membrane. The action of IPs
is key to cell division, development, and metabolism, but this unique chemical
environment renders the system difficult to study and thus key details of the
process remain unknown. The cohesive research/educational mission at the Georgia
Institute of Technology involves students at high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels to comprehend, at the molecular level, the chemistry and
structure of a particular IP type. The research will answer how the specific IP
performs proteolysis chemistry on its many substrates in the distinctive
membrane environment to generate the signaling molecule products, as a model for
the larger IP family. To answer these questions, students will use cross-
disciplinary, cutting edge, and high-resolution biochemical and biophysical
methods tailored to membranes, training them for future STEM careers. In turn,
educational modules for K-12 students will be developed, implemented, and
disseminated. In the long term, an understanding of the chemistry and structure
of IPs will lead to future research to better understand how IP-derived
signaling is regulated at the cellular, tissue, and organismal level to elicit
specific biological outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aspartyl IP sub-class
(IAP) will be studied, using as a model an IAP ortholog from the archaeon
Methanoculleus marisnigri JR1. Students will probe the interplay between
chemical and positional considerations, evaluate the extent of cleavage
processivity, and elucidate substrate-IAP interactions in molecular detail,
using tailored high-resolution and quantitative experimental methods. Students
will then study the structure of activated substrate/IAP complexes using
chemical crosslinking, X-ray crystallography, and small angle neutron
scattering, results of which will be complemented by molecular dynamics
simulations. These studies will provide critical new mechanistic insight into
the process of intramembrane proteolysis using a well-defined model system.
Results of these studies will challenge tenets in the field based on lower
resolution or indirect methods, enable the identification substrates for IAPs
broadly throughout biology, and will lead to future studies to probe the
mechanisms by which intramembrane proteases are regulated. New structure-based
hypotheses for further study, including the origin of bulk water entry for
catalysis, will emerge. The tailored quantitative methods also hold promise for
broad adoption across IAP orthologs, experimental conditions, and IP classes
where similar knowledge is desirable. Any unprecedented strategies used for
structure determination will be applicable to studies of other IAPs, other IP
classes, and membrane proteins. Results will be broadly disseminated in the
cross-disciplines of biochemistry, proteomics, membrane biophysics, structural
biology, and neutron sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.