* 1817884
* US-China Workshop on Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases; January 10-12, 2018, Shenzhen, China
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Xiangming Xiao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2018
* USD 49,761.00

This award will support travel for U.S. researchers to a US-China workshop on
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases in Shenzhen, China.
The workshop has two objectives. The first objective is to review recent
research progress in ecology and infectious disease research and identify key
gaps in data, information, and knowledge. The second objective is to identify
research priority areas and discuss possible mechanisms for joint research and
education activities in ecology and infectious disease research between the US
and China. The emergence and re-emergence of human, animal and plant infectious
diseases around the world have been a major concern for various economic sectors
(e.g., crop production, livestock production, forestry), biodiversity, and
public health and security. For example, a number of large-scale epidemics of
infection diseases (e.g., H5N1, H7N9, Ebola and Zika) in the past two decades
have resulted in substantial losses of human life, as well as in increased
economic burdens. Researchers from the USA and China have been at the forefront
of research, education, surveillance, control and prevention of many infectious
diseases, and this workshop brings together the leading researchers in this
research area from the US and China to communicate and synthesize current
knowledge of epidemiology, ecology and evolution of infectious diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying and assessing major gaps in data,
information and knowledge in the EEID, this workshop is going to contribute to
the global community's effort and advance our ability and skills in predicting
and mapping hot-spots, hot-moments, emergence, spread, and persistence of
infectious diseases in the near future. Specific broader impacts from the
workshop include a white paper (to be published in a peer-reviewed journal) on
the current status, gaps, and research priorities in ecology and evolution of
infectious diseases, training opportunities for US faculty and students, and
network building opportunities for researchers and institutions from the US.