* 1817684
* Nanoscale dynamics and molecular recognition kinetics of a disordered protein
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Zimei Bu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

Nanoscale protein motions govern the assembly and actions of macromolecular
machinery, such as receptor signaling, protein synthesis, and DNA replication.
Nevertheless, nanoscale protein dynamics remains a largely unexplored frontier
because of a paucity of applicable experimental methods. This research will
employ a novel technique, neutron spin echo spectroscopy (NSE), and theoretical
physics to reveal nanoscale protein dynamics. Further, the researchers will
investigate how nanoscale protein motions influence the kinetics of protein-
protein association. This research will improve our understanding of the role of
nanoscale protein motions. It will also demonstrate that NSE can provide unique
and important new insights into the mechanics of protein molecular machines. The
program will provide opportunities for training young scientists, and provide
opportunities to integrate materials into undergraduate and graduate courses on
molecular biophysics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research
project is to determine the relationship between nanoscale protein motions and
the protein association rate constant in flexible proteins with significantly
disordered regions. This research group will apply neutron spin echo (NSE)
technique to determine nanoscale protein motions, and utilize their novel
theoretical physics framework involving non-equilibrium statistical mechanics to
interpret the NSE data. By combining NSE and protein binding kinetics
experiments, this group will demonstrate that electrostatic interactions
activate and control nanoscale dynamics of an intrinsically disordered protein,
which in turn modulates the binding kinetics of binding partners. Theoretical
physics analyses will demonstrate that NSE experiments can pinpoint the
nanoscale dynamics changes in a highly specific manner. The group will perform a
series of structural, dynamics and kinetics experiments with an archetypical
phosphorylated protein, in order to prove the hypothesis that nanoscale protein
dynamics is a controlling (and controllable) factor in protein association
kinetics. This research will establish a firm relationship between nanoscale
protein dynamics kinetic association rate constants, in order to better model
and predict the kinetics of molecular recognition of flexible and disordered
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.