* 1817955
* Collaborative Research:  Chemical and genetic mechanisms driving microbial interactions in a model microbiome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Laura Sanchez, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2021
* USD 361,909.00

Microbes live in complex communities throughout the environment, but it remains
unclear how specific microbes become members or maintain their role in these
communities. This project will explore how bacteria and fungi use chemicals they
produce to interact with one another and their environment. The bacteria and
fungi in this project are all derived from the remarkably stable communities of
microbes that inhabit cheese rinds that are consumed around the world.
Currently, there is a poor understanding of how the chemicals bacteria and fungi
produce on fermented foods stabilize or destabilize the roles of the members of
their communities. In the short term, this project will identify key chemicals
and processes that bacteria and fungi use to interact with one another on cheese
rinds. In the long term, studying these microbes will give insight into the key
processes bacteria and fungi use to operate within a community. The key
processes used in this relatively simple system will be extended to other
complex systems to explore how microbes use their own chemistry to affect other
members in their communities. The project will create a series of K-12 outreach
modules, which will raise awareness of the biochemical and microbial
contributions nutritional foods. Additional broader impacts is the training of
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multispecies microbial
communities (microbiomes) are important drivers of global ecosystems, human and
animal health, and food production, but our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that drive the formation of these communities remains a significant
gap in knowledge. A contributing factor to this gap is the fact that few
biological systems are available where in situ microbial communities can be
deconstructed and experimentally recreated in the lab. Because of the challenges
in manipulating microbiomes, very little is known about the genetic and chemical
basis of species interactions. Bacteria and fungi are known to produce and
dedicate a large part of their genetic material to the production of specialized
metabolites. However, many of the pathways remain cryptic or have yet to be
discovered because they have not been implicated in bioactivity screening. In
this project innovative mass spectrometry techniques will be combined with
microbial genetic and genomic techniques and a novel model community system to
determine the molecular mechanisms of species interactions and how these
interactions shape the formation and stability of microbial communities. This
research will uncover conserved genetic pathways that underlie microbial
interactions and their accompanying metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.