* 1817389
* Design and Testing of Math Models of Iron Trafficking and Regulation in Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Lindahl, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Iron is an essential micronutrient of eukaryotic cells. It is required to
generate most of the chemical energy in our bodies. Iron-bound enzymes catalyze
hundreds of reactions in cells, including processes as fundamental as DNA
replication and repair. In this project, the principal investigator's aim is to
develop mathematical models that simulate the movement of iron in eukaryotic
cells and to investigate how that iron is regulated by cells. Like cars driving
into a city at rush-hour, iron "traffic" occurs on different pathways in the
main cytosol region of the cell, and different iron species end up at different
locations in the cell such as in mitochondria, the nucleus, or other organelles.
The cell regulates these traffic patterns so it can survive and prosper under
various environmental situations (too much iron or too little iron). However,
the details of this regulation - at the level of molecules - are poorly
understood. In this project, the investigator's main objective is to develop a
comprehensive math model that accounts for all of the iron-containing species in
the cell that will help explain complex iron "traffic" within cells. As part of
the broader impacts of the project, the PI will engage graduate and
undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented groups in science,
in interdisciplinary research training. The PI will also develop a website
offering free downloads, sample data and video tutorials related to the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to develop
molecular-level mechanistically-based math models of iron trafficking and
regulation that can simulate the comprehensive iron content and iron-based
reactivity of a yeast cell. The PI will construct a model that accounts for iron
in the cytosol, mitochondria, vacuoles, ER/Golgi, nuclei, and cell wall. The
ordinary-differential-equations-based models will reflect all of the ca. 120
iron-containing species in yeast cells, with species being represented as groups
of aggregated components. Models will share "housekeeping" processes but each
model will have a unique emphasis that will be expanded in detail. In developing
the models, the investigator will focus on: a) respiration and reactive oxygen
species; b) cytosolic iron metabolism (involving the cytosolic iron sulfur
cluster assembly (CIA) and iron-related chemistry in the nucleus; c)
mitochondrial iron-sulfur and heme chemistry; d) nutrient iron import and
metabolism; e) iron homeostasis and regulation. Each model will be optimized in
terms of kinetic parameters against experimental data obtained in the PI's lab
or elsewhere. Models will be tested by determining whether predictions made by
the model (e.g. the effects of deleting or overexpressing a gene related to iron
metabolism) are realized experimentally. Models will also guide the design of
new experiments, generating a unique synergy between experiments and modeling
that will advance our understanding of the cell biology of iron
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.