* 1817622
* Examining how functional protein aggregates evade protein quality control degradation systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Eric Ross, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Aggregation (or clumping) of proteins is generally harmful to cells, so cells
contain elaborate machinery designed to prevent protein aggregation. However,
certain proteins have evolved to form functional protein aggregates that are
used to regulate various cellular activities. This project will examine how
functional protein aggregates evade the protein quality control systems designed
to degrade aggregation-prone proteins. These studies will offer insight into
protein evolution, and will provide tools for protein design. This experimental
work will be integrated with educational opportunities. Some of the research in
this project will be conducted in the context of an undergraduate laboratory
course, which is designed as a hybrid of independent research and traditional
laboratory classes. The structured environment of the class will allow for
training of many more students than would be possible with separate independent
projects, thereby expanding undergraduate research opportunities. Additionally,
the PI will continue his Biochemistry is Elementary outreach program. This
program uses hands-on biochemistry and genetic experiments to introduce
elementary school students to the scientific method and the fields of
biochemistry and genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental work will
utilize yeast prion proteins as a model system. Yeast prions result from the
structural conversion of proteins from a soluble form into an insoluble
aggregated form. These prions can be stably passed from mother to daughter
cells, allowing the prions to act as protein-based genetic elements. This
project builds on exciting preliminary results demonstrating that subtle changes
in amino acid sequence can dramatically change the balance between protein
aggregation and degradation. Using this experimental system, the researchers
will quantitatively define the amino acid sequence features that allow certain
protein aggregates to evade the cellular anti-aggregation machinery, and explore
the mechanism by which these proteins evade
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.