* 1817334
* Fundamental principles, limits, and function of ultrafast motion in single cell organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2023
* USD 918,538.00

Contrary to popular notion, the fastest movements in biology are not exhibited
by large, multicellular animals such as a sprinting cheetahs or Usain Bolt, but
by obscure, tiny microscopic single cell organisms. How a seemingly simple cell
may generate extraordinary power and speed, without muscles, remains an open
question. To address this critical knowledge gap, this project will study an
extreme unicellular organism (Spirostomum ambiguum) that harnesses poorly
understood molecular motors, springs and latches to achieve some of the fastest
and most powerful movements in nature. In addition to advancing our knowledge of
cell biology, insights from this project holds potential for a breakthrough in
nanoscale engineering, including design of powerful micro-robots. The PI will
involve young scientists across all levels in cell biophysics research including
K-12, undergraduate and under-represented minority students in the Atlanta area.
The PI will also host high-school summer interns in partnership with Lambert
High School. Research findings and scientific discoveries will be shared with
the broader public through popular media outlets including, popular media,
YouTube, and the local Atlanta Science Festival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spirostomum is a relatively large protozoan, which moves
via a controllable-triggered myoneme. It is an excellent model system to
understand fundamental questions of achieving extraordinary power amplification
at the scale of a single cell. The proposed research will integrate tools and
techniques from biology, physics and mathematics to develop a multi-scale
framework that establishes: i) the governing principles for force generation
through calcium-based supramolecular protein networks (i.e., myonemes); ii) the
physical limits on speed imposed by both cellular material properties and
viscous energetic dissipation to environment; and iii), collective hydrodynamic
communication and sensing through ultra fast group contractions in single
cells.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.