* 1817749
* Molecular mechanisms of RNA Polymerase I Transcription Elongation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Aaron Lucius, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

This work seeks to fill a fundamental gap in our understanding of how one of the
three specialized RNA polymerases, RNA Pol I, transcribes ribosomal DNA into
ribosomal RNA. This function is directly linked to cell growth and
proliferation. The research will produce a detailed physical description of how
RNA Pol I extends the RNA chain, and the findings will aid the broader
scientific community in understanding why higher organisms have evolved three
RNA polymerases, Pol I, II, and III, when lower organisms only require one. The
project will also interrogate the role of subunits within this multi-subunit RNA
polymerase. Additionally, students will have opportunities to gain Ph.D. level
expertise in enzymology, which is sought in both the public and private sector.
Undergraduate students will also gain research training and become more informed
and competitive for future careers in STEM fields. Finally, a specific plan is
in place to support recruitment and retention of women in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcription elongation catalyzed by the fourteen
subunit RNA Pol I is essential for ribosome biogenesis. Pol I synthesizes the
5.8 S, 18 S, and 25 S ribosomal RNAs. Despite its essential requirement for cell
viability, little is known regarding the mechanism of Pol I catalyzed
transcription elongation. This research will advance knowledge of transcription
by producing a detailed kinetic mechanism for single and multi-nucleotide
incorporation catalyzed by Pol I. Transient state kinetic techniques,
specifically chemical quenched-flow and novel analysis methods will be employed
to determine rate determining steps in the reaction and how these might be
regulated. Substantial research has been done on DNA polymerases, bacterial RNA
Pol, and eukaryotic RNA Pol II; however, much less is known about eukaryotic Pol
I and III. The results of this project will enable comparison of the fundamental
mechanistic differences between the three eukaryotic RNA polymerases, and help
provide insights into the evolutionary pressures that led to their
specialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.