* 1817582
* Systematic analysis of context-specific functions of transcriptional CDKs in human cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joaquin Espinosa, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project investigates the process by which the genetic information stored in
the DNA molecule is expressed in cells. The first part of this process, known as
gene transcription, involves the copying of segments of DNA (genes) into RNA
molecules. Despite the undisputed importance of proper control of gene
transcription in biology, there are still major unanswered questions in this
field. How do cells adjust their gene transcription in response to changes in
their environment? How is gene transcription controlled during the development
of multicellular organisms? What are the key enzymes and other proteins within
the cell that regulate transcription in these different contexts? Within this
framework, the research team will investigate a group of enzymes known as
"transcriptional CDKs" that are well recognized regulators of gene transcription
in organisms from yeast to humans. This research will provide new insights into
how transcriptional CDKs enable cells to alter their transcriptional activity in
different contexts. Therefore, the knowledge generated will advance the field of
molecular biology and expand our collective understanding of how the genetic
information within DNA is expressed to ultimately control cell behavior. The
research will be carried out by a diverse teaching-research team with a proven
track record of training scientists from undergraduate to post-doctoral levels,
including promoting underrepresented minorities in academia, and increasing
scientific literacy in society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
elucidate the functional specialization of the transcriptional CDKs using a
chemical genetics approach. Using genome editing technology, researchers will
create alleles of each kinase that can be inhibited by bulky ATP substrate
analogs. This panel of matching isogenic human cell lines will then be used to:
1) decipher the contribution of each CDK to the transcription cycle via genome-
wide measurements of RNA synthesis, processing, and steady-state levels; 2)
identify unique and shared proteins targeted for phosphorylation by each CDK;
and c) identify genetic interactors for each kinase using CRISPR-based genetic
screening in human cells. Collectively, these efforts will provide an advanced
mechanistic understanding of how transcriptional CDKs regulate gene
transcription, as well as the evolutionary mechanisms leading to their
functional specialization in vertebrate cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.