* 1817217
* Mass and Age Standard Stars - Studying Timing Reliability in Cluster Territory (MASS-STRICT)
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Eric Sandquist, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2023
* USD 401,639.00

Age is very difficult to determine precisely in astronomy, partly because it is
not something that can be directly measured. Stars are the most natural timers
to use, and star clusters provide the testing ground for many different age
dating methods. This research group will develop selected orbiting multi-star
groups in star clusters as precise standards for age dating. The goal is to
reduce age uncertainties to under 10% over a huge range, from a youthful 100
million years to 4 billion years, like the Sun. Age measurement is becoming more
and more important as larger telescopes allow us to study more distant, fainter
stars and to understand their histories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
broader impact plan is centered on addressing the continuing underrepresentation
of women and minorities within the physical sciences. The investigator will
promote activities at their Hispanic-Serving Institution. They plan active
recruitment of minority students (especially early undergraduates), regular
academic mentoring and career preparation guidance, and full-year research
experiences. Each of these components is important for establishing the flow of
students into physical science careers and ultimately making them "normal"
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable ages are an important ingredient in
understanding the workings of stars and the assembly of the Milky Way galaxy.
This research will use precise brightness, spectroscopic velocity, and
interferometric position measurements of binary stars to infer precise ages,
targeting star clusters that are in common use for calibration and testing of
the most impactful age measurement techniques. For example, asteroseismology is
providing ages for thousands of oscillating red giant stars cutting through the
Milky Way, but the technique is currently subject to systematic errors that can
be identified and corrected. Ages from the rotation periods of individual main
sequence stars require calibration with objects of known age. Ages from cooling
white dwarfs depend critically on the ability to predict the initial mass of the
star that produced an observed white dwarf and determine its age. But most
commonly in astronomy, the brightness and colors of groups of stars are used to
estimate age, and this research will examine nearby clusters with the most
precise brightness measurements for many members. As a bonus, precisely measured
masses will provide an important and long-awaited new dimension for testing
models of stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.