* 1817692
* Protein-ligand interface engineering for allele-specific regulation of histone demethylases and epigenome editing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kabirul Islam, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 649,099.00

In eukaryotes, genes can be turned on or off by changing the way the genome is
packaged in the nucleus. Normally, the genome is compacted by winding the DNA
around barrel-like cores of proteins. Tight packaging turns genes off, but
chemical modification of the protein cores can relax the DNA and allow genes to
be turned on. The modifications are carried out by a large group of enzymes, but
how and where they function remains unknown. This project will take an
interdisciplinary approach, including organic chemistry, protein engineering,
and cell biology--to uncover the specificity of these modifiers and to design
enzymes capable of turning on specific genes at will. The research setting will
provide a unique training ground for graduate and undergraduate students.
Furthermore, a chemical biology laboratory course will engage undergraduate
students in inquiry-based exercises where students will learn to design and
carry out real-world experiments aimed at developing their critical thinking and
independent learning skills. Early implementation of such a research-based
course is expected to bridge a gap existing in the current educational
curriculum by motivating STEM students in science education and research with
the long-term benefit of generating a skilled
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in gene expression in eukaryotic
organisms like humans can be achieved by reversible chemical modifications on
the histone protein components of chromatin. The focus of this project is to
study a particular type of modification, called lysine methylation, which is
removed by a class of enzymes known as lysine demethylases. How specific
demethylases contribute to gene expression has remained largely unexplored, due
in part to the lack of tools capable of rapidly interrogating a given
demethylase in intact cells under carefully controlled conditions. Using one
particular lysine demethylase as paradigm, this research will focus on
developing a novel chemical-genetic platform that combines pharmacological and
genetic engineering to perturb specific isoforms with rationally designed small
molecules and precise temporal control. Furthermore, the engineered
demethylation apparatus will be combined with the spatial selectivity of
programmable CRISPR-Cas9 to develop a new type of conditional epigenome editing
tool for regulating gene transcription in space and time. The approach will be
applied to reprogram expression of genes that underlie faithful cell division,
cellular differentiation, lineage commitment, and ultimately, organismal
development. These unique tools will be made broadly available to researchers
interested in addressing how reversible histone methylation regulates eukaryotic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program,
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.