* 1817957
* RUI:   Collaborative Research: Understanding the role of a modified phosphotransferase system and a unique two component signal transduction system in regulating gene expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Catalina Arango Pinedo, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 252,071.00

Bacteria have the ability to directly sense their environment and change their
behavior according to their surroundings. While the behavioral changes in the
bacteria can be seen visually, the intricate genetic processes that lead to some
of the changes are not fully understood. This project will investigate some of
the ways in which bacteria carry out these processes using Sinorhizobium
meliloti as a model. Sinorhizobium meliloti is a member of a larger group of
bacteria called rhizobia, and is environmentally and economically vital in the
field of agriculture. Sinorhizobium beneficially infects legumes and provides
useable nitrogen to increase crop yield. An efficient and productive rhizobium
infection reduces the need for chemical fertilizers. Expanding our knowledge of
the genetic systems that control the behavior of this bacterium has the
potential to allow manipulation to optimize the rhizobium-plant interaction. The
project will train students from the across educational levels, from high school
to graduate students to do scientific work in this field and to communicate it
properly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
investigate and understand the role of a hybrid phosphotransferase system (PTS)
and a unique two component signal transduction system in regulating gene
expression in the bacterial nitrogen-fixing gram-negative symbiont Sinorhizobium
meliloti. The project will study a recently identified and novel interaction
between the two systems that regulates several cellular processes. Additionally,
the systems themselves are interesting and insufficiently characterized: the
phosphotransferase system is an abbreviated nitrogen-sugar hybrid while the two-
component system has an intriguing multiple-sensing domain HWE kinase (Sma0113)
and an atypical response regulator with no effector domain (Sma0114). One of the
processes under dual regulation is catabolite repression. This is a complex
process through which bacterial cells adapt to obtain energy and raw materials,
and, in related bacteria, controls the expression of genes associated to their
ability to interact with their hosts. Three approaches will be used to elucidate
how the systems are integrated into the cellular network. Transcriptome analysis
will allow identification of the combined regulon of the two systems. Genetic,
biochemical, and proteomic methods will reveal their downstream partners.
Genetic tools will be used to characterize the promoter structure that allows
dual regulation. The results will bring better understanding of the
characteristics of the two systems and the role each plays in regulating gene
expression in S. meliloti and similar gram negative
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.