* 1817670
* RUI:  Investigation of the structure and dynamics of type IV pilus filaments using all-atom and coarse-grained molecular dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Joseph Baker, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 266,149.00

This project will use advanced computational approaches to better understand the
biomechanical properties of a protein filament that has applications ranging
from bionanotechnology to cell motion and bacterial infection. Bacteria and
archaea can adhere to surfaces using long, "sticky" filaments that protrude from
their cell membranes called type IV pili (T4P). These filaments, which are made
of thousands of copies of a protein called pilin, are incredibly strong, yet
simultaneously extremely flexible. For example, a single bacterial T4P filament
can support up to 10,000 times a bacterium's body weight, and T4P can be
stretched to three times their original length without breaking. This project
will use a computational approach known as molecular dynamics simulation to
investigate the structure and dynamics of T4P filaments. Using this
computational approach, simulated forces will be applied to T4P filaments to
probe how they respond to being stretched, which will allow the identification
of interactions that provide T4P with their great strength. The insights about
T4P that will result from this work will inform applications in
bionanotechnology, the role that T4P play in bacterial adhesion and motion, and
will expand our general knowledge about protein filaments. Furthermore, this
project will provide significant training to undergraduate students in a highly
cross-disciplinary area of research at the interface of biology, physics,
chemistry, and computer science. It will also develop computational learning
modules and incorporate them into the undergraduate science curriculum to train
students in the computational methods that are increasingly important in all
scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a computation/theory-
led approach to: (1) investigate the dynamics of T4P filaments from three
organisms, N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis, and P. aeruginosa, at the all-atom
level of resolution using all-atom molecular dynamics simulation, and (2)
develop coarse-grained models to study the structural properties of T4P
filaments, including the structural transition that occurs for T4P under
external force. This comprehensive, multi scale computational approach will
provide insights into the strength and dynamics of T4P across multiple length
and time scales relevant to T4P function, and importantly will bridge the gap in
knowledge that currently exists between the experimental and theoretical
understanding of the biomechanics of T4P filaments. Specifically, all-atom
simulations will be used to characterize T4P structural heterogeneity and to
identify the most important interactions between pilin subunits for maintaining
T4P structural integrity in the initial stages of the polymorphic transition
that T4P exhibit under the application of external force. External forces will
be applied to T4P using steered molecular dynamics protocols. Additionally, all-
atom and coarse-grained simulations will be used in combination to determine
important T4P filament properties such as the Young's modulus, persistence
length, and torsional rigidity. Finally, coarse-grained simulations of T4P
filaments under force will allow for the development of the first model of the
fully force-transitioned state of a T4P filament, providing unprecedented
molecular-scale insights into how the filament changes shape at the molecular
scale. The coarse-grained T4P model developed in this project will act as a
starting model for bridging from the atomistic scale to the scale of cellular
biology. This project will provide novel insights into T4P biomechanics, aid in
the fundamental understanding of the role of T4P in prokaryotes, and improve
understanding of the plasticity of helical
biopolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.