* 1817417
* Modulation of DNA Repair by the Protein Component of Chromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sarah Delaney, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2023
* USD 859,587.00

The DNA in cells is constantly exposed to reactive molecules that can chemically
alter bits of the DNA. Because DNA serves as the source of genetic information
for cellular life, cells have devised sophisticated methods for repairing
damaged DNA. Effective repair is necessary for cellular survival and transfer of
error-free genetic material to the next generation. Despite the importance of
DNA repair, there is still much we do not understand about the process. A focus
in this project is to study how DNA repair is influenced by the type of DNA
packaging that occurs in the nucleus, whereby strands of DNA are wound around
cylindrical protein cores, like thread around a spool. By assembling damage-
containing DNA wrapped around protein cores in the laboratory, researchers will
apply cutting-edge methods to study how DNA packaging affects the ability of
cells to replace damaged segments in DNA with new ones. The research will be
carried out by graduate and undergraduate research as part of their professional
training for careers in STEM. Collaborations with two female faculty and their
students at colleges for women will expand the broader research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation, alkylation, and deamination of DNA bases can
cause mutations and halt replication; therefore, to maintain genomic stability,
this kind of damage must be repaired. Base excision repair (BER) is a
coordinated series of enzyme-catalyzed chemical reactions in which the damaged
base is removed and replaced. Despite our significant knowledge of BER, much of
what has been learned is based on repair of damage in DNA templates devoid of
the chromatin proteins that package DNA in the nucleus. This project focuses on
the ability of the protein component of chromatin, the histones, to modulate
initiation of BER. Using biochemical methodologies and kinetics techniques, the
research will provide a comprehensive description of the ability of histones to
govern DNA repair in the compacted environment of chromatin. The specific goals
of the research are (i) to determine the ability of variants of the histone
proteins to regulate BER, (ii) to understand how post-translational modification
of histones influences BER, and (iii) to establish the contribution of the
terminal regions of the histones to their overall activity. The results are
expected to provide a deeper understanding of how BER occurs in the nuclear
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.