* 1817631
* Collaborative Research: Redirecting cellular metabolism via synthetic toehold-gated dCas9 regulators
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mattheos Koffas, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2023
* USD 342,000.00

Cellular metabolism is capable of highly specific and efficient chemical
synthesis at mild temperatures and pressures far beyond the capability of most
synthetic chemical routes. Engineering specific pathways can be used to further
improve the range of compounds that can be synthesized but it is a major
challenge to achieve commercially viable productivity. To maximize productivity,
it is crucial to fine-tune pathway fluxes. The goal of this project is to
develop a new transformative approach to modulate cell metabolism based on
endogenous cellular information. An emerging strategy is the use of regulators
that provide dynamic control of pathway fluxes. A recently discovered modified
CRISPR based tool offers a unique approach for DNA targeting and transcriptional
regulation. These new generation of regulators can be used for dynamic gene
repression and activation for many synthetic-biology and metabolic engineering
applications. In addition to the scientific advancements, this project will help
train graduate students through the integration of principles from protein
engineering, synthetic biology, and cellular physiology. Outreach activities to
local high school teachers and students through existing programs available at
the University of Delaware and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a new
transformative approach to modulate cell metabolism based on endogenous cellular
information. In particular, a new generation of toehold-gated dCas9 regulators
governed by conditional sgRNA structures that are activated by toehold-mediated
strand displacement will be created to provide simultaneous, orthogonal, and
autonomous control of cellular metabolism. Because dCas9-based regulators are
governed by a structurally defined single guide RNA (sgRNA) structure, it is
easy to envision that conditional sgRNA structures can be created that are
activated by endogenous mRNAs based on toehold-mediated strand displacement.
This new framework to design toehold-gated dCas9 regulators responsive to any
endogenous mRNA will lay the foundation as a new transformative approach for
implementing dynamic control of cellular metabolism. The ability to modulate
metabolism based on endogenous cellular information in optimizing the production
of numerous products in yeast will be established. The long-term goal is to
combine the knowledge gained from this project toward the design of dynamic and
autonomous cellular control for any metabolic pathway of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.