* 1817518
* Deciphering the roles of differential type IV pilin expression and N-glycosylation in biofilm formation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mechthild Pohlschroder, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 945,547.00

PI Name: Pohlschroder, Mechthild&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Institution: University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal title: Microbial
biofilms: Deciphering the roles of differential type IV pilin expression and
N-glycosylation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes including bacteria, archaea,
algae, and fungi can form communities that are embedded in protective polymeric
matrices, called biofilms. These biofilms can be beneficial, for example when
making vinegar. But biofilms can also cause great harm as they can be tough and
extremely difficult to eradicate, causing for example substantial corrosion and
clogging of water and sewage pipes and of the pipelines used to transport oil
and gas, as well as crop damage and food spoilage; thus they have significant
negative impacts on the economy. This project will address the biological
processes that regulate and facilitate the establishment and spread of biofilms
and thus will result in a greatly improved understanding of biofilm formation.
In particular, we aim to understand the role cell surface structures, termed
pilins, and sugar-modifications of proteins play in biofilm formation. We will
use cutting edge mass spectrometric (MS) technology to characterize at the
molecular level biofilm formation in an archaea model organism, Haloferax
volcanii. Our research will not only advance the scientific knowledge in this
exciting and timely field of research, but will also provide post-doctoral
associates, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students with invaluable
training opportunities to study microbiological systems with novel, state-of-
the-art technologies. Furthermore, the Pohlschroder lab will take part in
science education programs in hopes of stimulating an enthusiasm for science
among young students, particularly those who attend the underserved schools of
West Philadelphia. The PI will continue to develop microbiology experiments for
use by schools having limited resources, and the lab will participate in in-
class instruction as well as teacher-training workshops hosted by the University
of Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, sensitive quantitative
proteomics analyses have led to the identification of crucial components
underpinning processes that are required for biofilm formation in bacteria and
archaea. Thus far, however, few attempts to characterize differential protein
expression patterns in planktonic cells, as compared to cells from various early
stages of biofilm development, have been made. Moreover, given limited
technological means, previous mass spectrometric (MS) studies of differential
glycosylation during these transitions had not been performed, leaving the role
played by this post-translational modification in biofilm formation poorly
understood. However, recent technological advances in MS now allow generation of
the most complete prokaryotic glycoproteome available, in both planktonic cells
and biofilms, clarifying the mechanisms involved at various stages of biofilm
formation. Using genetic and biochemical approaches in concert with quantitative
glycoproteomics, the lab will focus on determining how differential expression
and post-translational modifications of type IV pilins, which are subunits of
the evolutionarily conserved cell surface structures, type IV pili, affect
biofilm formation. These methods will likely also lead to the identification and
characterization of other proteins that play roles in biofilm development.
Because archaea and bacteria share many features in common, these studies will
not only promote a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying archaeal
biofilm formation but will also provide insights for those studying bacterial
biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.