* 1817993
* Collaborative Research: The impact of reproduction on the tempo and pattern of mitonuclear adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Suzanne Estes, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 459,651.00

This project aims to understand how nuclear and mitochondrial genomes contribute
to adaptive evolution, and to discern the impact of sexual reproduction on this
process. The cells of most non-microbial life forms contain numerous
mitochondria, organelles responsible for generating biological energy.
Mitochondria contain their own genomes, which are far smaller than "regular"
nuclear genomes and encode a unique set of genes related to energy metabolism.
Proper mitochondrial functioning relies upon many gene products encoded by the
nuclear genome. These two genomes must therefore evolve in concert; i.e.,
mitonuclear coevolution. This research will provide the first comprehensive
assessment of nuclear and mitochondrial genomic change accompanying controlled,
adaptive evolution under different reproductive systems. It will also result in
discovery of novel mutations that suppress the effects of mitonuclear damage.
The project will provide important data and resources to the scientific
community, expand the PIs' educational and outreach activities, and provide
research training and professional development for a postdoctoral fellow, a
research technician, and graduate and undergraduate students. Analysis of
mitochondrial genomes has long been used for forensic and phylogenetic
applications, and defects in mitochondrial genomes are implicated in
approximately 1,000 human genetic diseases, cancer and aging. The central
importance of mitochondrial genetics and mitonuclear interaction to diverse
areas of biological research suggest that this research will have far-reaching
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide the first direct, non-
retrospective tests of major hypotheses to explain mitonuclear genome
coevolution. The project will apply experimental genomics with Caenorhabditis
elegans nematodes to study evolutionary process within the context of the
mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), the proper functioning of which
relies on the maintenance of favorable mitonuclear epistatic interactions. The
project will: 1) Determine the impact of sexual system on the tempo and patterns
of mitonuclear adaptation. C. elegans strains containing deleterious
mitochondrial- and nuclear-encoded ETC mutations will undergo adaptation in
replicate populations experiencing obligate selfing, facultative outcrossing, or
obligate outcrossing, and 2) Determine the evolutionary dynamics, functional
characteristics and sex-specific effects of individual mitonuclear mutations.
Genomic, bioinformatic and phenotypic analyses will determine the molecular
bases and functional underpinnings of mitochondrial and nuclear mutations
available to mask the effects of deleterious ETC mutations, and reveal the
relationship between rates of outcrossing and mitonuclear
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.