* 1817633
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Enzymology of Bacterial Nicotinic Acid Catabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Katherine Hicks, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 290,796.00

The goal of this project is to enhance our understanding of how soil-dwelling
bacteria have evolved the ability to degrade important small molecule
pollutants. N-Heterocyclic aromatic compounds (NHACs) are a class of small
molecules that are pervasive environmental pollutants and pose potential health
risks. Both Pseudomonas putida and Bacillus niacini are common soil bacteria
that contain enzymes involved in breaking down nicotinic acid, a model NHAC, by
different mechanisms. In this project, Professor Mark J. Snider at the College
of Wooster and Professor Katherine A. Hicks at the State University of New York
College at Cortland, along with their undergraduate research students, will
collaborate to determine the biochemical mechanisms that these bacterial enzymes
use to degrade nicotinic acid. Project-based laboratories will also be developed
at their institutions to strengthen the biochemical curricula on environmental
issues. In addition, this project will also educate and motivate the next
generation of scientists through the community-based summer camp (BWISER) with
middle school-aged girls. This week-long research experience will focus on
learning modern chemical techniques for studying the degradation of NHACs and
the importance of bacteria in bioremediation processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish the molecular mechanisms
underlying the enzyme-catalyzed degradation of nicotinic acid using a structure-
function approach. Nicotinic acid is a model compound for understanding the
metabolism of NHACs. Recently, the genome of B. niacini has been sequenced and a
cluster of genes putatively identified to code for the catabolic enzymes that
degrade nicotinic acid using a novel pathway have been discovered. This project
will confirm the proposed functions of the genes by determining the effects of
knocking out specific genes using CRISPR technology. Pathway intermediates will
be identified and characterized by LC-MS/MS and 1H NMR spectroscopy. Using a
combination of mechanistic studies and protein X-ray crystallography, the
enzymes involved in activating the pyridine ring of nicotinic acid for
degradation will also be characterized. These steps involve unique flavin-
dependent monooxygenases that expand the reactions catalyzed by members of this
superfamily. Work on the monooxygenases will concentrate on elucidating the
structural determinants of substrate specificity and engineering these enzymes
for activating a range of NHACs for degradation. Together this project has the
potential to build on our understanding of the biochemical strategies bacteria
have evolved to degrade NHACs. This work will also provide undergraduate
students with training in modern biochemical techniques, skills necessary to
answer complex questions about environmental contamination, and preparation for
STEM field careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.