* 1817355
* Intelligent Biology and Medicine in 2018: Advancing Interdisciplinary Education, Collaboration, and Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Zhongming Zhao, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2019
* USD 17,974.00

The International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) aims to
promote information science, technology, and education to a great variety of
trainees and young investigators, including trainees, faculty, teachers,
scientists, and engineers, and to provide a forum for the cross-fertilization of
ideas. The 2018 meeting will held in Los Angeles June 10-12. Since its inception
in 2012, ICIBM conference series has fostered the education of next generation
of bioinformatics, systems biology, and intelligent computing scientists with
cutting edge technologies and updated knowledge, as well as promoted informatics
research in complex biological systems and agricultural, environmental,
pharmaceutical, zoological, and data sciences. The travel awards for junior
scholars are judged by the submission and quality of anticipated poster
presentation. This award would provide support for 20 US-based students and
junior scholars who would be engaged in posters. In addition, support is
provided for four world leaders to speak at the meeting and interact with the
junior scholars. The top scored manuscripts in peer-review will be selected for
special issues in BMC journals and the International Journal of Computational
Biology and Drug Design. ICIBM 2018 program will include four distinguished
keynote speakers, conference invited talks, four tutorial and workshop sessions,
scientific presentations, highlight talks, poster session, and other
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICIBM 2018 will continue in providing
innovative training and research collaborative programs catering to various
levels of research expertise. Junior researchers will utilize resources to gain
higher levels of training and information from senior experts, while established
researchers will have continued access to collaborative communication and cross-
disciplinary opportunities. Through extensive educational activities,
collaborations, and interactions throughout the event, ICIBM 2018 will advance
cutting-edge convergent research. The commitment to education and diversity
through the inclusion of underrepresented students and other trainees, as well
as the conference training opportunities, drives the establishment of a
culturally and professionally diverse Trainee Committee. Special issues in BMC
journals and the International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug Design
help to insure broad dissemination of the insights and research. Support is
provided for 20 students and four keynote speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.