* 1817286
* Collaborative Research:   Spatiotemporal Regulation of the Ethylene Signaling Network and Rapid Adaptive Responses in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Gyeong Mee Yoon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 986,538.00

The goal of this project is to better understand how the gaseous plant hormone
ethylene, commonly produced when plants are under stress, acts to regulate
adaptation to various environmental inputs such as drought, chilling, salinity,
flooding and nutrient deficiency. All of these stresses commonly affect the
growth and reproduction of plants, ultimately threatening global food security.
Plants undergo adaptive responses to these stresses by modifying physiological
processes in which plant hormones such as ethylene play a pivotal role. This
project will not only uncover the role of ethylene in plant adaptive response,
potentially contributing to improving sustainable agriculture and food security,
it will also provide research training for one postdoctoral scientist and two
graduate students. The project leaders will also mentor undergraduate students
through summer internship opportunities as well as other undergraduate research
activities. In addition, the project will provide outreach activities to the
general public, focusing on local high school students by allowing them to
experience personal laboratory exercises and research
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid adaptation of plants to their
surroundings is a critical trait for the survival of the plant and is regulated
by how fast plants alter their growth patterns by modulating cellular dynamics.
However, little is known about the fundamental aspects of adaptive responses
such as response kinetics and the correlation of these kinetics with cellular
events. The goal of this research is to fill this knowledge gap by utilizing
ethylene-regulated dark-grown seedlings as a model system. The plant hormone
ethylene plays a key role in plant adaptation, in addition to its well-known
function in plant growth and development. Furthermore, dark-grown seedlings
provide an excellent model system to study plant adaptation, as ethylene-induced
changes are easy to trigger and to assay and the signaling pathway has been well
characterized. Moreover, several studies indicate that the reversible growth
kinetics of dark-grown seedlings in response to ethylene is closely regulated by
the spatiotemporal regulation of ethylene signaling molecules. This provides a
unique opportunity to study the correlation between adaptive response kinetics
with the altered cellular dynamics directing this change. In order to accomplish
these research goals, the investigators will determine the movement kinetics of
the central ethylene signaling molecules in response to ethylene using cell
biology approaches and its relation to the growth kinetics of dark-grown
seedlings using high-resolution, time-lapse imaging analysis. In addition, they
will test the hypothesis that a RAF-like protein kinase called Constitutive
Triple Response 1 (CTR1), a negative regulator of ethylene signaling, plays a
key role in a rapid resetting of the ethylene response, leading to faster growth
recovery of dark-grown seedlings after ethylene
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.