* 1817257
* Integrating Science Needs with Advanced Seafloor Sensor Engineering to Provide Early Warning of Geohazards: Visioning Workshop and Roadmap for the Future
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The PIs request funding to support a workshop focused on understanding current
seafloor and subseafloor sensing, and future needs for instrumenting the
seafloor to provide real-time data and engineering needs for geohazards and
early warning. They propose a two-day workshop is Seaside, Oregon. The proposed
workshop will bring together leading science and engineering experts within the
fields of marine geology and geophysics, oceanography, sensors, communications,
visualization, computer science, robotics, geotechnical engineering, and marine
geomatics from the academic, government, and private sectors to develop a robust
plan for addressing seafloor sensor challenges. The final deliverables will
include a final report and a paper for submission to the American Geophysical
Union's EOS journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific topics to be addressed
include engineering needs for geohazards and early warning, development of
sensors to measure seafloor deformation and temperature and fluid flow with high
resolution over a large area. Strategies for transmitting data from the sensors
to land quickly and efficiently (including advanced in situ data processing and
data compression algorithms) will also be considered as well as methods for
powering the stations using energy derived from the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.