* 1817594
* I-Corps: Barcode embedded rapid diagnostic tests for point-of-care fertility tests
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* David Wright, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the shift of
clinical diagnostic assays from the laboratory to the home setting. While other
industries have recently experienced a surge in consumer empowerment, healthcare
as a field has been slow to adopt new technologies that fit this pattern of
consumerization. This I-Corps project seeks to evaluate the market for one such
technology: mobile-phone linked point-of-care diagnostic tests. During the award
period, the team will assess consumer preferences, identify customer concerns,
and evaluate product-market fit for these diagnostic tests. The successful
completion of the proposed project has the potential to expand access, both
financially and geographically, to accurate clinical
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to evaluate the
commercial potential of a new type of at-home diagnostic test. These tests are
analyzed by a mobile phone, which then securely transmits results to a patient's
electronic medical records. This technology has previously been demonstrated for
infectious diseases of global concern, specifically: malaria and HIV. In
previous work, it has been shown that these mobile-phone analyzed tests can be
as sensitive as expensive laboratory instrumentation for test analysis. In
addition, these tests are user-friendly and require minimal instruction prior to
use. Importantly, this makes them amenable to at-home use by the general
population.