* 1817231
* RI: Small: Fast and Accurate Natural Language Parsing and Generation by Marrying Deep Learning with Dynamic Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Liang Huang, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This grant aims to improve automatic understanding, generation, and translation
of natural language by machines. Automated natural language processing has
already changed the way we interact with digital assistants such as Amazon Echo
and Apple Siri on smartphones and other devices. Automated machine translation
reduces information barriers on the Web, where most information is inaccessible
to most users because it is in a language they do not understand. Today's
natural language systems, however, are limited to short exchanges and often make
errors. These limitations are due to need for the systems to respond very
quickly: current methods for more accurate understanding and generation take too
long. This project will overcome this problem by developing new, fast,
principled algorithms for these tasks. This project also supports STEM education
of underrepresented minorities (who do not speak English natively) by recruiting
them in machine translation studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant aims to
construct fast (linear-time) and accurate natural language parsers and
generators (including translators) that utilize the power of both deep learning
(for accurate and automatic feature engineering) and dynamic programming (to
speed up the search). This project focuses on Recurrent Neural Network-based
models (RNNs) such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTMs). In particular, this
project aims to (1) Develop linear-time dynamic programming-based neural parsers
by using RNNs to summarize the input text and extend them to joint syntactic-
discourse parsing and predictive parsing. (2) Develop approximate dynamic
programming algorithms and principled beam search methods for text generation
and machine translation systems that use RNN-based decoders to model output
text. (3) Combine the above two directions with an innovative application of
simultaneous translation using predictive parsing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.