* 1817985
* Regulating Nitric Oxide Homeostasis and its Impact on Plant Growth and Reproduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Elizabeth Vierling, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 01/31/2024
* USD 810,206.00

This project will determine how nitric oxide (NO) modulates important aspects of
plant growth, development and seed yield, processes critical to food security
and plant biomass production. NO acts as a signaling molecule in all higher
organisms, and the discoverers of the role of NO in cells were awarded the Nobel
Prize. This project will use biochemical and genetic approaches in Arabidopsis
thaliana to investigate how a specific protein enzyme, known as GSNOR, controls
the amount and effects of NO in plants. Results will contribute to our overall
understanding of the mechanism of NO action in all organisms. One postdoctoral
researcher, a graduate student, two undergraduates and a middle school teacher
will receive training in laboratory research, as well as mentoring in written
and oral communication of scientific data for specialist and lay audiences. In
addition, outreach programs will focus on engaging teachers and students in
Amherst middle and high schools with the goals of developing hands on
experiments for middle school students involving plant materials and exposing
high school students to University of Massachusetts STEM undergraduate majors
and their campus experiences. The engagement with Amherst schools will also
serve the important goal of strengthening community ties with the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the clear involvement of nitric oxide
(NO) in multiple plant processes, including germination, root growth and
fertility, a basic understanding of the mechanisms by which NO exerts its
effects on systems critical for plant growth and development is lacking and will
be addressed in this project. The cellular signaling and regulatory effects of
NO are mediated by reversible, posttranslational protein redox modifications,
including cysteine (Cys) nitrosation (Cys-SNO) and glutathionylation (Cys-SG).
These reversible, covalent modifications result primarily from reaction with
S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), a soluble NO-adduct of the abundant cellular redox
buffer glutathione. They can have major effects on protein activity, indicating
there must be mechanisms to control NO and GSNO concentrations in both time and
space within cells. This project investigates how the enzyme
S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) plays a major role in modulating GSNO and
protein nitrosation levels. A model for regulation of GSNOR activity by
nitrosation of specific Cys residues has been developed from biochemical studies
of Arabidopsis, yeast and human GSNOR. This project will test this model both in
vitro (Aim 1) and in vivo in Arabidopsis thaliana (Aim 2) using biochemistry and
genetics, and possible regulation of GSNOR activity by other posttranslational
modifications will be investigated. Experiments will also determine how GSNOR
nitrosation is reversed by specific cytosolic redox proteins in the thioredoxin
and thioredoxin reductase families (Aims 1 and 2). Results will develop a
complete picture of the possible redox modifications controlling GSNOR activity
and thereby cellular NO levels, and provide novel data on the activity and
specificity of cytosolic thioredoxins. Finally, changes in protein nitrosation
associated with the reduced fertility of Arabidopsis GSNOR null mutants will be
determined by novel mass spectrometry methods (Aim 3). In total, experiments
address how mechanisms controlling activity of a single enzyme (GSNOR) are
propagated to result in phenotypic changes at the whole organism
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.