* 1817294
* Electrochemical Interaction of Nano-Cerium Oxide Composites with Hydroxyl Radicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Dong-Shik Kim, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2021
* USD 370,686.00

Free radicals are extremely reactive and unstable chemicals generated from
various sources like biological metabolism and atmospheric reactions.
Overproduction of free radicals, such as hydroxyl radicals, in a human body, is
known as one of the causes for accelerated aging, cancer, Alzheimer's disease
and multiple sclerosis. Therefore, a rapid and efficient detection of free
radicals is essential for the prevention and cure of these diseases. Several
methods have been used for the detection of free radicals; however, most of them
are not accurate and consistent enough in identifying the type and concentration
of free radicals. The goal of this proposal is to make a robust and reusable
sensor for hydroxyl radicals. The sensor is regarded as greatly beneficial not
only for medical diagnosis, but also for fuel cells, and environmental
monitoring. This research will be performed by a diverse team with a strong
interest in increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in science
(including Ohio's rural communities, WISDOM, Latino Youth Summit, and EXCEL
programs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research investigates the
electrochemical characteristics of hydroxyl radicals and the nano-composites
including redox reaction mechanisms at the nanoscale, and the effects of
catalyst and structure of the materials on the electron transfer rate and redox
reaction mechanisms. Leveraging the PIs? experience in sensors and controlled
synthesis of nanomaterials, this project seeks to achieve the following specific
objectives: (1) investigate the influence of the type of substrate and the
electrochemical catalyst on the redox reaction between cerium oxide and OH
radicals, (2) investigate the effect of the composite composition on the
affinity of cerium oxide toward hydroxyl radicals, (3) selectively deposit
cerium oxide nano-islands onto supported metal nanoparticles for increased
surface area, and (4) investigate the selectivity of the composites toward
hydroxyl radicals from other radical types. This research has the potential to
transform not only the sensors field, but also other research areas including
free radical studies, nano-metal synthesis, composite materials synthesis, and
material characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.