* 1817839
* Workshop to Revise the Liberal Art of Science
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2023
* Gordon Uno, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2023
* USD 44,436.00

In 1990, the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
published the groundbreaking document, "The Liberal Art of Science," which
recommended that all college students should take more science courses. This
book and associated program argued that science pervades all aspects of
contemporary human existence and that our nation's future economy and security
and the quality of individual lives depend on the public's understanding of
scientific developments. The importance of science for all remains true today.
Since 1990, however, the science and science education communities have made
significant discoveries about how students learn, how to engage a broader
spectrum of students in science, what are effective pedagogical methods to teach
science, and what scientifically literate citizens and future scientists should
know and be able to do. In 1990, many Americans were noted to have little
understanding of science or how it affected their lives, and many students,
especially from underrepresented groups, had limited access to or incentives to
pursue science as a degree or career. These major issues still hold true in
2018. Thus, the revision of "The Liberal Art of Science" is an important and
timely endeavor, capitalizing on recent breakthroughs while addressing
continuing problems. The workshop will bring together scientists and science
educators to outline and begin writing an updated "Liberal Art of Science" and
to plan for the widespread implementation of contemporary recommendations for
teaching and learning science by improving existing science courses and not
simply trying to add more courses to a students' already crowded curriculum.
Workshop participants will have diverse research interests in science, science
education, faculty professional development, and science literacy. They will
also represent major scientific and science education organizations and
institutional associations actively engaged in professional development of their
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants at the workshop will have
significant obligations before attending the meeting at the headquarters of the
AAAS in Washington, D.C. Each person will be asked either to draft an outline of
a chapter in the new book or prepare a presentation for the workshop itself
based on their interests and expertise. In addition, each person will identify
one or two exemplary individuals or programs that use active learning methods,
increase scientific literacy of students, or focus on learning outcomes that
prepare students for a world that is increasingly influenced by science and
technology. The workshop, which will extend over parts of three days, will be a
series of presentations, discussions, and small working groups and will result
in an outline of the entire new document and a plan to disseminate and implement
new recommendations for change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.