* 1817212
* AF: Small: A New Approach to Analysis and Design of Algorithms for Stochastic Control and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Rahul Jain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 399,999.00

Randomized algorithms for stochastic optimization and control underpin many
developing technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Autonomous
Robotics, and Big Data Analytics. Their development is hampered by a lack of
suitable mathematical tools. In many cases, current mathematical techniques such
as those based on Stochastic Lyapunov theory are rather difficult to use, thus
necessitating invention of customized techniques for algorithm design for each
problem and its analysis. This project will develop a new class of mathematical
techniques, called probabilistic contraction analysis, that are easier to use,
and more broadly applicable. The project's aim is not just analysis of existing
algorithms, but development of analysis tools with an eye on design. The project
outcomes can accelerate development of new algorithms for stochastic control and
optimization problems that arise in many important application fields such as
AI, Autonomy, Big Data Analytics, etc. The project will train under-represented
and/or female PhD students and postdocs, as well as high school students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a randomized algorithm for stochastic
optimization and control, this project views each iteration as applying a random
operator, and develops new "probabilistic contraction" analysis techniques,
created by the investigator, that use stochastic dominance arguments to show
convergence to probabilistic fixed points. Specifically, the investigator will
develop empirically-inspired algorithms for optimal control of continuous state
and action space Markov decision processes, and unconstrained and constrained
stochastic optimization problems. The techniques to be developed may be useful
for a broader class of stochastic iterative algorithms, and lead to development
of a probabilistic fixed point theory of random operators on Banach
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.