* 1817276
* 2018 Geobiology Gordon Research Conference: The microbial planet from deep time to today
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Tanja Bosak, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This is a request to support the participation of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows from U.S. institutions in the 2018 Geobiology Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) that will bring together scientists from across the
globe to Galveston, TX between January 21 and 26, 2018. The field of geobiology
investigates the coevolution of life and the environment over Earth history,
including studies of life and the environment today. Over the past decade, the
field of geobiology has produced a strong cohort of scientists who require a
meeting of their own to exchange ideas, tools, and expertise. The Graduate
Research Seminar (GRS), a two-day meeting for graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars, will immediately precede the GRC and give early career scientists an
opportunity to organize and participate in focused meetings. GRC and GRS
actively promote diversity, eschew review talks and instead demand researchers
to share the latest and greatest ideas and questions during the poster and
discussion sessions. Because the attendances of GRC and GRS, respectively, are
limited to 200 and 60 people, respectively, these meetings will stimulate
thoughtful and engaging discussions and spontaneous interactions as well as
offering numerous networking opportunities for junior people. By supporting the
attendance of GRS and GRC by graduate students and postdoctoral scholars from
the U.S., the requested funding will strengthen the sense of community, train
junior scientists, promote collaboration and diversity in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geobiology uses the tools of paleontology, geology,
geochemistry and microbiology, but is separated from these more traditional
disciplines by an interest in the complex relationships and feedbacks among
biological, chemical, and physical processes. The scientific programs for
Geobiology GRC and GRS 2018 will investigate interactions among biological,
chemical and physical processes on Earth?s surface in daily poster sessions and
nine oral sessions, each with two or three invited speakers and a discussion
leader. These sessions will highlight open questions, novel experimental and
conceptual approaches and active areas of research within the field. Both
meetings will encourage open and honest intellectual debate and ask each session
chair to encourage rigorous analysis of all science presented or discussed in a
manner respectful to all conferees. An informal afternoon meeting titled
?Transition Time: How to find the right career after graduate school or your
postdoctoral fellowship? will provide mentoring and support the professional
growth of graduate students and postdocs. GRC and the preceding GRS will offer
numerous opportunities to socialize and network. These interactions will advance
discovery, disseminate results, and train attendees in methods, approaches and
presentation skills.