* 1817736
* Collarborative Research:  A systems approach to understanding signaling networks in host-microbiome-parasite interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Richard Fell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

All animals contain complex communities of bacteria and other microbes, known
collectively as the microbiome. These microbes perform many important functions
for their host, including defense against infection by parasites and pathogens.
To accomplish these functions the microbes must interact closely with both host
and parasite cells. Increasingly, scientific evidence suggests that these
interactions occur through the production of chemical messengers that allow
communication among the bacteria in the microbiome, the host and the parasite.
This research project advances understanding of the microbiome by devising a
model honey bee gut system. Such a system has significantly fewer bacterial taxa
and performs the same functions as other gut microbiomes, including playing a
role in host defense against parasites. In this honey bee system, both network
models and experimental manipulations of the gut microbiome are used to further
understanding of the microbiome and its role in host defense. The knowledge
derived from the project would be important for manipulating the microbiome for
host health, including, ultimately, that of humans. A computer science and
biology-based outreach module for elementary school students is being developed.
Students and teachers are guided through the building of Raspberry Pi clusters,
which are then used for student-driven projects based on the research datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Growing evidence points to the critical role that the
microbiome plays in host health and defense against parasites via interspecies
cellular signaling. This research uses a systems biology framework to advance
understanding of interspecific cellular signaling in host-microbiome-parasite
interactions. The model system is the honey bee gut microbiome which consists of
less than ten bacterial taxa. Three objectives collectively address the role of
the microbiome in host defense against parasites, assess functional redundancy
in the microbiome in relation to parasite resistance, and experimentally test
network predictions. Bees with a common gut parasite provide data to generate
interaction networks for bees that are parasite-infected and for bees that are
resistant to infection. Within these networks, specific gene modules and
bacterial taxa, important for parasite resistance, are identified within the gut
microbiome. In this way key interactions among the host, parasite and bacteria
are elucidated. Next, an alternative, complimentary approach to building
microbiome networks for this system is developed. For this approach whole genome
sequences of dominant bee gut bacteria are collected from apiaries that vary in
parasite infection prevalence. The importance of strain-level variation in these
dominant bacterial taxa are explored in a large set of computationally-derived
networks. Shifts in network topology, including changes in the empirically-
derived resistance modules, are assessed. Finally, based on the empirical and
computational networks, predictions are made about microbiome community
structures that are most likely to result in parasite resistance. These
predictions are tested by creating bees with synthetic gut microbiomes that are
predicted to be parasite-resistant or susceptible. This project will
significantly advance knowledge of the mechanisms by which the microbiome
impacts host health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.