* 1817029
* SaTC: CORE: Small: URadio: Towards Secure Smart Home IoT Communication Using Hybrid Ultrasonic-RF Radio
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Qiben Yan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 10/31/2019
* USD 499,999.00

Recent years have seen the explosion of smart home Internet-of-Things (IoT)
devices and platforms, underscoring the need to address security and privacy of
smart home communications. The demand for IoT devices (e.g., smart speakers,
locks, and activity trackers) is occurring while radio spectrum, a necessary
ingredient for wireless service, becomes increasingly scarce. As a result,
multiple wireless technologies coexist and compete for spectrum resources,
resulting in degraded spectrum efficiency and security. This project aims to
enhance the reliability and security of smart home networks by leveraging the
security and energy efficiency properties of ultrasonic communication, and by
integrating them with radio-frequency technology. The success of this project
will result in a new communication system that can provide secure and reliable
communication on two different types of spectrum - radio-frequency and
ultrasound - to help alleviate the crowded radio frequency spectrum and prevent
aggregated security attacks. The proposed project aims to significantly improve
the security of smart home networks, and will also have a positive impact on
education through the creation of new wireless security course projects and
modules; provision of research training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students of underrepresented groups; and broad dissemination of project
results through high-profile tutorials, talks, publications, software tool kits,
and open-source sites.

The goal of this project is to develop novel, practical and foundational
solutions to secure smart home IoT networks. The research focuses on the
following objectives: 1) Develop and assess the performance of a hybrid
ultrasound/radio-frequency transceiver using a wideband ultrasonic transducer to
enable secure and reliable IoT communication by leveraging phased acoustic array
technology; 2) Ensure the robustness of IoT communications by developing
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) interference cancellation and directional
ultrasonic anti-jamming communication technologies; and 3) Design a location-
restricted device authentication mechanism without the reliance on credentials
by leveraging signal features of the ambient radio-frequency and ultrasonic
signals, aiming for for immediate and trustworthy authentication of IoT devices.
The proposed solution will be tested using large-scale simulations and
experimentally tested via software-defined radio testbeds and ultrasonic radio
prototypes. The project pursues advances in our understanding of security in
smart home IoT networks, thereby providing guidance on the design of next-
generation smart home systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.