* 1817579
* I-Corps: Biometric Data Analytics Platform to Enhance Mental Health Provider-Patient Engagement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Arjun Ramakrishnan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
digital health solution that empowers both patients and providers to engage in
meaningful and personalized treatment. The market that this proposal has the
ability to reach is significant and includes a medical/clinical segment, a
research segment, and a performance segment. This approach has the potential to
improve patient care while reducing healthcare costs. Additionally, as education
of patients and the public improves regarding mental health, the negative stigma
surrounding these conditions will decrease and more people in need will seek
care. An initial application will be in treating Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,
where there is an urgent and critical need for innovation. Engaging patients in
their treatment plans will have a positive impact on the lives of those
suffering from mental illnesses.

This I-Corps project is an innovative approach that provides easy to interpret
results tailored to mental health providers, patients, and other non-technical
users. The software aggregates data from numerous modalities, allowing for more
complex and valuable analyses than existing platforms. The physiological data
being collected has been scientifically proven to be related to mental well-
being. Furthermore, clinicians are able to gain deeper insights into their
patient's physiological response in real-time and over the course of a long-term
treatment plan to guide clinical decision making. Existing barriers to treatment
are addressed by providing seamless connection to various wearable devices,
HIPAA-compliant architecture to ensure data privacy, pairing to audio recording
or virtual reality environments, real-time note taking abilities, and
simultaneous multi-session overlay. Engaging patients in their treatment plans
through an objective measurement tool addresses a clear gap in mental health
treatment, which is currently heavily reliant on subjective questionnaires and
self-reporting.