* 1817394
* Computational Simulation Studies of Membrane Fouling Mechanisms and Designing New Antifouling Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Yongsheng Leng, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 293,870.00

The shortage of potable water is becoming an increasingly challenging issue in
the world. Today, about 1.1 billion people, roughly one sixth of the world's
population, live in areas without enough safe drinking water. Water contaminants
can be removed using a membrane separation process. Membranes allow purified
water to pass while retaining the contaminants. However, the contaminants can
build up and foul conventional membrane technologies. Foulants reduce membrane
performance, require regular membrane cleaning, and increase energy consumption.
The mechanism by which membranes foul, and what chemical attributes contribute
to membrane fouling, are not well understood on a fundamental molecular level.
This research project will advance computational models for a widely used
polymer membrane and develop efficient simulation methods to provide fundamental
understanding of fouling mechanisms. The project will use the new computational
tool to explore strategies of designing high-performance, antifouling membranes
for water purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets fundamental
questions of membrane fouling and proposes new strategies for designing
antifouling membranes through surface modification, mainly by grafting different
polyzwitterion coatings. Research objectives include: (1) developing
computational models for polyamide membranes and foulants, in which the membrane
surface model can properly represent the surface chemistry and morphology based
on available experimental datasets; (2) developing a combined nonequilibrium
molecular dynamics screening and equilibrium umbrella sampling technique to
accurately search for the lowest free energy fouling sites and fouling
configurations for a membrane-foulant complex system; and (3) using the
developed computational models and tools to perform extensive molecular
simulations to investigate surface modified polyamide membrane and its
antifouling properties, proposing new strategies for the molecular design of
antifouling materials. The project provides an important opportunity for
students to obtain education and training in simulation-based engineering and
science research. One graduate student will be trained in this project.
Undergraduate and high school students, including women and minority students,
will participate in the program through the support of institution summer
undergraduate program for education and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.