* 1817378
* RUI:   Molecular Interplay between Cell Adhesion and Directed Migration
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Yulia Artemenko, SUNY College at Oswego
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 295,430.00

Movement of individual cells can be guided by a variety of cues, including
chemical signals and mechanical forces, and is critically important for a
multitude of processes, ranging from embryonic development to proper function of
the immune system. Studies in the well-established model organism, social amoeba
Dictyostelium, have demonstrated that directed movement is orchestrated by a
vast network of molecular pathways that are activated in response to the
chemical or mechanical signals. Similar molecular pathways have also been
observed in mammalian cells that utilize amoeboid-type movement, such as white
blood cells and metastatic tumor cells. To better understand the molecular
networks controlling cell to surface attachment in directed cell movement of
amoeboid cells, this research will examine interactions between known regulators
of cell attachment,identify new players in the process, and explore the role of
mechanical forces and their transmission to the molecular network in directed
movement in Dictyostelium cells. This research will provide training
opportunities for many undergraduate students performing primary research either
in the investigator's laboratory, or in a course-based setting, as well as high
school students from traditionally underrepresented backgrounds. Students will
gain hands-on experience in current techniques in molecular and cell biology and
biochemistry, and will develop valuable critical thinking and scientific
reasoning skills. To further promote higher education in STEM-related fields in
the upcoming generation, this program also includes hosting visits of preschool
and high school students to SUNY Oswego, where they can directly interact with
and learn from the students conducting primary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemotaxis, or migration in a chemoattractant
gradient, is the best understood mode of directed cell migration, and involves
activation of multiple signal transduction pathways downstream of a
chemoattractant receptor, leading to biased actin polymerization. In contrast to
chemotaxis, detailed mechanisms of shear flow-induced migration are not known.
Furthermore, the role of cell-substrate adhesion during directed cell migration
in cells that utilize amoeboid-type migration is unclear. The hypothesis of this
study is that in addition to its involvement in overall directed migration,
cell-substrate adhesion plays a unique role in the initiation of and directional
sensing during shear flow-induced migration. Using an established model system
for amoeboid-type motility, Dictyostelium discoideum, this research will
investigate the interplay between adhesion and directed cell migration in two
ways. First, this study will test the genetic and molecular interaction between
Rap1/Phg2, a known pathway that controls adhesion in Dictyostelium, and a new
regulator of adhesion and chemotaxis, KrsB. A suppressor screen will also be
conducted in a course-based setting to identify potentially novel KrsB partners.
Second, this project will examine the effects of various perturbations in cell
substrate adhesion and its coupling to the actin cytoskeleton on the initial
response to shear flow. Taken together, this study will greatly expand the
understanding of the signal transduction events involved in non-integrin based
adhesion and its role in directed cell migration to various
cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.