* 1817869
* Mechanisms of SSB in Coordinating DNA Replication and Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Linda Bloom, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 737,925.00

Mechanisms of SSB in Coordinating DNA Replication and
Repair&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When enzymes duplicate chromosomal DNA or repair DNA
damage, the DNA duplex is unwound and regions of single-stranded (ss) DNA are
exposed. Single-stranded DNA binding proteins (SSBs) play a key role in
protecting DNA from damage by binding ss DNA that forms during normal cellular
processes. This project addresses the questions of how SSBs bind ss DNA tightly
to protect it, but at the same time allow key enzymes to access the DNA to
perform their necessary activities. A combination of biochemical and biophysical
techniques will be used to investigate the interactions between SSB and three
different enzymes that help replicate DNA or repair DNA damage. This project
will also be used as a platform for teaching scientific concepts and techniques
to students of all ages in order to foster their career development. Students
ranging from high school to graduate school will be actively engaged in
performing the experiments. More experienced students will be encouraged to
mentor newer students, thus fostering their teaching and mentoring skills, as
well as solidifying their own core knowledge. The students who work on the
project will also develop YouTube video vignettes that use entertaining ways to
explain the science behind the project to younger students to excite young
students about science and to encourage more young people to explore STEM-
related career opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-stranded
DNA binding proteins (SSBs) bind single-stranded (ss) DNA intermediates of DNA
metabolism to protect ssDNA from damage and to prevent the formation of
potentially mutagenic DNA secondary structures. Another critical function of
SSBs is to mediate genome maintenance pathways by physically and functionally
interacting with many different enzymes. These basic functions of SSB are
conserved in all domains of life, but they would seem to interfere with one
another. This project uses an Escherichia coli model system to uncover general
mechanisms by which SSB and enzymes cooperate to enhance the efficiency of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions on DNA. Despite their critical importance, mechanisms
by which SSB-enzyme interactions stimulate enzyme activity and allow enzymes to
gain access to DNA are not fully defined. Moreover, few studies have measured
both enzyme stimulation and DNA-SSB remodeling under the same kinetic conditions
to determine how the two processes are linked. This research addresses these
questions by: 1) defining mechanisms by which E. coli SSB stimulates enzyme
activity, and 2) defining dynamic interactions between enzymes and DNA-SSB that
give enzymes access to DNA substrates. Interactions of three model enzymes, a
clamp loader, a DNA polymerase, and a DNA helicase, with SSB will be
investigated. These enzymes were chosen because each acts on the same DNA
substrate, and thus will encounter the same dynamic DNA-SSB structure. This will
increase the impact of the findings by permitting identification of mechanisms
that are common to all three enzymes, and those that may be specific for a given
enzyme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.