* 1817115
* NeTS: Small: Creating an Evolvable, Diverse, and Dynamic Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The Internet ushered in a new era of communication, and it has engendered an
ever-growing set of applications that have transformed our lives. It is
remarkable that all this has taken place with an Internet architecture that has
remained unchanged for over forty years. While much research has been done on
promising new Internet architectures, there is little hope for their adoption
because the pain of transitioning to a new architecture is too great. When it
comes to Internet architecture, we know much more about where we want to go,
than we do about how to get there. This project looks not at what new
architectures we should create, but how we could more easily deploy them. The
goal is to create an Internet that is more evolvable and dynamic, so that what
has served us so well over the past forty years can evolve to meet our needs
over the next forty and more. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some view the forty years of
architectural stagnation as inevitable. After all, it has long been a central
tenet that the Internet needs a "narrow waist" at the internetworking layer
(L3), a single uniform protocol adopted by everyone; given this assumption,
changing this layer is inevitably hard. This project rejects this dogma,
attributing the requirement of a narrow waist to a fundamental flaw in the
original Internet architecture: the conflation between the interdomain dataplane
and the intradomain dataplanes. As an alternative, this project separates these
two dataplanes. Furthermore, in copying the Internet?s use of layering, in which
L3 is an overlay on L2, and L2 is an overlay on L1, this project implements the
interdomain dataplane (referred to as L3.5) as an overlay on top of the
intradomain dataplane (L3). This decouples the two dataplanes, allowing them to
evolve independently. This project uses this approach to create an architectural
framework that enables all clean-slate architectures to be incrementally
deployable and coexist, making the Internet fully extensible. Moreover, rather
than being some radical clean-slate architecture that could never be deployed,
the framework itself is incrementally deployable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling
architectural extensibility could greatly change the nature of the Internet.
Today, an Internet architecture must try to meet all the needs of all
applications. Once the Internet becomes fully extensible, with an ever-changing
set of coexisting architectures, each architecture can be designed to more fully
meet only some of the needs of some applications. This would hopefully lead to a
broader ecosystem of architectures which, in their union, can better meet all
the needs of all applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.