* 1817377
* Resuscitation and assembly of the rhizosphere microbiome in response to plant stress
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Sheng He, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 506,000.00

Plants associate closely with some soil microorganisms and engage with them in
beneficial relationships near the root surface. It is expected that beneficial
microbes can support plants to be resilient to stresses in the environment, such
as drought. However, it is not well understood how microbes are recruited to the
root during stress or which members of the diverse soil microbial community are
most responsive during stress. This research will investigate how microorganisms
respond to plant hormones that signal stress. Understanding the dynamic
relationships between soil microbes and plants during stress is important for
anticipating, and potentially managing, expected changes in plant performance
given environmental and land-use changes. This project will assess how soil
microorganisms alter their growth and activities when exposed to plant hormones,
quantify how the molecules released from roots change during stress and assess
the responses of microbes to those changes, and determine how members of soil
microbial communities collectively respond to plant stress signals in natural
and controlled environments. This work has broad significance for understanding
plant resilience, with expected outcomes of national interest for agriculture
and land management, food and energy security, sustainability, and general soil
health. It will also benefit society by providing quantitative scientific
workforce training and community outreach at Michigan State University's Science
Festival and other public campus events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the research is to understand the rules of assembly and function of the
rhizosphere microbiome given exposure to plant hormones that signal stress. For
plants, root microbiome recruitment and assembly is facilitated through the
soil, which provides the physical, chemical, and biological context for plant-
microbiome engagement. Soil harbors a rich reservoir of microbial diversity, but
up to 80% of microorganisms in soil are dormant and have inaccessible functional
potential. When plants are stressed, they release metabolites into the soil that
could serve as signals to microorganisms. This research aims to: 1) uncover
bacterial responses in growth and resuscitation to stress phytohormones; 2) to
quantify microbial community dynamics and interactions given plant stress
signals; and 3) to identify members of complex soil microbial communities that
resuscitate and assemble to the rhizosphere during stress. A multi-scale
approach will be used that combines in vivo quantification of bacterial
responses to phytohormones, synthetic microbiome construction and manipulation,
and in situ experiments of rhizosphere microbiome dynamics in soil. This
research is expected to decipher rules governing microbiome dynamics when plants
are stressed. A foundational understanding of the interactions between plants,
microorganisms and the environment will facilitate management of microbiomes
towards desired functions, and will support goals towards sustainable
agriculture and food and energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.