* 1817124
* Metacommunity Dynamics: Integrating Local Dynamics, Stochasticity, and Connectivity
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2023
* USD 290,670.00

This project will develop a novel mathematical approach for describing the
dynamics of ecological communities at large spatial scales, a description of
dynamics called metacommunities. From a mathematical standpoint, the project
will start with relatively simple descriptions of interactions among species,
such as competition and predation, at small spatial scales, coupled with
descriptions of connectivity, the way species move between locations. The
mathematical descriptions will then be expanded to include more detailed and
realistic descriptions of interactions among species and underlying
environmental changes. The models will be analyzed to determine both long-term
behavior and dynamics. The mathematical models will then be used to answer
important ecological questions focused on how changes in habitat quality and
availability and connectivity between different habitats will affect the
composition and dynamics of these metacommunities. This, in turn, will provide
information about how human activities that affect habitats and connectivity
will affect species composition and dynamics and can provide guidance for both
conservation and restoration efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical
models of metacommunities used will be primarily phrased in discrete time with a
time step of one year, both to reflect dynamics in seasonal environments and how
data is gathered. The simplest models will focus only on species presence or
absence and will be difference equations, so a relatively complete analytical
treatment will be possible. Equilibria and their stability can be calculated.
The more complex descriptions will all be phrased as integro-difference
equations where time is discrete, but the state space is continuous. The
underlying dependent variables will be density functions for the abundance of
the species under consideration, and the kernels in the integro-difference
equations will describe the underlying ecological dynamics. Initial analyses
will be numerical with the expectation that analytic treatment of conditions for
persistence and coexistence will be possible, building on recent mathematical
work on integro-difference equations. To treat changing conditions through time,
the kernels will be modified to include explicit time dependence. The
mathematical analyses will then be used to answer the underlying ecological
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.