* 1817478
* Mechanisms of Organelle Trafficking, Inheritance, and Homeostasis in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Anthony Vecchiarelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2023
* USD 899,954.00

Atmospheric carbon dioxide is at the highest level in the past 800,000 years,
therefore, understanding carbon fixation mechanisms has become very important.
Almost half of global carbon remediation is done by photosynthetic cyanobacteria
that concentrate the machinery required to fix carbon dioxide into organelles
made entirely of protein called carboxysomes. Despite their importance to the
global carbon cycle, the factors controlling carboxysome inheritance is unclear.
This research will elucidate the trafficking mechanisms of carboxysomes so as to
understand how this vital organelle is maintained in a cell population. An
understanding of the basic biological mechanisms by which carboxysomes are
inherited will provide a means to utilize carboxysomes for synthetic biology
applications. Toward this end, this project will further the NSF's mission of
expanding science and engineering research potential by improving natural carbon
fixation; thus, this project offers a major societal benefit. The project also
has broad impacts on education, engaging the public, and increasing scientific
literacy by giving the public an appreciation of how bacterial function can have
global implications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While eukaryotic organelles are
organized by the cytoskeleton, it is unknown how bacterial organelles are
spatially regulated. In the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus, carboxysomes
are evenly spaced along the cell length, which ensures their inheritance. The
mechanism governing this distribution is unknown. The research will contribute
the first mechanistic understanding of a trafficking system responsible for the
inheritance of carboxysomes. The Vecchiarelli lab will employ biochemistry,
genetics, mathematically modelling and quantitative microscopy to study the
molecular basis of carboxysome organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.