* 1817909
* Characterizing dynamic properties and responses of an artificial mitotic cell
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

Mitosis is the important process by which cells divide and proliferate. A cell
divides into two, and two into four, and so on. This process is finely
controlled by a set of genes and proteins. These are known as the mitotic
oscillator. Defects in mitosis are thought to increase the chance of developing
cancer. It is difficult to study the oscillator inside the cell, where many
other complicated cellular processes are also occurring. This project will build
a synthetic mitotic oscillator into tiny droplets to mimic real cells. Without
the complicated effects from cell growth and cell divisions, these microdroplets
enable quantitative manipulation and characterization of the mitotic oscillator.
The knowledge gained through this research will be disseminated to the broader
scientific community through publications, conferences, and workshops. The
interdisciplinary technologies will be disseminated to youth and the public
through proposed outreach activities such as demonstrations and lab open day in
collaboration with local professional educators and the museum. These activities
will allow us to engage underrepresented minority students in grades 6-9
interested in science, expose them to research excitement, and prepare them for
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to quantitatively
analyze the stochastic dynamics of a minimal mitotic oscillator and its
responses to various environmental signals. To constitute a minimal cytoplasmic
mitotic oscillator, Xenopus egg cytosolic extracts will be encapsulated in
microfluidic water-in-oil emulsions that mimic single cell behaviors.
Additionally, a more complicated cell that contains nuclei will be built on top
of this minimal oscillator. This will recapitulate complex phenomena in vitro
such as nuclear assembly, chromatin condensation, and protein localization.
Several questions will be examined in this system, including the role of cell
size, temperature, and energy depletion in modulating properties of the
oscillator. To achieve these goals, computational modeling, droplet-based
microfluidic methods, and time-lapse fluorescence imaging will be integrated.
This work will build a cyclic cell bottom-up, ranging from the simplest form
containing no nuclei to the complicated ones driving various nuclear activities.
The success of this work will provide valuable guidance in search of new targets
for drug development and regenerative medicine in preventing and treating
mitotic oscillator-related cancerous diseases, and thus be relevant and of great
importance to broader communities in cancer biology, and cell and developmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.