* 1817929
* Mechanisms of Interleaflet Coupling in Asymmetric Lipid Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Frederick Heberle, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 749,632.00

Living cells communicate with the outside world through a thin double layer of
lipids and associated proteins called the plasma membrane. A remarkable feature
of this membrane is that its two halves are chemically distinct: the lipids that
face the internal contents of the cell are very different from the lipids that
face the external environment. It is not clear what role this compositional
asymmetry plays in the life of a healthy cell, yet it is clear that cells do not
function properly without it, and indeed they expend valuable energy to actively
maintain it. This project aims to shed light on the mystery of cell membrane
asymmetry by answering the basic question of how the two halves of a membrane
communicate with and influence each other. This will be accomplished through the
systematic study of how the different types of lipids that are found on each
side of an asymmetric membrane influence the properties of the other half, as
well as the properties of the membrane as a whole. Because much of a membrane's
functionality is derived from the proteins it hosts, the researchers will also
investigate how a membrane-resident protein affects, and is in turn affected by
lipid asymmetry. In the course of this project, the principle investigator will
train graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in experimental and
computational methods that will prepare them for careers in STEM fields. The
researchers will communicate their findings to the scientific community through
conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications and will also engage the
public through an outreach program to enhance awareness of and appreciation for
biophysical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compositional asymmetry of the two
bilayer leaflets is a fundamental property of most cellular membranes, including
the plasma membrane that surrounds the cell. Although this asymmetry is
essential for cell viability, its role in normal cellular function is poorly
understood. This project will elucidate the rules that govern communication
between the two halves of asymmetric model membranes, leading to improved
predictions of functional phenotypes based on the asymmetric lipid composition
of a membrane. A primary goal of the project is the use of neutron scattering
techniques to reveal how the structural and dynamical properties of each leaflet
respond to changes in lipid composition, and to integrate the experimental
results with atomistic simulations to inform on the underlying molecular
mechanisms responsible for these changes. A second objective is to develop a
deeper understanding of how asymmetric membranes adapt to the presence of a
transmembrane protein, and how the protein responds in turn to an asymmetric
lipid environment. While lipids provide the basic structure of biomembranes,
proteins provide most of the functionality; this project will provide much
needed information about protein-lipid interactions in the biologically relevant
context of an asymmetric membrane. A third objective is the continued
development of robust techniques for preparing and characterizing complex
asymmetric vesicles for use as advanced plasma membrane model
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.