* 1817216
* NeTS: Small: Support for Interactive AR/VR Video: Learning and Optimizing at the Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) are increasingly used in new application
areas including entertainment, medicine, public safety, architecture, personnel
training, etc. Mobile AR/VR systems allow users to be untethered, thus making it
convenient for use in new settings. Edge networking and computing is a promising
way to support demanding, low latency AR/VR applications, however there is a
need for a deeper understanding of what functionality an edge system should
provide to support those applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
improves user experience with AR/VR applications by using compute capability in
edge cloud nodes located close to the user. The goal is to implement a system
for real-time streaming and analysis of AR/VR videos that jointly uses the
network efficiently while maintaining a high user Quality of Experience (QoE).
The first activity is to develop a common set of functional building blocks that
implement a set of generic AR/VR applications.&lt;br/&gt;The second goal is to
develop the techniques to chain these building blocks together in a way that
effectively uses an edge server composed of a mix of both set Central Processing
Units (CPUs) and Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). An evaluation will be
performed on a testbed of AR/VR devices and smartphones through trace-driven
simulations, using publicly-available user datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.