* 1818710
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Effects of Innovative Mathematics Instruction Methods on Student Attitude, Self-efficacy, Effort and Performance
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Seong-Tae Kim, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 05/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Researchers at North Carolina A&amp;T State University are examining the mutual
effects of the Math Emporium and SCALE-UP models on student learning and
performance in gate-keeper mathematics courses. Framed using theories of
motivation, self-efficacy, and attribution, the project is grounded by research
documenting that an engaging classroom environment and active learning improve
student performance. The researchers are interested particularly in exploring
how exposure to mathematics instruction models can modify existing psychosocial
processes among students in the gate-keeper math courses. The project will
contribute to the current knowledge by producing empirical evidence of an
intervention that can mitigate a recurring barrier to underrepresented minority
student persistence in STEM, i.e., mastery of gatekeeper mathematics courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will test two hypotheses: implementing the
Math Emporium and SCALE-UP models in pre-calculus and trigonometry courses will
positively impact students' attitudes, self-efficacy, and academic performance,
and there is a causal relationship among these variables. The project will
employ a mixed-method research design and sequential approach to answer the
research questions and include approximately 120 treatment subjects and 120
control subjects. The qualitative phase of the project aims to reveal underlying
factors that influence cognitive and affective processes and expand theory and
current knowledge of practices that have been demonstrated to improve STEM
education and persistence. A pre-post-test design will be used to determine
students' incoming attitudes and beliefs and the extent to which these change
over time in related gate-keeper mathematics courses. The researchers will use a
comparison group to document the magnitude of the effect of the intervention on
student attitudes, self-efficacy, effort and course outcomes and employ
descriptive statistics to characterize categorical and numerical variables.
Focus group sessions will be transcribed and coded for significant statements
and emergent themes, and textual and categorical data analysis will be conducted
using text mining tools. The research results are expected to not only improve
student success in gatekeeper mathematics courses but also to increase
underrepresented student retention in STEM broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.