* 1818026
* Role of histone variant H3.3 in DNA repair
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Akash Gunjan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2022
* USD 734,000.00

Histone proteins wrap DNA around themselves to form filaments called
chromosomes, thereby regulating all aspects of DNA function, including DNA
repair. Chromosome structure in turn is regulated by posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) on the histones and the use of primary sequence variants of
the canonical histones. Unlike its canonical counterparts, the histone variant
H3.3 is deposited throughout the cell cycle in transcriptionally active regions,
where it forms unstable nucleosomes. The research will examine a new potential
role for H3.3 in DNA repair. The research will benefit society by promoting
science education and training future scientists, while contributing to a better
understanding of how histone proteins promote DNA repair. This research will be
carried out with the involvement of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
as well as postdoctoral scholars and will have a broad impact on science
education and the training of future scientists. Early exposure to the joys of
science encourages students to pursue future careers in science. Through a
college-based summer outreach program, rural and minority K-12 students will be
exposed to research concepts in the PIs lab. Genetic model systems such as the
budding yeast and fruit flies are ideal for educating K-12 (and undergraduate)
students in the methods of scientific research and explaining genetic
principles. The PI will also continue to host high school juniors in his lab
each summer under the Young Scholars Program (YSP) as they work on mini-
projects. These mini-projects usually perform very well at science competitions,
which helps them secure admission and scholarships at top universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the transcriptional roles of histone H3.3 are well
known, recent evidence also suggests critical transcription independent roles of
H3.3. Consistent with this evidence, preliminary data pointing to a crucial role
for H3.3 in homologous recombination (HR)-mediated DNA repair has been obtained,
and this project will investigate the molecular mechanisms involved. The
specific hypothesis to be tested is that histone H3.3 and its PTMs modulate
chromatin structure at DNA damage sites to help recruit HR repair factors,
thereby contributing to genomic integrity. The hypothesis will be tested by (i)
determining the role of H3.3 in HR mediated DNA repair in distinct chromatin
structures, (ii) identifying its DNA repair specific chaperones, and (iii)
defining the role of H3.3 modifications in DNA repair. The research will use
genome sequencing based biochemical assays, live cell microscopy, and mass
spectrometry (MS) to determine the role of H3.3 and its modifications in HR-
mediated DNA repair. The analyses will be carried out primarily in normal and
H3.3 deficient cultured human cells, as well as in patient derived tumor cell
lines carrying H3.3 mutations. A potentially useful byproduct of the MS data
generated during the course of this research is the identification of novel DNA
damage inducible PTMs on histones other than H3.3. Hence, the findings from this
research will establish the role for H3.3 in DNA repair and will also lay the
groundwork for the functional analysis of other histone variants implicated in
DNA repair. Furthermore, due to the evolutionary conservation of the major
processes involving chromatin and DNA repair, the research will yield useful
information on mechanisms that contribute to genomic stability across eukaryotic
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.