* 1818038
* Sustainable Healthcare Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Cassandra Thiel, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,933.00

This research development workshop will be held April 6-8, 2018 in New Haven,
CT, focused on improving sustainability engineering methods and tools for use in
healthcare delivery. This workshop will bring together experts from
environmental and industrial engineering, materials science, clinical care,
public health and policy, health care administration, and health economics, to
identify knowledge gaps and develop a strategic action plan to fill these gaps
in addressing one of the grand challenges of healthcare environmental
sustainability: balancing patient safety with waste reduction and pollution
prevention. An aim is to discover synergies that arise from combining different
approaches and various perspectives to address this challenge. The workshop will
describe the scope of evidence-based information, identify gaps, and development
research priorities in order to produce information/tools to support
clinicians/healthcare administrators in efforts to reduce health care pollution
and waste. The workshop intends to develop a strategic action plan for
sustainability in healthcare which identifies critical research needs and the
obstacles and opportunities in safely addressing the resource consumption of
medical and clinical care.

The impetus for this workshop lies in the excessive waste and resource use of
current US healthcare services. Through the systems lens provided by
sustainability engineering, researchers have begun to quantify material use and
environmental emissions from medicine, yet the broadening of these
quantification studies and their translation into clinical practice have been
slow in developing. This workshop will (1) bring together interdisciplinary
researchers to help reinforce ongoing and forge new research connections to
tackle healthcare sustainability in an actionable way, and (2) develop
strategies to develop, test, and implement clinically-relevant sustainability
interventions, so that the actual footprint and resource-use of medicine will be
minimized.