* 1818971
* NeTS: JUNO2: Resilient Disaster Communications in the Social-Media Era
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Effective and timely communication among citizens in need of help, first
responders and others who are able to help during and in the aftermath of a
disaster can affect outcomes dramatically. The integration of social media in
daily lives has also dramatically changed how victims, volunteers, and first
responders exchange information during this time. This project, a collaboration
with Japan under the JUNO2, program, will develop a communication framework in
disaster situations that enables critical information to be shared among several
groups that use multiple modes of communication, including the use of social
networks for hyper-local assistance from first responders and volunteers. But,
security and trust are also important, because adversaries and malicious actors
often seek to exploit a vulnerable situation. The communication framework will
provide timely delivery of relevant information to first responders, victims and
volunteers while at the same time enabling the participants to establish trust
amongst each other and avoid having critical information forwarded through
malicious nodes. This project seeks to have significant societal impact in the
way public safety is managed and is equally applicable across all geographies,
especially in the United States and Japan, both of which have experienced major
natural disaster over the past few years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
leverages two innovations for communication in disaster situations: a new graph-
based dynamic naming framework integrated with an information-centric network
layer for timely communication; and new approaches to usable security that
provide trust relationships among participants based on establishing a trust
chain originating from the pre-existing trust with first responders. Naming is
one of the fundamental technologies underpinning modern communications (e.g.,
Domain Name System, or DNS). The researchers extend the capability of
Information Centric Networks (ICN) to use rich graph structures for the
namespace and develop a sophisticated, but light-weight, prefix matching for
forwarding based on information across multiple layers. The use of namespace
templates will enable easier adoption and dissemination of the namespace. The
project will develop means to create trust relations in a timely manner between
devices which are controlled by owners, leveraging both content and human
information to ensure trustworthiness of a human/owner of the device. It will
also examine whether human-based trustworthiness is meaningful in disasters and
becomes a deterrent force against the malicious behavior of nodes and whether
the trust management overheads on both systems and users are reasonable. A
prototype framework/protocol stack will be installed at both the University of
California-Riverside and Osaka University in Japan. Evaluation will be done on
example scenarios that involve large numbers of victims and first responders.
The PIs will work on standardizing communication for disaster management,
including security and privacy. The artifacts developed in this project will be
released as open source software to stimulate further experimental research in
this important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.