* 1818732
* Targeted Infusion Project: Active Learning Integrated Nuclear Engineering Education (ALINE)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Mebougna Drabo, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Alabama A&amp;M University seeks to improve
undergraduate students' preparation and success towards a career in nuclear
engineering or an advanced degree by focusing on active learning strategies.
Undergraduate students are involved in the project as researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the objectives to: enhance student
learning and technical skills by integrating active learning units into nuclear
engineering courses; study the efficacy of the active learning model and units
on nuclear engineering skill-set development; and improve retention and
graduation rates in nuclear engineering programs, thus increasing the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in the nuclear
engineering workforce. This project is guided by formative and summative
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.