* 1818696
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integrative Makers Course and Laboratory for STEM Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. To make STEM learning purposeful and
fulfilling, this HBCU-UP TIP project aims to provide STEM juniors and seniors at
Tuskegee University with experiences that are aligned with industry practices
through a new and novel Makers Course and associated Makers Laboratory
(MC&amp;ML) called "Conducting Integrative STEM Research in a Makerspace". The
MC&amp;ML is designed to provide students with industry-like experiences needed
STEM workforce readiness or graduate school preparation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the MC&amp;ML lies in its framework of the
"Makerspace", a dedicated physical area where students from different STEM
disciplines will convene for work on collaborative hands-on research projects in
advanced multidisciplinary fields such as nanocomposites, biomaterials, smart
materials, and computation modeling. The program interventions include: (1) the
establishment of the MC&amp;ML, (2) the use of "Learning through lectures and
making" whereby teams of multidisciplinary faculty will lecture, mentor students
and supervise projects on dedicated MSE-focused topics, (3) increased summer
research internships opportunities, (4) Graduate Record Examination (GRE)
preparation, and (5) Workshops for the Graduate Research Fellowship Programs and
STEM-Related Workforce. As an HBCU, Tuskegee is a leader in educating and
preparing minority students for STEM careers. The success of the MC&amp;ML will
contribute to increasing diversity in the STEM technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.