* 1818560
* Meeting: Biology of CAM Plants, April 9-13, 2018, Phoenix, Arizona
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Kevin Hultine, Desert Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2019
* USD 11,500.00

Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis is one of the principle carbon
concentrating mechanisms in terrestrial plants, and is the major means by which
land plants achieve superior levels of resource-use efficiency. As a result, CAM
plants are increasingly being recognized as among the world's most important
crops for food, fodder, fiber, and fuel, as well as being key drivers of
ecosystem function in dry regions. CAM photosynthesis also stands out as an
example of complex trait evolution, with over 60 independent evolutionary
origins, and occurrence in more than 33 families of vascular plants. Exploiting
the productive potential of CAM for human enterprise while protecting CAM plants
in naturally occurring environments requires the integration of a broad range of
biological disciplines. To promote this integration, this conference will bring
together a diverse group of scientists to discuss the evolution, ecology,
functional biology, genomics and engineering of CAM traits and species. The
outcomes of the conference will be highly relevant for ongoing efforts to select
traits in succulent CAM species used for food crops and biofuels, and for
conservation and management of highly threatened arid, semi-arid, or tropical
ecosystems in the face of rapid environmental change. Discoveries from the
conference will be translated into outreach and broad dissemination to the
public, policy makers, land managers, and the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAM photosynthesis was a leading topic in plant
biology research in the two decades after its discovery in the 1960s. However,
once the biochemical details of carbon flow in CAM photosynthetic pathways had
been established, further progress in CAM research was dependent on application
of molecular-genetic and phylogenetic, and isotopic approaches to investigate
these metabolic adaptations. In recent years, significant advances in molecular
phylogenetics, high throughput sequencing, and isotopic physiology have
reinvigorated CAM research and contributed to major new initiatives in CAM
evolution, the development of novel C3 photosynthesis and CAM bioenergy crops,
and the engineering of CAM pathways in non-CAM crop species for improved climate
resiliency. These initiatives are now producing exciting results, and due to the
overlapping nature of disciplines in the modern era of biology, they need to be
presented in a forum where experts and students from across the research
spectrum can consider their significance. This conference aims to accelerate
this momentum by providing a forum for face-to-face interactions among a wide
range of plant biologists. In doing so, the conference will accelerate the pace
of discovery and promote synergistic interactions that will maximize the
potential for highly novel, transformative discoveries with immediate
significance towards commercial application and the conservation of natural
ecosystems.