* 1818467
* High-Order Numerical Methods for Convection-Diffusion Equations with Unbounded Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yang Yang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 236,978.00

This project focuses on design of efficient and robust numerical methods to
solve partial differential equations with unbounded singularities, with
potential applications in astrophysics, biology, combustion, electrical
engineering, and oil recovery. The numerical techniques under development can be
extended to systems with multi-species fluid mixtures such as gaseous detonation
and reacting flows. The project includes training of graduate students through
involvement in the research. Research results will be integrated into new
courses on numerical analysis and multidisciplinary
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is the study of
high-order numerical methods for solving convection-diffusion equations with
unbounded singularities. It contains two parts. The first part is to study the
error behaviors of the numerical schemes and ensure the boundedness of numerical
approximations before blow-up occurs (where the exact solutions are sufficiently
smooth). The second part is to use high-order numerical methods to solve
convection-diffusion equations involving delta-singularities and other blow-up
solutions. Special bound-preserving techniques will be constructed to ensure
that the numerical approximations are physically relevant. The strategies in
this work do not depend on the maximum principle, and they ensure L1-stability
of the numerical schemes. For problems with blow-up solutions, the blow-up
criteria, blow-up locations, blow-up time, and blow-up rates will be studied.
The project aims to develop a general approach to numerically approximate exact
blow-up times and to elucidate the relationship between blow-up time and
significant system parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.