* 1818412
* UNS:  Developing Cross-Assembly Phage As A Marker of Human Fecal Pollution in the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Kyle Bibby, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 274,676.00

1510925 Bibby

More than four decades after the Clean Water Act, approximately 40% of our
Nation's waterways still do not meet the goal of "fishable and swimmable." A
significant challenge in meeting this goal is identifying sources of pollution,
and specifically quantifying human fecal pollution. Recently, a highly abundant
bacteriophage (a bacterial virus), named Cross-Assembly Phage, was identified in
the human gut by metagenomics data mining. This bacteriophage is more abundant
than all other known bacteriophages in the human gut combined, and appears to be
human specific. This project will demonstrate the utility of the Cross-Assembly
Phage assay through a demonstration study in the Allegheny River, including
correlation with other fecal source tracking markers and viral pathogens; and
investigate the global abundance and ubiquity of Cross-Assembly Phage in sewage
with the assistance of international collaborators. Additionally, this project
will involve the Pittsburgh Water Microbiome project as an educational and
outreach task. In this project, middle-school student citizen-scientists will
sample water, including water from Pittsburgh's three rivers, and the microbial
ecology of the water samples will be analyzed by engineering undergraduate
students. This effort will educate both citizen-scientists and undergraduate
engineering students about microbiology and water quality. The Carnegie Science
Center has committed to include an interactive kiosk on the project in an
upcoming exhibit.

The proposed project represents a potentially transformative step forward in
pollution source tracking, through the development of a human-specific, abundant
viral marker of human fecal pollution in the environment. In addition to the
water quality field, the proposed research will have significant impact on other
fields, including food safety and human microbiome research. The PI is well
qualified to conduct the proposed research, with significant experience in
environmental virology, as well as an initial publication investigating the
potential of Cross-Assembly Phage as a pollution source tracking marker.
Additionally, the project has committed collaborators to assist with distinct
project tasks, namely specificity testing for the qPCR assay and international
sample collection. The project team has access to all necessary resources to
complete the proposed research. Both the technical and educational aspects of
the proposed work have significant benefits to society. Pollution impacts have
rendered many of the nation's waterways not "fishable or swimmable"; developing
an improved marker of human fecal pollution in Cross-Assembly Phage will enable
more accurate regulation and beach closures, as well as more economical
investments to control sources of pollution. The results from this project will
be disseminated both in the peer-reviewed literature and conference proceedings
as well as via outreach.