* 1818917
* GAGTA 2018: Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Thomas Koberda, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 22,000.00

The funded conference "GAGTA 2018: Geometric and Asymptotic Group Theory with
Applications" will take place July 16-20 at Korea Institute for Advanced Study
in Seoul, Korea. The conference will bring together leading researchers as well
as early career mathematicians and graduate students from all over the world.
The primary goal of the conference is to discuss recent developments at the
interface of algebra, geometry, and industrial and applied mathematics. The
international venue and diverse array of speakers and participants will
facilitate the formation of many collaborative relationships, provide ample
opportunity for mentorship and career development for early career
mathematicians, and foster international cooperation. The broad scope of the
conference will encourage interdisciplinary research developments. The inclusion
of an applied portion has far-reaching practical applications far beyond
theoretical mathematics. The NSF funds awarded will serve to defray the travel
costs of US participants. The organizers will give priority to graduate students
and early career mathematicians, as well as participants from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Braid groups sit at the center of a deep web of
connections between group theory, algebraic geometry, and applied mathematics.
The subfields involved in this web include CAT(0) geometry, geometric group
theory, mapping class group theory, low dimensional dynamical systems, knot
theory, singularity theory, complex geometry, industrial mixing theory, and
cryptography. In recent years, there have been many exciting developments in all
of these fields, though many questions persist and a plethora of new avenues of
research has been opened. The funded conference will bring together a large
variety of researchers, from established leaders to early career mathematicians
and graduate students. The purpose of the conference is to expose and train
researchers in the many facets of the theory of braid groups, and to forge new
and productive collaborative relationships which will promote and develop the
theory and applications of braids. All the fields described above will be
represented among the research talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference website:
http://gagta.cayley.kr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.