* 1818707
* Catalyst Project-Life STEM: Enhancing the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum to Increase Student Engagement
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Bianca Garner, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 148,800.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
supports the development, implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative
models and approaches for improving the preparation and success of HBCU
undergraduate students so that they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or
careers. Through this one-year project, Tougaloo College seeks to increase
student engagement and retention in the Biology sciences by engaging both
faculty and students. The proposed project will strengthen curriculum in the
first year General Biology laboratory course with more research based
activities. Biology faculty members will work with students to create a learning
community in the biological sciences to strengthen retention in core classes.
The overall outcome will be to strengthen the STEM pipeline by providing
undergraduates with a strong foundation in Biology.

The Tougaloo College Biology department will undergo an intensive review of
programs to strengthen curricular and co-curricular activities. An important
component of this process will be to develop a new introductory Biology
laboratory, using research based activities. Assessments of this program will
include perception surveys and academic standing to ensure program
effectiveness. With a focus on increasing scientific understanding, instructors
of the General Biology laboratories will adopt strategies to increase retention
rates. Faculty will be supported with developmental opportunities that enhance
teaching and research. Students will be provided mentoring and support to
increase academic success in critical classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.