* 1818377
* Mapping sequence-function landscapes to isolate improved variants of the dominant carbon-fixing enzyme
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* David Savage, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2021
* USD 398,213.00

Photosynthetic carbon assimilation produces the foods, fuels, and materials that
are central to modern society. Enhancing photosynthesis would thus have
significant positive impact in these critical application areas. Photosynthetic
carbon assimilation is thought to be limited by the central enzyme called
RuBisCO (Ribulose Bisphosphate Carboxylase/Oxygenase). RuBisCO is notorious for
its slow and mistake-prone activity, yet attempts to improve this enzyme have
largely failed. The goal of this project is to lay the groundwork for enhancing
photosynthetic carbon assimilation by testing the feasibility of improving its
key, limiting step. In the process, this research will engage other scientists,
via symposia, to develop a broader community and discussion focused on improving
photosynthesis. In addition, principles derived from the work will be used to
develop novel undergraduate curricula that enables teaching biochemistry using
quantitative principles, rather than traditional memorization-based methods.
These curricula will be employed and tested in an undergraduate biochemistry
course at UC Berkeley to evaluate their effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will apply new advances in protein engineering and DNA sequencing
to answer the fundamental question of whether RuBisCO is forced to make rate
versus specificity trade-offs. Assaying this question has historically been
difficult due to the challenge of systematically constructing the necessary
libraries and assaying for the carboxylase activity of RuBisCO in vivo. Here,
the investigators will develop a novel metabolically engineered E. coli strain
suitable for the direct selection of RuBisCO activities en masse. This strain
will then be used to perform a deep mutational scan of RuBisCO activity and
identify enzyme variants with perturbed kinetic properties. In total, this work
will shed new light into the sequence-function landscape of this critical enzyme
and could lead to the development of improved enzymes suitable for engineering
enhanced photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.