* 1818017
* Domesticated Transposons as a Source of New Regulatory Proteins in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Esther Betran, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 570,197.00

Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences capable of self-replication and
mobility that often account for a substantial fraction of eukaryotic genomes.
Despite their parasitic nature, it is now well documented that on many occasions
the genes encoded by TEs, which normally facilitate their own propagation, have
been "domesticated" to serve host cellular functions. The proposed work will
test the general hypothesis that transposases are an opportune source of
regulatory protein domains coopted because of their ancestral cellular
interactions to build new genetic systems underlying developmental innovation
and fostering organismal evolution. The PI will provide undergraduates,
including minorities and first generation college students, with their first
exposure to STEM research. The research and collaborations will guarantee that
this functional genomics project will train rising scientists (graduate students
and a postdoc) in cutting edge functional genomics technologies and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of domesticated TE genes known in a
variety of organisms are derived from the transposase encoded by DNA
transposons. The power of Drosophila genetics and genomics will be harnessed to
begin the elucidation of the biological function of four likely independent
domesticated transposase genes (DPLG1-4) and a set of proteins (MADFs) that are
hypothesize to derive from the same TE superfamily. These are highly conserved
in the Drosophila genus and are derived from the same superfamily of DNA
transposons (PIF/Harbinger) .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.