* 1818783
* Collaborative Research: Models, Algorithms, and Simulations for Two-Phase Ferrofluid Flows in Contact with a Solid Surface
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* XIAOFENG YANG, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 57,185.00

Being controllable by applied magnetic fields, two-phase ferrofluid flows have
found diverse applications in various science and engineering fields. Flows of
two-phase ferrofluid mixtures usually involve the coupling of hydrodynamics,
interface motion, intrinsic particle spins, magnetization field, and induced
magnetic field. It is expected that the proposed research will not only lead to
reliable well-posed models, efficient numerical algorithms for the two-phase
ferrofluid system, but also extend the applicability of mathematical models,
analyses and codes to various physical problems of current interest through
numerical simulations. The proposed research will produce efficient, optimally
convergent, easily implemented, energy stable numerical algorithms, as well as
publicly available finite element codes. It will provide ample and valuable
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to receive
multidisciplinary training in the areas of mathematical modeling, computational
mathematics, and mechanical engineering, and to develop state-of-the-art
mathematical models and numerical algorithms for science and engineering
applications. Starting from this collaborative work, the investigators plan to
disseminate the developed models, methods and software packages to more
engineers and scientists for solving their realistic problems, present the
research in professional conferences and colloquia, and organize special
sessions/minisymposiums in domestic/international conferences for related
works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in the challenge to develop suitable mathematical models and design
efficient and accurate schemes for the highly nonlinear two-phase ferrofluid
system, which couples free interfaces, hydrodynamics, magnetization field,
induced magnetic field, and intrinsic particle spins. Very few efforts have been
made to address the induced modeling/numerical challenges of the two-phase
ferrofluid system due to the complicated nonlinear couplings among these
constituents. The proposed models are thermodynamically consistent and thus
preserve the energy dissipation laws. With strengths of the finite element
methods in dealing with the complex boundary, the proposed numerical schemes are
efficient, accurate, easily implemented, and energy stable with some discrete
energy dissipation laws which have advantages of allowing the large time step
and controlled error bound to capture the interfacial singularities accurately.
In addition, the models, numerical algorithms and simulations will contribute to
better understandings of various physical problems of practical interests, such
as new materials based on ferro fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.