* 1818748
* A Novel Computational Method for Diffuse Interface Models of Implicit Solvation of Biomolecules
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Zhan Chen, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 112,109.00

In the past two decades, implicit solvent models are of tremendous importance to
the biomolecular&lt;br/&gt;modeling community with thousands of exemplary
applications in the literature due to their low&lt;br/&gt;computational cost and
relatively high accuracy. The accuracy of implicit solvent models
depends&lt;br/&gt;on the geometric description of the solute-solvent interface
and the solvent dielectric profile that&lt;br/&gt;is defined near the molecules.
Successful implementations of the proposed model in this project
with&lt;br/&gt;realistically generated solute-solvent smooth boundaries will
greatly improve the accuracy and&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of these implicit solvent
models. This investigation will be directly integrated into
existing&lt;br/&gt;implicit solvent software and visualization packages to
ensure extensive usages by an established&lt;br/&gt;user community of
researchers in chemistry, physics, and biology. Moreover, the proposed work will
present &lt;br/&gt;an unconventional computational method for diffuse interface
models applied to spatial multiscale modeling &lt;br/&gt;in mathematical
biology. Successful development of the proposed work will become a valuable
computational&lt;br/&gt;tool for studying the transition between regions
described by discrete and continuum models. &lt;br/&gt;The outcome will have
potential impacts across a wide range of scientific fields such as
multiscale&lt;br/&gt;modeling in cancer research and drug design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
computational method for diffuse interface models of&lt;br/&gt;implicit
solvation of biomolecules. The computational approach will be mathematically
rigorous and&lt;br/&gt;computationally efficient to generate physically
realistic solute-solvent smooth boundaries by free&lt;br/&gt;energy
minimization. To this end, an innovative construction is proposed to transform a
variational&lt;br/&gt;problem subject to bounded admissible functions into an
equivalent unconstrained problem so&lt;br/&gt;that the traditional Euler-
Lagrange Equation can be applied directly. This new
computational&lt;br/&gt;formulation will be implemented with advanced
computational algorithms to ensure their accuracy,&lt;br/&gt;stability, and
efficiency, and it will be validated by several common biomolecular modeling
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.