* 1818440
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Evidence-Based Strategies to Enhance STEM Majors' Mathematics Performance
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Anna Harris, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2021
* USD 179,995.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate program
provides support to design, implement, study and assess efforts to increase the
numbers of students and the quality of their preparation by strengthening
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research.
This project at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff provides a strategic
approach to reform the introductory mathematics curriculum to increase student
success. Undergraduate students are involved in this project as peer leaders and
researchers.

The project seeks to develop faculty expertise in evidence-based instruction,
specifically research and project-based learning, web-based learning, and peer-
led team learning, and to infuse these strategies into introductory mathematics
courses. It is envisioned that these approaches will improve the retention and
graduation rates of STEM majors at the university. The proposed activities are:
to update the College Algebra curriculum incorporating evidence-based
instructions methods and pilot two courses; to develop a co-requisite College
Algebra curriculum and pilot a course; and to develop a peer-led team learning
center. The project is guided by formative and summative evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.