* 1818187
* Integrative Mathematical and Experimental Approaches to Understanding Robust Activation of Gene Expression by Light Color
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Kehoe, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 836,897.00

This research defines a newly discovered light color sensing system in bacteria
that has the potential to regulate responses in synthetically created bacterial
life forms. Such customized organisms have the potential to produce a wide range
of beneficial products for humankind, but their activities must be strictly
controlled. At present, there are few highly robust control systems available to
synthetic biologists, therefore the discovery and development of additional
regulatory pathways is of paramount importance. Building on recent discoveries
in a highly abundant, photosynthetic marine bacterium, this project uses
mathematical modeling to predict the mechanism through which shifting ambient
light color from green to blue results in a 35-40-fold increase in the
bacterium's gene expression. The project also involves the use of molecular,
genetic, and biochemical tools to test the models and define the photo-
regulation process. This system has tremendous potential for significantly
contributing to the areas of microbial biotechnology, green chemistry and the
new and rapidly growing field of optogenetics. In addition to the basic
scientific value of the project there is training received, by three graduate
students, in modeling and molecular genetics research. There is also training
received, in science pedagogy, by high school teachers. Students from
underrepresented groups in science benefit from a summer research immersion
program at Indiana University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical modeling is
used to predict the mechanism through which a newly discovered signal
transduction pathway operates. Predictions from the model are tested using
molecular biological and biochemical approaches. Diametrically regulated by blue
and green light and widely used by Synechococcus, this simple but robust
signaling system is unique. The regulation element consists of three regulatory
proteins named FciA, FciB, and FciC, and three genes whose expression is highly
upregulated in blue light and downregulated in green light. FciA either operates
with, or independently of, FciC, and modeling these components provides weighted
evidence for one of these two models. Using RNAseq and Western blot analyses a
time course of RNA and protein responses is examined after a switch from growth
in green light to growth in blue light. Both in vitro and in vivo approaches are
used to determine the specific DNA sequences that are bound by FciA, FciB, and
FciC. Methods include Electromobility Shift Assays, DNaseI footprinting, and
exoChIPseq. Finally, the signaling system is transferred to another
cyanobacterial species and to a non-photosynthetic bacterium to begin to develop
this regulatory system for use in species that are commonly used in microbial
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.