* 1818148
* Protein Structural Defects: Sites for Small Molecule Binding and Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kevin Gardner, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2023
* USD 697,556.00

This project will investigate novel experimental approaches to detect sites used
by proteins to bind small molecule cofactors that are essential to their
function. Such knowledge is critical to understanding how cells use protein-
based molecular machines for many tasks, ranging from sensing changes in their
microenvironment to controlling the speed of complex biochemical reactions
inside of them. These protein machines often utilize small molecule cofactors to
perform and control their various functions. Knowing how these cofactors bind
their protein targets - and critically, where they do so on the protein - is
essential for understanding how normal biological function is achieved, how this
function is perturbed in disease, and how one might generate new regulatory
molecules for biotechnology or medicine. This project will investigate the
development of a novel approach to address where and how cofactors bind to
proteins by taking advantage of pressurized water to help quickly probe for
cofactor-binding sites, coupled with NMR spectroscopy to yield atomic precision.
The successful completion of the planned research will yield new techniques
which can be widely applied in academic and industrial laboratories, application
results to a wide range of protein targets, and the training of students and
researchers in a combination of cutting-edge biophysical and biochemical methods
and analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines multiple solution NMR
approaches with complementary experimental and computational studies to
investigate how the unusual structure and dynamics of cavities within proteins
form sites suitable for small molecule binding and regulation. Such work is
significant in providing quantitative descriptions of ligand-binding site
properties, advancing the understanding of fundamental principles in biology and
enabling the development of novel genetically-encoded sensors and ligand-
activated proteins useful for the chemical and synthetic biology communities.
This research program focuses on studying cavities within a large family of
ligand-controlled protein/protein interaction domains, many of which have small,
hydrated defects within their cores which can potentially serve as regulatory
small-molecule binding sites. Several fundamental aspects of such binding remain
cryptic at this time, most surrounding how ligand binding can occur despite
these cavities being completely isolated from water. As well, there is almost no
understanding of how protein dynamics - well-known to impact ligand specificity
and the transmission of allosteric changes in many other systems - are involved
in such protein-ligand interactions. To address these shortcomings, this project
will utilize high pressure solution NMR spectroscopy in combination with other
biophysical and biochemical approaches to: 1). Ascertain the prevalence of
cavity prevalence and ligand binding within a subset of domains, 2). Determine
how high pressure affects cavity structure and dynamics, allowing different
conformations to be accessed with and without ligands and 3). Examine the
functional linkage of ligand binding to control of effector
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.