* 1818229
* REGULATION OF CAP-INDEPENDENT TRANSLATION IN PLUS-STRAND RNA VIRUSES
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Anne Simon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 10/31/2022
* USD 841,374.00

This project will benefit society by having college undergraduates, PhD level
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers participate in research designed
to address how viruses engage in one of their most important activities,
synthesis of their required proteins. This research will be presented at
scientific conferences, used in the teaching of introduction to biology for
biology majors, and used to introduce undergraduates at the University of
Maryland and Bowie State University to cutting edge procedures designed to study
how the virus manipulates its genome in ways that were not previously thought to
occur. In addition, this research adds a new dimension of understanding to a
procedure (protein synthesis) that was thought to be mostly solved by exploring
the possible regulation of a key aspect of virus biology: how they switch from
being a template for making proteins to having that template replicated by
changing how the template interacts with specific proteins. By studying three
different viruses that all appear to use the same process to control how
proteins are made, results should have a broad impact on virus research in
general. Thus the results of this research should be applicable not only to
plant viruses, but also animal and human viruses, including ones that cause
serious disease in animals and plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent results have
led to the hypothesis that translation enhancers located in 3' UTRs of plant
viruses need to be cleared of bound translation factors/ribosomes for
replication of the template to proceed. PEMV contains three 3'cap-independent
translation enhancers (3'CITEs): kl-TSS, PTE, and TSS, only two of which are
used by the genomic RNA (kl-TSS/PTE) while all three are used by the subgenomic
RNA. In Aim 1, SHAPE RNA structure probing and mutagenesis will be used to
determine whether a sequence exclusive to the gRNA alters the structure of the
TSS to keep it from functioning. In Aim 2, compensatory mutations and SHAPE will
be used to examine a newly discovered element (the CAS) for its ability to block
translation factor binding to downstream 3' CITEs in three viruses. The newly
identified replication element DUO will also be investigated for interaction
with CAS during translation, allowing the critical kl-H hairpin to bind CAS,
keeping CAS from binding to the downstream 3'CITE and interfering with
translation factor binding. Aim 3 will employ mutagenesis, SHAPE and EMSA to
determine if CAS interacts with, and destabilizes its downstream 3'CITE, and
whether this interferes with binding of translation factors and RdRp
transcription. Aim 4 will investigate the relationship among DUO, kl-H and CAS
to determine how CAS is blocked from binding its
3'CITE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.