* 1818311
* Core-shell Upconverting Nanostructures (CSUNs) for Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mark Wistey, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2019
* USD 142,381.00

Principal Investigator: Mark Wistey&lt;br/&gt;Number: 1438608&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The sun represents the most abundant potential source of pollution-
free energy on earth. Solar cells for producing electricity require materials
that absorb the sun's energy and convert its photons to electrons, a process
called photovoltaics. Current photovoltaic solar cells are not able to fully
utilize all of the energy in the solar spectrum. This project seeks to sharply
improve the efficiency of solar cells beyond 50%, and maintain this efficiency
even when the spectrum changes due to morning light, evening light, and haze. A
conventional solar cell is only efficient at generating electricity from a
single color of light. This proposal seeks to capture more of the solar spectrum
using upconversion, a process where several low-energy colors are absorbed in
separate steps, producing high energy electrons as the output. Upconversion
requires a process called energy ratcheting, with allows electrons to lift to a
higher energy state. Typical upconversion materials such as germanium allow only
one ratcheting step. The goal of this project is use core-shell materials
ordered at the nanoscale to promote two ratcheting steps. These core-shell
upconverting nanostructures (CSUNs) have strong potential to increase the
efficiency of even the best existing solar cells. CSUNs would also deliver power
more uniformly during overcast and dusk/dawn hours, which would provide more
even production of power for distribution to the electrical grid. This project
also includes educational and outreach science demonstrations to reach
economically disadvantaged schools in the South Bend/Michiana area of Indiana to
stimulate interest in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current photovoltaic solar cells are not able
to fully utilize all of the energy in the solar spectrum. Upconversion is a
process to capture more of the solar spectrum where several low-energy colors
are absorbed in separate steps, producing high energy electrons as the output.
The overall goal of this project is to develop core-shell nanostructures for
upconversion in photovoltaic solar cells to improve solar energy conversion
efficiency. A major challenge in upconversion is the need for energy ratcheting,
which allows for electrons to be lifted to successively higher energies without
falling back down. Energy ratcheting is possible using a material such as
germanium, which strongly absorbs light but does not re-emit it. The proposed
research seeks to add a second energy ratcheting step using core-shell
nanostructures within the solar cell. In this design, excited electrons can
escape from the core directly into the host solar cell, but a shell barrier
prevents them from falling back into the core. The proposed research will
synthesize heterogeneous, interleaved growth of III-V (AlGaAs) and Group IV (Ge)
semiconductors with no extended defects, and then fabricate a family of core-
shell upconverting nanostructures (CSUNs) using germanium self-assembled quantum
dots or islands embedded as individual cores within a wide bandgap AlAs or
AlGaAs shell layer. The shell layer is embedded in a contiguous host of AlGaAs
or GaAs with a slightly smaller bandgap. Ge is chosen as the core material
because its excited carrier lifetimes of around one millisecond are long enough
for absorption of a second photon. Within this context, the first objective in
this work is to optimize growth of the Ge-AlAs-GaAs core-shell structure to
maximize upconversion efficiency, and examine whether this system can exceed the
efficiency of a conventional tandem cell. The second objective is to test
whether self-assembled CSUNs are sufficient for high efficiency, by
characterizing faceted growth, host mobility, and absorption strengths. The
third objective is to use these experimental results to predictively model and
identify optimal band structures and materials for new CSUN designs. The final
objective is to combine CSUNs with advanced techniques such as plasmon resonant
absorption, photon management, and bandpass absorption, and insert them in
multi-junction cells and characterize efficiency. If successful, this work has
the potential to significantly increase solar cell efficiency and preserve
current matching in multi-junction cells. The physical principles developed in
this work also have strong potential to enable the design and evaluation of a
new generation of nanocomposite solar materials. This project also includes
educational and outreach science demonstrations to reach economically
disadvantaged schools in the South Bend/Michiana area to stimulate K12 student
interest in STEM fields.