* 1818425
* Broadening Participation Research Center: Center for the Advancement of STEM Leadership
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Camille McKayle, University of The Virgin Islands
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 10/31/2023
* USD 3,280,492.00

Broadening Participation Research Centers provide support to Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to conduct broadening participation research
and serve as national hubs for the rigorous study and broad dissemination of the
critical theories, structures and pedagogies, as well as culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. The collaborative project at the University of the
Virgin Islands, Fielding Graduate University, North Carolina A&amp;T State
University and the Association of American Colleges and Universities seeks to
formally establish the Center for the Advancement of STEM Leadership (CASL). The
United States continues to lag other nations in preparing sufficient numbers of
its citizens to fill STEM workforce needs. For the US to remain globally
competitive, it must continue to broaden participation in STEM education at all
levels. Among higher education institutions, HBCUs have a sustained record of
consistently producing a diverse group of graduates in the STEM fields who are
prepared for further education and the STEM workforce. Through research, CASL
seeks to determine how the leadership of HBCUs has contributed to this
consistent sustained success and then to use that knowledge to prepare future
leaders. Through disseminating its research findings and its leadership
development model, ultimately CASL will allow all of higher education, and thus
American society, to benefit from the experience and lessons of HBCUs in
broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CASL uses a groundbreaking
scholarly approach based in the success of HBCUs in broadening participation
while also taking advantage of established and culturally-responsive research
and theoretical frameworks. CASL is thus able to generate, analyze, and
interpret broadening participation research questions about academic leadership.
Designed to be the nation's premier research center examining and determining
the kind of academic leadership that broadens the participation of African
Americans and other underrepresented groups in STEM, CASL will use its knowledge
to contribute to the development of next-generation HBCU leaders who can
themselves contribute to continued broadening participation efforts. CASL's
three objectives are: 1) to examine how intuitive, unwritten codes of excellence
in leadership result in the broadening participation success of HBCUs and to
integrate this knowledge into STEM higher education reform; 2) to provide a
community of scholars with a world-class leadership development program that
integrates personal and institutional histories into broadening participation
research and practice; and 3) to assimilate the HBCU institutional narrative
into the national undergraduate STEM reform knowledge base through mainstream
outreach and knowledge transfer outlets. To accomplish these goals, CASL's
initiatives include its empirical research agenda; strategic initiatives
including occasional papers, study groups, and the STEM Central online platform;
and its leadership development program involving both didactic and action
learning components. A robust external evaluation will monitor and assess
progress on all objectives, providing both formative and summative assessment of
all Center activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Broadening Participation
Research Center is also funded by the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and
the Professoriate, which targets increasing the number of historically
underrepresented minority faculty in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.