* 1818107
* Dissecting contribution of Cas9-induced DNA unwinding to specificity in gene editing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Peter Qin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

The groundbreaking 2013 discovery that CRISPR-Cas9 can be programmed to
efficiently edit genomes in complex organisms sparked a revolution in genetic
engineering that is still rapidly unfolding. This project will test a hypothesis
on how CRISPR-Cas9 discriminates between correct vs. incorrect DNA targets, and
advance the capability of a biophysical technique known as site-directed spin
labeling to the level of interrogating biomolecules one at a time under
physiological conditions. The research is expected to yield mechanistic
understanding that will aid further development of genome editing tools, and to
advance technology that can benefit the broader scientific community. The
project will also contribute to training of the STEM workforce via research
engagement and curriculum development at both graduate and undergraduate levels,
and will support outreach to the public on issues related to genome editing that
have profound societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clustered-Regularly-
Interspaced-Short-Palindromic-Repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR-associated (Cas)
proteins provide adaptive immunity for bacteria and archaea. In type II CRISPR,
a single Cas9 protein is activated by small RNA(s) to cleave DNA duplexes at
specific sites. A key step in Cas9 target acquisition is unwinding of the DNA
duplex to form a stable R-loop structure in which the RNA guide-segment is base-
paired with the target-strand of the DNA protospacer. Studies have established a
sequential unwinding model for Cas9 target acquisition, and these mechanistic
insights have been instrumental in driving developments of CRISPR-based
technology. However, understanding of mechanisms of Cas9 function is far from
complete. In this project, Aim 1 will map the boundary of Cas9-induced DNA
unwinding in bulk solution using a combination of spin-labeling and fluorescence
spectroscopy; Aim 2 will examine the interdependency between Cas9 target
cleavage and variations in the boundary of DNA unwinding; and Aim 3 will develop
spin-labeling methods for investigating Cas9-induced DNA unwinding at the level
of single molecules. The work will advance fundamental understanding of CRISPR-
Cas9 function by testing a "two-state equilibrium" hypothesis on target
discrimination, and will yield new biophysical techniques that broadly impact
studies on nucleic acids and protein-nucleic acid
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.