* 1818597
* CAREER: Analyzing the Emergence of a Complex Land Management System
* SBE,BCS
* 12/04/2017,05/31/2024
* Sean Downey, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 414,903.00

Can local communities effectively manage public lands, or are more distant
government or non-governmental agencies necessary to protect our natural
resources? For many years, researchers argued that providing individuals and
communities with open access to natural resources would inevitably lead to
overuse and ultimately to destruction through deforestation, overfishing,
overgrazing, and other environmentally detrimental activities. However,
subsequent research by political scientist and Nobel laureate Dr. Elinor Ostrom
and her colleagues found that this "tragedy of the commons" scenario is not
universal. Instead, some small communities do effectively manage local lands
without external oversight. This appears to occur most often when communities
have enduring, well-developed social norms for maintaining the natural
environment and for sanctioning individuals who violate community standards. But
these findings raise another question: If some communities can do it, why not
all? Why are some communities effective at preserving their natural resources
while others are not? The research supported by this award seeks to answer that
question. Anthropologist Dr. Sean S. Downey (University of Maryland) will test
the theory effective land management rests on more than just having the right
social norms; in addition, he suggests, the social norms, the particular
characteristics of the local environment, and the ecosystem services the
environment provides to local users must work together to produce ecological
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few communities in the United States are
both free of external oversight and also dependent primarily on the local
natural environment for subsistence. Therefore, Dr. Downey and his team will
travel to two forest-based villages located in a remote area in southern Belize
to test the theory. The communities have a demonstrated history of local
ecological knowledge and environmental stewardship but there has historically
been little top-down environmental management: an ideal location for
understanding how local community norms and natural ecosystem dynamics interact
and create a sustainable forestry system. The researchers will collect data
through multiple methods: household surveys; farmer land use interviews; and
close monitoring of how the communities affect their forests. The monitoring
will be accomplished through piecing together high-resolution photographs of the
usage areas around each village using a GPS-linked multi-spectral camera mounted
on an unmanned aerial vehicle. These photos will subsequently be stitched
together into geo-referenced two-dimensional photo-mosaics, ground-truthed
through farm plots surveys, and analyzed to understand how these environments
provide for the local communities, how they are affected by human farming
activity, and also how these forests recover to sustain future generations. The
research team will also conduct behavioral economics experiments to assess how
cooperation and punishment in the communities relate to natural resource use,
and use computational analysis to determine the most important social and
natural factors for effective long-term natural resource management. The project
also has several integrated educational goals, including training the next
generation of American scientists, educators, and policy-makers in the science
of complexity; developing coursework and facilitating interdisciplinary
collaboration at the University of Maryland; and offering a service learning
project for American students in Belize. Ultimately, findings from this research
will provide insight into the factors that promote effective local management of
natural resources and this could lead to better and more efficient management of
public lands at a significant cost savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.