* 1818821
* Smart Data Approaches for the Inverse Design of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Hector Ceniceros, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,001.00

The traditional approach to the design of new, smart materials requires costly
experimentation to explore a vast combination of parameters. This process can be
accelerated in a "virtual lab" with computer simulations but it requires a non-
traditional approach. Until recently, the focus of computer simulations has been
the forward problem: given values of the parameters such as molecular
architecture, composition, etc., find the material properties. But the inverse
problem in which given a desired set of material properties we seek values of
the parameters that give rise to those properties, is more critical for
accelerating the design and advancement of new materials. This inverse design
problem, which is an extraordinarily challenging, high-dimensional global
optimization problem, is one of the main thrusts of this project. The envisioned
mathematical and computational framework will be broadly applicable to a wide
variety of materials such as block copolymers and nano-structured soft
materials. This project will have a substantial impact in education with an
increased participation of students from underrepresented groups and
undergraduates&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, computer simulations are
performed for some educated choices of the model parameters. Each simulation is
in general costly so that, even with state of the art computing resources, only
a limited number of simulations is feasible for realistic models. This is a
particularly serious problem when the parameter space is moderate to high
dimensional and is impossible to fully explore that space. In this project, the
principal investigator will develop a probabilistic approach to solve the
inverse design problem, to design superior methods for the forward problem, and
to perform statistical inference for the construction of computationally more
efficient, coarse-grained models. This is a smart-data approach, in which the
use of prior belief about the objective function to be optimized or to be
inferred (based prior evaluations) to guide the sampling of the parameter will
be explored for the first time in the context of field-theoretic models of
multi-block copolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.