* 1818390
* Defining the Competitive Edge: Cellular Systems that Enable Nitrate Assimilation in Marine Diatoms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andrew Allen, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

The oceans cover 70% of the Earth's surface, contain an extraordinary diversity
of microbial life, and constitute the largest ecosystem on our planet.
Approximately half of the annual photosynthetic production of organic matter on
Earth takes place in the photic zone of the water column in marine environments,
making the ocean a major component of the global carbon cycle. Diatoms are one
of the most prominent phytoplankton groups and are crucial to maintaining the
ecological and biogeochemical equilibrium of marine systems. Diatom
photosynthesis is estimated to account for between 25% and 40% of the 45-50
billion tons of organic carbon fixed annually in the sea. The ability of diatoms
to thrive in upwelling-induced, periodically nutrient-rich conditions makes them
the basis for the world's shortest and most energy-efficient food webs. Some of
the world's largest fisheries are driven and maintained primarily by diatom-
based new production: CO2 fixation fueled by upwelled nitrate. Among marine
phytoplankton, diatoms are among the best competitors for elevated levels of
nitrate, yet the cellular systems providing the competitive advantage of diatoms
during coastal upwelling events remain to be fully described. Broadening our
physiological and molecular understanding of nitrogen sensing and intracellular
metabolism in marine diatoms is an important research focus for microbial
sciences and the global marine nitrogen cycle. Our project aims to improve
understanding of the cellular systems in diatoms that efficiently and rapidly
respond to both increased availability of nitrate in the immediate extracellular
environment and reduced concentrations of intracellular nitrate as stores are
depleted. Specifically, we will characterize the activity of the major
components of the system including sensors, membrane transport proteins, and
membrane lipids. The project will also develop educational outreach activities
which target primary school students in the areas of microbiology,
biogeochemical cycles and biotechnology. These science outreach activities
benefit from collaborations with the San Diego-based organization: The League of
Extraordinary Scientists and Engineers (LXS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to understand the poorly understood cellular systems which provide the
competitive advantage of diatoms during coastal upwelling events. Ultimately a
more thoroughly detailed, mechanistic understanding of diatom nitrate uptake
pathways will facilitate a much-improved ability to forecast the impact of
anticipated changes in ocean nutrient delivery and associated uptake by diatoms.
This critical cellular and biogeochemical issue is centered around efforts to
define the molecular components of nitrate sensing in diatoms, identify the
metabolic signals that regulate the overall cellular response to nitrogen-
replete and nitrogen-limited conditions, characterize vacuolar nitrate
transmembrane channels and pumps, and investigate the composition, biosynthesis
and recycling of vacuolar membrane lipids. Specifically the project will employ
combination of physiological, conjugative episomal cloning, gene knockouts,
protein localization, tagged-ATP biochemistry and cutting edge molecular
biological experimental approaches to characterize the activity of the major
components of the system: a) sensors that relay information on the availability
of nitrate, and metabolite signals, generated in the chloroplast, that trigger
the cascade of molecular events necessary to activate transcription; b) membrane
transport proteins i) MFS proteins that pump nitrate across the outer membrane
and into the cell under replete conditions, ii) nitrate channels and H+ pumps in
vacuolar membranes that transport excess nitrate into vacuoles for storage, iii)
the nitrite transporter, embedded in the chloroplast membrane, that delivers
nitrite for assimilation via nitrite reductase and GS-GOGAT enzymes; and c)
membrane lipids, both newly synthesized and recycled, that are necessary for
expansion of vacuolar membranes as excess nitrate is stored. Overall aims of the
research activities include, development and validation of a refined conceptual
model of nitrate sensing, storage, and uptake in key marine
phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.