* 1818886
* Iteratively Regularized Broyden-Type Algorithms for Nonlinear Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Alexandra Smirnova, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this project is to tackle major computational challenges faced by
scientists and engineers in their quest to improve the accuracy and efficiency
of numerical algorithms for solving large-scale inverse problems. This is a
scenario where direct measurements of the unknown quantities are not feasible,
and one needs to identify "cause from effect" by using (generally nonlinear)
mathematical and statistical models. The resulting problems are notoriously ill-
posed (or unstable), in a sense that even small measurement errors in the input
data may give rise to a substantial noise propagation in the recovered solution,
to the extent that this solution gets entirely destroyed. For this reason,
special techniques called "regularization" must be combined with high-speed
optimization procedures, so that reliable information on the unknown effect
could be obtained from the available data. The key areas of application include
imaging and sensing technology, machine learning, gravitational sounding, ocean
acoustics, and data sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at the
development of iteratively regularized Broyden-type numerical algorithms for
solving nonlinear ill-posed inverse problems in either finite or infinite
dimensional spaces. A family of new regularization methods will be designed to
solve large-scale unstable least squares problems, where the Jacobian of a
discretized nonlinear operator is difficult or even impossible to compute. To
overcome this obstacle, PIs consider a family of Gauss-Newton and Levenberg-
Marquardt algorithms with the Frechet derivative operator recalculated
recursively by using Broyden-type single rank updates. To balance accuracy and
stability, the pseudo-inverse for the derivative-free Jacobian is regularized in
a problem-specific manner at every step of the iteration process. A variety of
filters will be investigated, yielding greater flexibility in the use of
qualitative and quantitative a priori information available for each particular
applied problem. The proposed iteratively regularized methods will be studied in
both deterministic and stochastic settings. For stochastic processes, the
minimization functionals are evaluated subject to stochastic errors due to
inexact computations to lower per-iteration cost, and/or unavoidable
environmental noise and fluctuations. In the framework of the proposed research,
PIs will conduct comprehensive convergence analysis of the new algorithms,
including convergence rates and optimal policies for the selection of
regularization parameters and step sizes. In addition to the theoretical
investigation, a significant component of this project is to evaluate the
proposed algorithms using extensive numerical experiments on real-world
nonlinear inverse problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.