* 1818067
* How yeast sense direction in shallow pheromone gradients
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jie Liang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

This project will contribute to our understanding of gradient sensing, the
ability of cells to sense small differences in chemical concentration across
their surfaces, and thereby locate the source of the stimulus. This phenomenon
is essential for the development and health of all organisms. The principal
investigator uses yeast cells as a model to study the molecular mechanisms
underlying gradient sensing, which are thought to be broadly applicable to cells
in more complex organisms as well. During this project period, the principal
investigator and his postdoctoral scientist will mentor select biology students
from nearby Malcolm X College (MXC), one of the City Colleges of Chicago, in an
effort to enhance their chances of graduating from a four-year institution with
a BS in a STEM field. The proposed undergraduate research and mentoring program
is designed to inspire, instruct, advise, and support underrepresented students
who may be interested in a STEM career. The investigation will also provide
students and the postdoctoral scientist with interdisciplinary training through
interactions with collaborators who are experts in diverse areas. Because the
project is at the interface of math and biology, researchers on each team will
gain a better understanding of the methods used by those in the other
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best-known gradient-stimulated cellular
outputs, chemotaxis (directed cell movement), and chemotropism (directed cell
growth), are required for a wide range of biologic processes. Although they
ultimately exhibit quite different behavior, chemotactic and chemotropic cells
face similar challenges: the responding cell must sense small differences in
chemical concentration across its surface, determine the direction of the
gradient source, and polarize its cytoskeleton toward it. The mating response of
the budding yeast S. cerevisiae is chemotropic: mating cells interpret complex
pheromone gradients and polarize their growth in the direction of the closest
partner. Like many chemotaxing cells, yeast use G protein-coupled receptors to
detect mating pheromone secreted by potential partners and thereby direct their
growth toward the nearest pheromone source. The goal of this project is to
understand how the chemotropic growth site is established before polarization of
the cytoskeleton, and how the cell responds to changes in gradient direction.
Various models have been proposed to explain how yeast interpret shallow
pheromone gradients in vivo, but none satisfactorily answers the fundamental and
long-standing question: how do the cells switch from the default polarity site
they use for cell division to establish a chemotropic site, despite a near zero
signal-to-noise ratio? Based on discoveries made during a previous project, the
principal investigator proposed a model that answers this question. The working
hypothesis is that mating yeast initially ignore the pheromone gradient, as they
first colocalize and concentrate signaling and trafficking proteins at the
default site, building a "gradient tracking machine" (GTM). Once assembled, the
GTM moves along the plasma membrane to the point of maximal pheromone
concentration, where it marks the chemotropic site. The priorities of this
investigation are to learn how the GTM is assembled, how it moves to the
chemotropic site, and how it steers chemotropic growth in response to changes in
gradient direction. These questions will be answered using imaging, genetic,
optogenetic, biochemical, and computational approaches, leading to a deeper
understanding of chemical gradient sensing. Because little is known about how
gradient-aligned cell polarity is established during the chemotropic responses
of other eukaryotes, general principles are likely to emerge that will broadly
influence the study of chemotropic phenomena. Moreover, many of the questions
posed in this investigation are pertinent to other transmembrane signaling
systems, and the findings are expected to reveal generally relevant
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.