* 1818147
* Dynamic regulation of initiation and pausing of transcription by human RNA polymerase II
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Shimon Weiss, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,316,627.00

The human genome contains about 3 billion base pairs of DNA that provide
essential instructions for cells to respond to developmental or environmental
cues. A key step in the response is transcribing the information in DNA to
intermediary RNA molecules that supply another layer of information.
Transcribing DNA to RNA is a highly regulated process, but exactly how it is
controlled remains an enigma. The goal of this project is to decipher this
problem by bringing together an experienced team of investigators to take a
multi-faceted approach to catalyze discovery in new ways. The research plan will
integrate educational and outreach programs at University of Colorado-Boulder
and University of California-Los Angeles to expose high school, college
students, and postdoctoral scholars to high-impact collaborative research. The
tools, strategies, and methodologies to be implemented will be applicable to the
study of other biological processes and molecular
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions addressed in this project are
fundamentally important for understanding the molecular control of eukaryotic
transcription. The human RNA polymerase II transcription machinery will be
studied in detail using cutting-edge methods developed initially through
analysis of bacterial RNA polymerase. Highly regulated stages in gene
expression, including transcription initiation and pausing, will be the focus.
This collaborative project will merge solution-based single-molecule
fluorescence techniques with detailed functional assays enabled by biochemical
reconstitution of the entire 4.5 MDa human transcription apparatus. Two key
questions will be addressed: How is RNA polymerase II transcription dynamically
regulated by specific protein factors? What role does RNA polymerase II
backtracking play in regulating initiation and pausing? An important aspect of
the work will be to test and validate mechanistic findings with in vitro and
cell-based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.