* 1818368
* Collaborative Research: Eukaryotic virus-host interaction and evolution in Saccharomyces yeasts
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Paul Rowley, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2023
* USD 478,053.00

No virus can infect all host species; therefore virus host range is limited.
Sometimes, a change in even one cellular component may turn a host to a
resistant host, or a resistant host into a host for the virus. This project will
study brewer's/baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) to understand how the
presence of a virus can select for host-specific changes that alter the
replication of viruses, and how viruses can adapt to infect new hosts. The
familiarity and public interest in brewer's/baker's yeast will facilitate the
outreach to the public, and experimental evolution curriculum will be developed
for high schools using yeasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to identify adaptive changes that occur within S. cerevisiae in response to
viral parasitism and the evolutionary response of viruses to changing host
environments. Persistence of viruses within yeasts drives the evolution of both
host and virus as cellular machinery adapts to abrogate virus replication and
viruses evolve to ensure their persistence. Saccharomyces yeasts that are
infected with different types of viruses will be evolved in the laboratory over
hundreds of generations to observe the evolutionary response to viral parasitism
in real-time. Next generation sequencing techniques will be used to identify
adaptive genetic changes in either the host or virus that are important for
persistent viral replication and/or antiviral defense. The genetic tools
available for S. cerevisiae will allow the manipulation of both host and virus
to identify the consequences of adaptive changes on virus persistence. This work
will build on previous observations that have identified species-specific
changes in host genes that can affect the replication of viruses within
Saccharomyces yeasts. The expected outcomes of this research are a better
understanding of the dynamic interplay between virus and host over multiple
generations and the identification of genes and cellular processes that govern
viral persistence within S. cerevisiae. Due to the common ancestry and conserved
cellular mechanisms of eukaryotic organisms, these findings could potentially be
applicable to virus-host interactions of higher
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.