* 1818384
* Elucidating the origin and consequences of dimensional reduction in bacterial growth control
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Terence Hwa, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 699,998.00

One of the biggest scientific challenges in understanding living cells at a
systems level is the disconnect between simple behaviors at the cellular level
(e.g., growth and movement) and the complex interactions at the molecular level.
Despite enormous efforts invested into characterizing molecular interactions,
their complexities make it very difficult to predict and manipulate cellular
responses to environmental and genetic perturbations. This project aims to
elucidate the strategies by which cells achieve "dimensional reduction", i.e.,
how cells themselves manage to reduce the multiplicity of molecular information
and direct simple coherent behaviors. The specific topic will be on bacteria
growth, with focus on how a bacterium cell determines how fast it grows and how
it uses this information to coordinate metabolism and gene expression. Student
and post-doctoral researchers supported by this grant will learn to make
molecular and behavioral characterization, develop mathematical models to relate
these measurements, and test specific hypotheses on the mechanism of dimensional
reduction. The lessons learned will be integrated into the graduate-level
curriculum in Quantitative Biology being developed by the PI, both for students
of biological sciences to learn the mathematics of dimensional reduction and for
students of physical sciences to learn different types of experiments to
characterize molecular interactions and behaviors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program will focus on the ppGpp signaling system underlying growth
control of E. coli as a specific molecular system implementing dimensional
reduction. From known qualitative features of ppGpp-based control in E. coli, a
quantitative model of growth control is proposed based on both positive and
negative regulation of protein synthesis via ppGpp signaling. This research
program will test and elucidate the details of this ppGpp-based mode of growth
control, probe its dependences on key components of the signaling and control
circuit which set its few parameters, and determine its consequences on the
kinetics growth transitions by E. coli, from one exponential growth state to
another through periods of growth arrest. The final output of this research is a
predictive, mechanistic model of bacterial growth dynamics in response to
changes in the environment, including nutrient availability and antibiotics.
This work is cofounded by MCB's Synthetic and Systems Biology and Physics of
Living Systems in Physics in MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.