* 1818006
* Control and function of chromatin-mediated gene silencing in fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Michael Freitag, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 840,194.00

Normal development relies on regulated gene expression, which in many organisms
is achieved by protein complexes that alter the structure of chromatin to
silence or activate genes. Chromatin consists of DNA packaged together with
histone and other proteins. How Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRCs) silence
genes that are important for development is not completely understood in any
organism. This project seeks to uncover how specific genes are targeted and
inactivated by PRCs, using fungi as convenient model systems. Societal impacts
will be via a combination of research on gene regulation, natural products,
biofuels and the discovery of putative fungal pathogenicity factors. The broader
impact of the work will also provide hands on laboratory education of
undergraduates via intensive long-term research projects. Other outreach efforts
include two-day genomics workshops for high school teachers and presentations to
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses mechanisms of
chromatin-based gene silencing by PRC2 and H3K27 methylation in the filamentous
fungus, Fusarium graminearum. Using a forward genetics screen, two novel
chromatin proteins that impact H3K27 methylation (DIS2 and DIS10) were
discovered. The main objectives of this work are to uncover the mechanism for
PRC2 targeting and the composition of PRC2 complexes. The main hypotheses for
the current project are: (1) Fusarium DIS2 and DIS10 use their putative
chromatin-binding motifs to interact with specific regions on histones or other
chromatin proteins to target the core PRC2 to chromatin segments that will be
enriched for H3K27 trimethylation; (2) targeting is based on portable, nucleic
acid-based signals. Core PRC2 subunits are regulated by DIS2 and DIS10 and
themselves regulate a large network of transcription factors and major
regulators of signal transduction. Completion of this project will result in
gaining insights into the global H3K27 methylation network. Methods used to
achieve the aims are: (1) forward and reverse genetics by undirected selections
and screens, gene deletions, and site-directed mutagenesis; (2) biochemistry by
chromatin immunoprecipitation, genome-wide expression analyses and mass
spectrometry; (3) biophysical studies to probe interactions between DIS2 or
DIS10 and histone or other chromatin proteins, and (4) cytology by examination
of "silencing bodies" (containing PRC2) in association with DNA. In combination,
these techniques will allow identification and characterization of PRC2 signals
and novel proteins involved in gene silencing. By studying mechanisms of PRC2
targeting, this research will provide key knowledge on chromatin-mediated
silencing in eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.