* 1818509
* Jura-Cretaceous Sinistral Displacement of Terranes Along the Northern Cordilleran Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 11/30/2022
* USD 237,138.00

One of the most controversial aspects of North American geology concerns the
degree to which rocks extending from California to Alaska have been transported
south and then north along the continental margin due to convergence and
translation between the North American and ancestral Pacific tectonic plates
during Late Cretaceous-Paleogene time. Some relationships suggest limited
mobility - geologic features remain close to where they formed. In contrast,
other data sets suggest thousands of kilometers of transport - rocks in much of
Alaska, British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon first moved south to the
latitude of Mexico, and then moved back north to their present positions. The
uncertainty in coast-wide transport hinders our ability to reconstruct the
geologic evolution of western North America and to understand the origin (and
future discovery) of important energy and mineral resources located in these
regions. This project focuses on determining the amount of southward motion
accommodated on fault systems that extend from northwestern Washington to
southern Alaska. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the award
is supporting important societal outcomes by training students in an important
discipline that is contributing to the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. The research project also involves collaboration
with researchers from the British Columbia Geological
Survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves field and laboratory analysis
of fault systems that may have accommodated up to 1600 km of southward motion of
rock assemblages. The investigators will conduct detailed structural analyses to
determine the amounts of displacement on recognized faults, map areas between
recognized faults to evaluate continuity, and collect samples that will
constrain when motion occurred. Field studies will focus on faults in coastal
British Columbia given that these are the best-known segments of the faults -
their extensions into Alaska and Washington are not well constrained. The
scientific objectives of the project include: 1) testing the hypotheses that
each of these two fault record approximately 800 kilometers of Late Jurassic-
Early Cretaceous sinistral motion, (2) evaluating the alternative interpretation
that the Insular and Intermontane tectonostratigraphic terranes are separated by
an Early Cretaceous suture zone, (3) using this new information to evaluate
current models for Cordilleran paleogeography, and (4) establishing the
sinistral faults as world-class examples of shear zones operating within an
active magmatic arc during oblique subduction. Field and laboratory analyses
will be conducted in large part by undergraduate students at the University of
Arizona in an effort to provide opportunities to learn techniques of geologic
mapping in a frontier area, and to perform geochronologic and geochemical
analyses using state-of-the-art instruments at the Arizona LaserChron Center
(University of Arizona). Each student will be sufficiently engaged in the field
and laboratory studies that they will be able to prepare a manuscript for
publication that includes detailed and regional geologic maps, descriptions of
critical structural/intrusive relations, large geochronologic and geochemical
data sets, and interpretations of broad significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.