* 1818720
* Planning Project: Improving Retention and the Quality of STEM Education and Research at Oakwood University
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Kenneth LaiHing, Oakwood College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,660.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support for projects to design, implement, and assess strategies that
can lead to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of
students receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. This two-year planning project at Oakwood College
seeks to increase the number of women and under-represented minorities in STEM
by developing a program that will recruit, retain and graduate students in STEM
disciplines. Transforming the institutional context to actively engage students
in their learning and develop skills for them to succeed academically is a
primary focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project goal is to increase the
number of well-prepared, competitively trained minority STEM graduate who pursue
graduate studies or enter the STEM workforce. Traditional lecture based and
teacher-centered instructional strategies have been shown to not effectively
motivate or retain students' interest in STEM disciplines. Oakwood College will
incorporate evidence based pedagogies, such as Student Centered/Active Learning,
Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) and Problem Based Learning, in gatekeeper courses
to improve student learning and first-year retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.