* 1818726
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Methods for Complex Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* David Aristoff, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,970.00

This project addresses computational challenges in materials science, chemistry,
uncertainty quantification, and related fields. Quantities of interest such as
chemical reaction rates, strength of alloys, and more, can be estimated using a
common mathematical modeling framework that computes mean values and provides
quantification of the variance about the means. Estimating these quantities by
computer simulation can be particularly challenging when the property that one
wishes to study is rare and many repeated computer simulations would be required
to estimate the mean value and the variance. While this challenge is somewhat
alleviated by growth in computing power, some simulations, including chemical
reaction rates, cannot be addressed via brute force computation. Rather than
rely on raw computing power, the investigators intend to develop novel computer
algorithms and approximations that will allow for more efficient and more
accurate predictions. This includes the use of interacting copies of
mathematical models, which communicate information between one another,
resulting in higher quality estimates. These algorithms and approximations will
allow more faithful prediction of quantities of interest and access to bigger
models (such as larger, more complicated molecules). Mathematically the project
will provide a rigorous understanding of the computer algorithms, providing
confidence to scientists in a variety of fields. Multiscale distributions appear
in a variety of applications, including materials science, chemistry, and
uncertainty quantification. Given efficient sampling strategies, one can compute
a variety of quantities of interest, including ensemble averages, mean first
passage times, and probabilities of rare events. However, multiscale
distributions in high number of dimensions are particularly challenging to
sample. One example is the Boltzmann distribution induced by an energy landscape
containing superbasins. Such a landscape features clusters of local minima that
correspond to close groupings of modes in the distribution. This project will
investigate four sampling algorithms: weighted ensemble sampling, parallel
replica dynamics, local entropy smoothing, and piecewise deterministic Markov
processes. Weighted ensemble sampling partitions state space into bins and then
elects to sample within those bins in an optimal way. The project will
investigate the choice of the sample allocation strategy and consider both
finite and infinite system size limits for the method. Parallel replica dynamics
also involves using an ensemble of samples, but, in contrast to weighted
ensemble, it uses the replicas to efficiently find first exits out of one
metastable region and into another. Local entropy smoothing removes the
superbasin features of the energy landscape by performing local ensemble
sampling and averaging. Finally, the investigators will use piecewise
deterministic Markov processes to perform rejection free sampling without
requiring estimates of gradients. These algorithms will be rigorously analyzed,
and they will be tested on a variety of realistic high-dimensional problems
including chemical reaction networks and stochastic molecular dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.