* 1818449
* Tensor Network Computation: Representations, Algebra, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Lexing Ying, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Modern data collection and computational simulations produce many high-
dimensional data sets. Such high-dimensional data sets represent one of the key
challenges in computational mathematics. As is well-known, the main difficulty
lies in the curse of the dimensionality, that is, the number of degrees of
freedom required to represent and analyze high-dimensional functions in the
traditional way grows exponentially with the number of dimensions. Recently,
tensor networks have emerged, mostly from the theoretical and computational
physics community, as a promising tool for representing and manipulating high-
dimensional functions and probabilities. This project undertakes a systematic
computational study of the tensor network approach. The investigation serves as
an initial step in providing a general framework for work with high-dimensional
data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on four aspects of tensor
networks. (1) The investigator aims to improve on recent work in tensor network
skeletonization, where the main task is to develop efficient tensor contraction
algorithms for inhomogeneous systems and general tensor networks, with an
emphasis on parallel implementation. (2) The investigator plans to develop novel
algorithms for constructing a tensor network either via sampling or from an
existing but redundant tensor representation. The approach will draw tools and
ideas from randomized numerical algebra, nonlinear optimization, and multiscale
methods. (3) The project will develop algorithms for basic algebraic operations
for manipulating high-dimensional functions in the tensor network
representation. These basic operations include addition, subtraction, entry-wise
multiplication, entry-wise inversion, entry-wise function application, and
application of linear operators in tensor network operator form. (4) The last
objective is to investigate new applications of tensor networks outside the
traditional realm of statistical and quantum mechanics, for example in numerical
homogenization, uncertainty quantification in very high dimension, and high-
dimensional partial differential equations in control and molecular
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.