* 1818040
* Mechanisms and Impacts of De-regulating Aromatic Amino Acid Biosynthesis in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joseph Jez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 762,000.00

Plants produce aromatic amino acids (AAAs) from simple precursors, and use them
to produce proteins, numerous natural products, including alkaloids, phenolics
and additional organic compounds that have medicinal, nutritional and other
useful properties. Understanding and improving the biosynthesis of AAAs will
enhance the nutritional quality of food, achieve cost-effective production of
medicines and enable sustainable production of industrial materials. The aims of
this research are to gain fundamental knowledge concerning how plants regulate
the production of AAAs, in order to precisely control the production of plant
natural products that are derived from AAAs. "Pigment Art+" outreach activities
will be conducted with K-12 students and their parents as a means of increasing
the awareness of the importance of plant natural products. Colorful plant
pigments derived from AAAs are used in this project as tools to inform the
general public about the nutritional and pharmacological values of plant natural
products. The activities are targeted for parents from communities that are low-
income and underrepresented in science. This project also trains students and
postdocs of diverse backgrounds, in collaborative interdisciplinary research
that integrates biochemistry, structural and quantitative biology and the
chemistry of plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are particularly suited to
produce AAAs and their derivatives since they naturally synthesize and
accumulate a large quantity of AAA-derived compounds. How plants regulate AAA
biosynthesis and coordinate the overall metabolic network to efficiently produce
AAAs remains elusive. A recent project identified plant enzymes that de-regulate
the entry and final reactions of AAA biosynthesis, catalyzed by 3-deoxy-D-
arabinoheptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase (DHS) and arogenate dehydrogenase
(TyrA), respectively. Such novel regulatory enzymes of AAA biosynthesis are used
to modulate this key intermediary pathway that connects central carbon
metabolism and numerous plant natural product metabolic pathways. The major
goals of this proposal are to define molecular mechanisms underlying the de-
regulation of plant AAA biosynthesis and to determine their quantitative impacts
on overall plant metabolic networks. The project specifically investigates the
feedback regulation of DHS and TyrA variants, and quantitatively test their in
planta roles in controlling AAA precursor supply. Dynamic carbon-13 CO2 labeling
will be used for metabolic flux analysis. Time-dependent carbon-13 enrichment
data will be used to estimate fluxes based on optimization of fit to a metabolic
network model. This integrated molecular to network level analyses will provide
a series of de-regulated DHS and TyrA variants, which will be tested in planta.
These experiments will generate prototype plant chemical platforms that will
display enhanced AAA precursor supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.