* 1818884
* NeTS: JUNO2: Resilient Edge Cloud Designed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Tarek Saadawi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,089.00

Achieving trustworthy IoT(Internet of Things) and CPS(Cyberphysical Systems) for
Smart and Connected Communities (SCC) is both an important goal and a major
challenge. The objective of this project is to address that challenge by
leveraging a resilient edge cloud network--computing capabilities that are
networked together and reside close to the end user and critical applications --
to enable fast response, scalability to a large number of applications, and
fail-safe operation. The project will conduct collaborative and foundational
research with collaborators in Japan, on a resilient edge cloud network to
achieve basic understanding of the underlying science for future networks. The
approach includes virtualized adaptable computing and networking, consideration
of resource constraints, potential mobility of end devices/sensors and security.
The results from this project will advance more resilient network-compute
infrastructure for SCC applications such as smart health, smart transportation,
smart energy, etc. The Japanese-US collaboration provides an international
testbed for demonstrating the project approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to improve the performance of IoT/CPS by realizing a resilient
distributed edge cloud network architecture. The objective is to provide (1)
coverage extension by introducing spatio-temporal floating edge cloud (EC)
function over end devices; (2) resilient communication between end-devices and
edge clouds via interface diversity and flow-based control; (3) optimal resource
allocation among end-device, EC, and backend cloud (BC) to meet diverse quality-
of-service requirements such as latency and blocking rate; (4) designing a
spatially and temporally optimized and dynamically adjustable utilization of
virtual network links and virtual machines (5) bio-inspired intrusion detection
system for protecting IoT/CPS devices (5) distributed database using hypercube.
The project will leverage the SmartCity testbed in New York and the StarBED4
testbed in Japan, which is a large-scale emulation/simulation infrastructure
consisting of 1,000 servers. These will be integrated into a single testbed for
large-scale real and emulation experiments, and will be accessible to both US
and Japanese researchers on this project. The networks will be connected via
global research networks i.e., Internet2 and NYSERNET in US, and JGN and SINET
in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.