* 1818650
* Enabling Computer and Information Science and Engineering Research and Education in the Cloud Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Jennifer Rexford, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

-Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing can transform computer science
research and education through on-demand, elastic, and self-serve access to
computation and storage resources at scale, coupled with contemporary hardware
(e.g., graphical and tensor processing units), advanced software stacks (e.g.,
machine-learning libraries), and shared data sets. Researchers and educators can
avoid the substantial time, energy, and expense of building and maintaining
local infrastructure, students can be better prepared for the cloud-centered
world they will enter upon graduation, and research projects across
institutional boundaries can more easily share and maintain data and the results
of their analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although academic adoption of the cloud
is increasing, significant challenges remain. Researchers worry about the
relative costs compared to local infrastructure, especially when some local
costs are hidden (e.g., "free" rack space, cooling, and power, as well as lower
overhead charges on grants for equipment purchases). Graduate students worry
about causing run-away costs if their experiments in the cloud run amok, and the
risk of escalating costs near major paper submission deadlines. Some projects
may not be able to use the public cloud, due to privacy issues (or the
perception of increased privacy risk) concerning the underlying data. Plus, for
both researchers and educators, making the transition to the cloud requires
overcoming a "learning curve" to select a particular cloud offering---and learn
how to use it effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will identify
opportunities and challenges for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) researchers and educators to use the cloud, and recommend
steps the major stakeholders can take to lower the barriers to cloud adoption.
By convening a diverse community of stakeholders who can contribute to the
strategic development of a cloud-computing roadmap, this workshop will lower the
barriers for cloud adoption for academic research and education in CISE. The
perspectives and insights shared from industry, government, and academia,
coupled with discussions focused on actionable challenges and measurable
outcomes, will serve to advance CISE research and education. The workshop will
identify high-priority topics and high-impact opportunities for future research,
training, and collaboration in conjunction with cloud
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
engage about 35-45 participants from academic, industry, and government,
including principal investigators, educators, cloud-computing researchers,
campus CIOs, public cloud providers, and government funding agencies. The
workshop will focus on several key issues including, (1) CISE research and the
cloud: What types of CISE research are (or are not) best enabled by cloud
platforms? (2) CISE education and the cloud: What types of CISE education are
best enabled by cloud platforms? What novel concepts can be taught? (3) Key
challenges with cloud usage: What are the barriers to cloud adoption and how
should the stakeholders address these issues? (4) Relationship among various
types of resources: What roles should on-campus resources, national resources,
and cloud-provided resources each play in supporting research and teaching? (5)
Cloud costs: How can researchers and educators best manage the costs of cloud
usage, including the risks of runaway costs or costs that continue after a grant
funding a project has ended? (6) Education for prospective cloud users: What are
good ways to educate and train researchers, students, and campus IT staff on
using the cloud effectively? (7) Ongoing user support: What ongoing support is
needed for academic users, whether locally or at the national level?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will host a series of presentations and
working sessions with live note-takers, resulting in a post-meeting white paper
describing key themes, insights, and recommendations from the discussions.
Lowering the barriers to academic use of the cloud has the potential to
significantly improve how CISE researchers and educators conduct their work.
Using the cloud can reduce IT costs, foster cross-institution and
interdisciplinary research collaborators, and better train students for a cloud-
centric world. Innovations in cloud computing services can help cloud providers
recognize new opportunities ahead of future commercial demands, while better
supporting academic research and education.