* 1818875
* Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Harvey, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Jeffrey Harvey at the
University of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the discovery of the Higgs
boson, the Standard Model of particle physics is now complete, but there are
still many important outstanding questions involving the fundamental structure
of matter and energy and their interactions. These include understanding what
sorts of mathematical structures are needed to combine gravity and quantum
mechanics, as well as to understand the origin of dark matter and dark energy.
String theory provides one possible framework in which to address these
questions. Part of this project is devoted to the study of new mathematical
structures which have been discovered in string theory and which are closely
connected to the area of mathematics that studies the properties of whole
numbers. These new mathematical structures are also relevant to the study of
topics such as the structure of new types of materials called topological
insulators and perhaps even to the study of physical systems which may be used
to construct quantum computers. This project will also have broader impacts
beyond the generation of new knowledge. It will involve postdocs, graduate
students, and at times undergraduate students, and will provide critical
training for the next generation of physicists as they start research. This pool
of technical knowledge provides the foundation for much of the technology
developed by the United States, and enhancing this pool of knowledge is
therefore in the national interest. The PI will also lecture at international
schools and workshops and in public-outreach events in the Chicago
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the PI will extend his past work on
the role of Hecke operators in two-dimensional conformal field theory and
investigate possible applications both to mathematical physics and to various
systems in condensed-matter physics where conformal field theory plays a central
role. He also plans to work on new developments concerning connections between
modular forms and the representation theory of finite groups, and to explore the
physics of non-compact conformal field theories and their connections to mock
modular forms and to black-hole entropy in string
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.