* 1818519
* Macrosystems Biology and Early NEON Science Investigator Meeting, Alexandria, Virginia, January 8-10, 2018
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Kevin Rose, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Gruner
* 12/31/2019
* USD 94,281.00

The biosphere has changed more in the past 50 years than during any time in
human history. Environmental change, land use change, and the introduction of
invasive species that collectively affect living systems by altering the
fundamental relationships between life and the non-living environment that
sustains it. Many of the changes challenge our understanding of how the
biosphere works - how the ecological systems on which we depend will respond to
changes in environment, land use, biodiversity, and a host of related
environmental factors. Research in Macrosystems Biology is developing the basic
scientific knowledge needed to understand the biosphere at regional to
continental and annual to decadal scales, to quantify the strong and weak forces
regulating the biosphere, and to predict the consequences of environmental and
land use change and invasive species on living systems is difficult to
extrapolate from studies conducted at local or global scales. Macrosystems
ecology seeks to understand ecological processes and interactions at the
broadest spatial scales and has potential to help solve globally important
social and ecological challenges. Critical advances in this field are shared
through publications, presentations, and synthesis activities such as workshops
and symposia.

This conference award will support a meeting of Macrosystems Biology and Early
NEON Science investigators, postdoctoral scientists, and graduate students.
Substantial investments in Macrosystems Biology research and education are
generating new insights into pattern and process at Macro-scales. The meeting
will advance Macrosystems Biology and Early NEON Science by: 1) Providing a
forum to summarize and discuss the science of Macrosystems Biology and Early
NEON Science; 2) Fostering collaboration and synthesis among scientists and
graduate students across funded projects; 3) Facilitating networking and
professional development of attendees, especially early career scientists; and
4) Developing a series of synthesis papers. The overarching themes of the
meeting include: 1) scaling; 2) team science and education, and 3) big data and
associated challenges. Discussion of these themes will yield insights to
generate new Macrosystems Biology theory and best-practices that will mark
critical advancements in the emerging sub-discipline of Macrosystems Biology.
This meeting will broaden impacts through professional development and
engagement of a diverse pool of scientists, collaboration and synthesis of
active researchers, and by generating new ideas and synthetic research products.
The participants represent a broad range of diversity at the meeting across
career stage and academic rank, geographic origin, type of academic institution,
disciplinary expertise, gender, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic background,
sexual orientation, and disability status. A substantial proportion of funding
for this meeting is specifically allocated to support early career scientists.
The resulting synthesis papers will be published in a special issue in the
journal Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment following this meeting. Through
face-to-face time, formal lectures, break-out groups, and follow up dialogue in
developing the special issue, it is anticipated the special issue will galvanize
new ideas and advancements in Macrosystems Biology and serve as a benchmark,
establishing and describing important elements, methods, and insights in
Macrosystems Biology for the broader scientific community.