* 1818278
* I-Corps: Electrocondensation Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Che-Jen Lin, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
the commercial potential of a portable, energy-efficient and cost-effective
device capable of producing high-quality potable water from moist ambient air.
The core technology uses a combination of cooling and electrostatic systems to
condense water vapor on surfaces made from proprietary materials. This
technology can be incorporated into an atmospheric water extraction device to
deliver potable water to customers with limited access to clean freshwater.
Current atmospheric water extraction systems rely on energy-intensive
refrigerant systems or unsustainable desiccant-based systems that suffer from
low water output and high operating cost. The successful development and
commercialization of the technology provide a viable solution to produce potable
water from air virtually anywhere. Such a water production device addresses the
consumption needs at locations where freshwater availability is challenging and
where absolute portability is required&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
will further develop a freshwater harvesting system that efficiently and cost-
effectively extracts water from moist ambient air. The process concentrates
water molecules from air using a high voltage electrostatic system, then
condenses the concentrated water vapor on cooled surfaces consisting of a
combination of hydrophobic and hydrophilic materials. The system generates
ultrapure water for potable use at locations with limited or no water resource
while significantly improves water harvesting efficiency and reduces energy
footprint of conventional water condensation systems. Such process improvement
minimizes the mechanical intensity and system maintenance requirement associated
with water purification and therefore reduces the overall operating cost. As a
result, commercial products based on this technology can be developed at various
scales to meet the potable water demands in niche markets ranging from personal
uses to industrial applications.