* 1818552
* Two Days Workshop to Study Wintertime Urban Atmospheric Pollution Processes; Fairbanks, Alaska; Mid-May 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Jingqiu Mao, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2019
* USD 21,391.00

This project supports the "Workshop to study wintertime urban atmospheric
pollution processes" to be held in Fairbanks Alaska during 2 days in early to
mid-May 2018. The goals of the workshop are to identify fundamental knowledge
gaps in the understanding of atmospheric chemical mechanisms occurring under
cold and dark conditions, and to develop strategies for evaluating chemical,
microphysical, and dynamical processes under polluted wintertime conditions. The
workshop is expected to result in improved regional modeling for better
predictions of urban air quality and design of wintertime air pollution
mitigation strategies for urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, limited
measurements in regions with persistent sub-freezing temperatures result in
regional air quality models that do not properly reflect pollutant
transformations. Scientific questions to be addressed in the workshop include
the following: (1) What is the role of secondary chemistry in increasing fine
particulate pollution under cold and dark conditions? and (2) What are the key
wintertime emission sources, and how do these emissions impact processing of
pollution? This workshop will be held as part of the International Global
Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC)/International Arctic Science Community (IASC) "Air
Pollution in the Arctic: Climate, Environment, and Societies" (PACES) project.