* 1818914
* PFCQC: STAQ: Software-Tailored Architecture for Quantum co-design
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jungsang Kim, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 15,811,123.00

Over the past half century, economic growth was heavily driven by increasing
computational power, which was crucial in enabling innovation, improving
efficiency, and managing complexity in most industries. To continue this growth,
it is critical to explore and vet new approaches for increasing computational
power. Quantum computers are a promising form of advanced computational power,
providing unmatched advantages in code breaking and scientific simulation
problems in fields such as molecular chemistry and materials science. Quantum
computing has advanced rapidly in recent years, and the hardware development is
nearing a level of sophistication where it is possible to construct a quantum
computer that may outperform classical computers in solving certain problems.
The Software-Tailored Architecture for Quantum co-design (STAQ) project brings
together a group of physicists, computer scientists, and engineers to construct
a quantum computer capable of showing an advantage over current computer
technology. The project also supports the development of educational tools and a
quantum information workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantum computer can
exhibit an advantage over standard computers when the quantum computer is large
enough that brute force simulation strategies become infeasible and a quantum
algorithm is sufficiently complex that approximate computational methods do not
provide accurate results. The STAQ project aims to utilize this quantum
advantage by building ion trap quantum computers with 64 or more qubits and
developing quantum algorithms suitable for noisy quantum devices. This ambitious
task will be enabled by a software stack that optimally maps the quantum
algorithms onto the ion trap device and allows for the algorithms and hardware
to be designed together. The project requires a wide range of expertise to
achieve the scientific goal. The team consists of ion trap experimentalists,
quantum information theorists, and computer architects. STAQ will organize a
Quantum Ideas School, which will recruit a diverse group of students into
quantum information and help retrain current industrial scientists for this
emerging field. This project advances the objectives of two of 10 Big Ideas for
Future NSF Investments: "The Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution"
and "Growing Convergent Research at NSF". The 10 big ideas will push forward the
frontiers of U.S. research, provide innovative approaches to solve some of the
most pressing problems the world faces, as well as lead to discoveries not yet
known. This project also advances the third objective of the National Strategic
Computing Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at developing new technological
capabilities in the post-Moore's Law era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, and the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.