* 1818643
* XPS: FULL: Collaborative Research: Parallel and Distributed Circuit Programming for Structured Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Vivek Sarkar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2019
* USD 88,265.00

This project develops a system for "circuit programming," which allows a
programmer to focus on the high-level solution to a problem rather than on the
details of how the computation is organized. Circuit programming consists of
writing rules that describe how data items depend on one another. The
intellectual merits lie in the design of a new programming language for
specifying these rules, along with the algorithms whereby the computer
automatically finds efficient strategies for managing the necessary computations
on available parallel hardware. The project's broader significance and
importance lie in its potential to streamline work in areas such as artificial
intelligence and machine learning. With the growing complexity of systems in
these areas and their need to process big data in depth, research and teaching
typically get bogged down in programming details, especially for parallel
platforms; this project aims to delegate those details to automatic methods.

The research develops a programming system for Dyna, a circuit programming
language that enables concise specification of large function graphs that may be
cyclic and/or infinite. Dyna employs (1) a pattern-matching notation that
augments pure Prolog with evaluation and aggregation and (2) an object-like
mechanism for dynamically defining new sub-circuits as modifications of old
ones. This project is building an adaptive system that can mix forward and
backward chaining to seek a fixpoint of the circuit and to update this fixpoint
as the inputs change. The system will perform compile-time and runtime analysis
of the Dyna program and will map it to Habanero, a system for scheduling
parallel computations on multicore processors, with extensions for task
priorities, task cancellation, GPU execution, and distributed execution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.