* 1818534
* Collaborative Research: An Audio-Based Spatiotemporal System for Automated Monitoring of Construction Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Abbas Rashidi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 02/28/2021
* USD 232,291.00

The construction industry has been suffering from the lack of real-time
performance monitoring, holistic project management, labor efficiency, and
waste-preventive tools. This has led to cost overruns in almost 90 percent of
construction projects with an average of 28 percent higher than forecast costs.
This research project is expected to facilitate a transformative change in the
ways that construction activities and operations are tracked and monitored. It
will play a significant role in future rapid, nonintrusive and cost effective
data acquisition capacity due to the use of audio signals instead of active
sensors or digital cameras. Eventually the incurred efficiencies, sustainability
benefits, and reduced costs of an automated project monitoring system will
significantly benefit the U.S. Architecture, Engineering, Construction and
Facilities Management industry. Success in this project also promises
significant impacts to engineering education. The project's educational
activities are highly integrated and inter-related with the research activities.
The research results will be used to create educational material and will be
made publicly available to educators at other institutions. The research results
will also be integrated into the outreach and engagement activities and will
result in engaging minorities and underrepresented groups through various
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent advances in developing and
implementing audio signal processing techniques for analyzing and modeling
complex systems and processes, the real added value and potential applications
of audio signals are still unknown to the civil engineering research community.
This project is the first attempt to introduce audio signals as an alternative
source of information for recognizing, tracking and monitoring construction
operations at jobsites. Current approaches for recognizing and monitoring
construction operations are either location-based or machine-vision-based, and
implying audio signals is a significant leap to overcome their limitations. The
framework provides the missing link between generic signal processing and
construction performance monitoring. This project will expand the research
horizons for academics in civil infrastructure systems as well as in digital
signal processing domains. Particularly, this scientific breakthrough will set
the stage for future research in automatically identifying and life-logging
construction operations and equipment actions, estimating project performance
indices, and creating corrective measures to keep the project performance as
planned. This, in turn, will enable the future development of novel, automated
applications for construction sequence analysis, productivity measuring, project
monitoring and control systems, and maintenance decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.