* 1818454
* Collaborative Research: Reform and Governance in Engineering Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Donna Riley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 152,494.00

This project addresses the ways in which the structure of the engineering
profession, and its institutional makeup, both enable and limit efforts to shape
and reshape engineering education as practiced within the United States. The
study is both historical and contemporary. It examines the broad history of the
different ways in which improvements and regulations have impacted engineering
education, from the early Progressive Era educational reform traditions built
around surveying and reporting on best practices, to the latest form of
accreditation regime built around student learning outcomes. In addition to
exploring the historical origins of these different approaches to governing
engineering education, the project will interview engineering educators,
educational policymakers, and professional engineers in order to understand
policymaking and accreditation functions within contemporary institutional
settings. The project will contribute to understanding STEM workforce
development by providing engineering educators and policymakers with the ability
to better shape and control our system of engineering education. This will have
broad impact on our ability to effectively train a skilled STEM workforce in an
increasingly competitive global arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursuing this
work, the project both draws on and contributes to a diverse literature,
including but not limited to those of the sociology of the professions,
organizational sociology, and the sociology of science and engineering. Using
interview methods as well as historical records, this project will assemble
precise descriptions of the ways in which different institutions and
stakeholders engage those occupying different positions within engineering
professional societies; licensing bodies; accreditation agencies; and
engineering education institutions (public and private universities; general
universities, engineering schools, and embedded STEM programs within liberal
arts colleges and minority serving institutions). Formal techniques for
analyzing the interview transcripts (content analysis) will be utilized to bring
forth accurate characterizations of how different players both contribute to and
navigate through the complex institutional ecology for engineering education in
the United States. This formal understanding will be instrumental to the
effective governance of engineering education in the US context.