* 1818219
* Dissecting molecular mechanisms of plant cytokinesis and cell plate development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Georgia Drakakaki, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,174,648.00

This interdisciplinary project will increase the understanding of how plant
cells divide. During plant cell division the formation of a novel structure, the
cell plate which evolves into the new cell wall, separates the new daughter
cells. The development of new cell walls during cell division is of profound
importance to all plant life on earth, yet fundamental questions about this
process remain unanswered. This project focuses on dissecting the highly dynamic
process of cell plate formation by employing quantitative image analysis,
computational modeling, biochemistry and genetics coupled with chemical
inhibition of key players in cell division. The work should prove
transformative, be applicable to a broad variety of plant species and hence
contribute to both fundamental research and the development of more desirable
cell wall properties for robust and productive crops. Overall, the work could
form the basis for new strategies towards improving crop quality and yield,
towards increasing food security and towards energy independence. The produced
models and animations of cell plate formation will be made widely available for
free educational use. The project will provide research training across a broad
range of cutting-edge research methodologies in modern cell biology for junior
scientists at the high school, undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate level.
Graduate students and postdocs will develop mentoring and teaching skills
supervising high school and undergraduate students through the framework of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
identify and quantitatively analyze new molecular mechanisms and pathways
directing polysaccharide cargo during cell plate formation in cytokinesis, a
process fundamental to all plant life on earth. Cytokinesis in plants is
fundamentally different from that in animals and fungi. In plants de novo
formation of a cell plate occurs via homotypic fusion of vesicles, which then
develops into the new cell wall, partitioning the cytoplasm of the dividing
cell. Cell plate formation takes place in multiple stages that involve highly
orchestrated vesicle accumulation, fusion and membrane maturation concurrent
with the time specific deposition of polysaccharides such as callose, cellulose
and cross-linking glycans. The project will use quantitative fluorescence
imaging during cytokinesis to develop a spatiotemporal model of cell plate
formation. Further, the use of biochemical, and genetic approaches combined with
chemical biology will help in characterizing the polysaccharide components
building the new cell wall during cytokinesis and identify novel molecular
players involved in cell plate development. These studies will generate
fundamental knowledge of mechanisms that control cell plate assembly and can
form a reference framework for cell wall build up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.