* 1818201
* NSF Workshop on Real-time Learning and Decision Making of Dynamical Systems. To Be Held at NSF, February 12-13, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,670.00

The goal of the workshop is to have a group of leading experts that have
complementary background (in the area of control, signal processing, machine
learning, communication, power and energy, transportation, etc.) to cross the
bridge among various research areas and shape the research paradigm that arises
from real-time learning for data-driven dynamical systems. Specifically, we have
identified the following data-rich dynamical engineering systems: power and
energy systems, transportation systems, as well as signal and information
processing systems. Topics for discussions include various real time learning
approaches for the engineering systems (such as deep learning architectures,
model-based learning, model-free learning, reinforcement learning, etc.), data
representation for engineering systems (including the research problems in
feature extraction, graphical models, real time unsupervised learning, etc.),
and the potential solutions for closing the loop around data. The workshop will
examine control, signal processing, machine learning, communication, power and
energy, and transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address key questions in real-time
learning and decision making that arises from dynamic data-driven engineering
systems. Topics of interest include different perspectives of learning and
decision making from control, signal processing, machine learning, computational
intelligence, and domain applications' viewpoint. They will synergistically
contribute towards two of the ten big ideas from NSF; ``Harnessing Data for 21st
Century Science and Engineering'' and "Growing Convergent Research at NSF''.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will engage and promote convergent research centered around real-time
decision making and data in engineering systems. The discussions will have
significant impact on the research and education of machine learning and large-
scale data-driven engineering systems. The workshop will also generate
opportunities for collaborative research between academia and industry. Ideas
will also be generated for possible innovation and entrepreneurship. The
workshop report will serve as an important resource for the scientific community
and the general public.