* 1818946
* Computational Framework  for Optimization with Perspective Functions and Applications to Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Patrick Combettes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 372,644.00

Data analysis is ubiquitous in modern science, essential in areas such as
information technology, environmental sciences, medicine, biology, and homeland
security. The mathematical formulations arising in modern data analysis pose new
mathematical and computational challenges, both because of the sophistication of
their formulations and their potentially very large size. In this context, it is
essential to exploit structures that may be present in a system, with the dual
objectives of simplifying the analysis and constructing efficient and flexible
optimization algorithms that need only to perform basic tasks at each iteration.
This research project aims to address these issues by developing new
mathematical tools and algorithms structured around a class of so-called
perspective functions that will facilitate handling of a broad range of data
analysis questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research concerns mathematical and
computational issues pertaining to perspective functions, a powerful concept
that permits the extension of a convex function to a jointly convex one in terms
of an additional scale variable. While perspective functions are implicitly or
explicitly present in many variational formulations, especially in data
analysis, few efforts have been devoted to the study of their mathematical
properties and the development of computational methods that can solve them
efficiently. Thus, no synthetic variational model is available to unify classes
of optimization problems involving perspective functions. In addition, on the
algorithmic side, there exists no principled strategy to solve such problems. In
particular, the proximity operators of perspective functions are known only in
limited cases, which precludes the use of powerful proximal splitting
algorithms. It is the objective of this project to fill these gaps. The project
aims to lay out theoretical and computational foundations for the analysis and
the numerical solution of minimization problems involving perspective functions
and generalizations thereof, and to apply these findings to problems in data
analysis that are beyond the reach of current methods. The research methodology
hinges on unifying structured variational models that are recast in product
spaces and solved via proximal splitting algorithms as well as duality-driven
strategies. Applications to several fields of data analysis are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.