* 1818476
* CAREER: Waterborne Cyanotoxin Detection and Removal Using DNA-Based Affinity Reagents
* ENG,CBET
* 11/16/2017,04/30/2021
* Jennifer Heemstra, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 438,142.00

1552961&lt;br/&gt;Heemstra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this
NSF CAREER proposal are to develop new methods for the detection and removal of
waterborne cyanotoxins and to dramatically increase the access of students to
research experiences. Cyanobacterial blooms occur in freshwater lakes and
reservoirs as a result of environmental conditions, resulting in the release of
small-molecule cyanotoxins into the water. These toxins pose a serious threat to
human health, with exposure resulting in both acute and chronic disease.
Cyanotoxin contamination is especially problematic with the accelerated
eutrophication of water sources promoted by phosphorus- and nitrogen-fueled
cyanobacterial growth, as was observed in the Lake Erie incidence in
2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and outreach activities build
from a firm and successful foundation established by the principal investigator
(PI). The PI developed DNA split aptmer technology for cocaine and has
demonstrated her group's ability to construct lateral flow sensors using this
technology in a sandwich format. The PI will apply this knowledge to create DNA
split aptmers for the detection of two cyanotoxins - microcystin and saxitoxin.
Algal toxin levels in drinking water are actively monitored in developed
nations. However, such monitoring is lacking for much of the global drinking
water supply. Toxin exposure frequently results from recreational water use
where widespread monitoring is impractical. Among the most prevalent and harmful
of these waterborne small-molecule toxins are microcystin-LR and saxitoxin. The
proposed research activities explore two novel, and potentially transformative
concepts: (1) The use of DNA aptamer-functionalized membranes to selectively
remove toxins from drinking water, and (2) The application of DNA split aptamer
ligation to construct inexpensive, user-friendly lateral flow sensors. In
addition to generating new technologies, this research will provide insight into
DNA assembly and DNA-small molecule interactions, and will establish a reliable
and efficient method for generating DNA split aptamers. This will lay a
foundation for a long-term effort aimed at developing new methods for the
detection and removal of small-molecule water contaminants. Additionally, future
expansion of the proposed activities could focus on developing a user interface
that would enable the general public to report positive test results for
waterborne toxins. This would harness the power of crowdsourcing to share
information among the public regarding contamination events, and would provide
scientists and engineers with data to help them better understand the
environmental conditions that give rise to toxic cyanobacterial blooms.