* 1818655
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infuse Cybermanufacturing Concepts to Manufacturing Processes and Automation Courses
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jahangir Ansari, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,414.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Virginia State University seeks to strengthen the
university's ability to recruit, retain, and graduate underrepresented students
in STEM by enhancing the manufacturing engineering curriculum. Undergraduate
students are involved in the project as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has the objectives to: enhance the cybermanufacturing engineering
curriculum; increase the number of students enrolled in and graduating from the
cybermanufacturing program; and improve the placement rates of graduating
seniors into STEM graduate programs or the STEM workforce. The evidence-based
strategies and activities to achieve these objectives are to: infuse concepts
such as digital thread, sensing and acquisition and data analytics into the
targeted courses under the framework of cognitive apprenticeship; develop three
new lab courses based on digital design and manufacturing of centrifugal pumps
for the targeted courses; enable digital thread and digital twin cyberlearning
environments at the institution; and establish joint undergraduate research
opportunities with Virginia Tech. The project will be guided by an external
evaluator, as well as internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.