* 1818465
* I-Corps: Magnetic nanoparticles as a magnetic resonance imaging and angiography contrast agent
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Allan David, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of improved magnetic nanoparticles with safer profiles for
biomedical applications. One specific market would be contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Current gadolinium-based contrast agents
(GBCAs) cannot be administered to patients with poor renal function, and more
recent clinical studies indicated long-term residual gadolinium deposition in
the brains of healthy patients. As gadolinium is the source of safety concerns
for current GBCAs, one possible solution is to replace gadolinium with bio-
compatible iron-oxides that offer similar contrast enhancement. Conventional
iron-based MRI contrast agents have a broad particle size distribution which
results in undesired side effects and performance variability. The technology
developed here enables tight control of particle size distribution and
physicochemical properties, which improves the agent's performance and safety
profile. Moreover, an iron-based contrast agent can be used as a contrast agent
for magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of peripheral vascular
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
technology that enables the explicit control of the physicochemical properties
of iron-oxide nanoparticles. These nanoparticles offer potential as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) contrast agents
that overcome the safety limitations of currently used alternatives. Iron-oxide
nanoparticles have been previously approved for clinical use as MRI contrast
agents but were discontinued from the market due to variable performance and
safety concerns - primarily due to formulations with a broad size distribution.
The technology developed here enables the production of iron-oxide nanoparticles
with highly controlled physiochemical properties and low batch-to-batch
variability which yield reproducible MRI results. This homogenous formulation is
expected to have more controlled pharmacokinetics and biodistribution profiles
compared to conventional iron-based agents.