* 1818649
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integrating Risk and Resilience into Undergraduate Engineering Education Towards a Hazard-Resilient Built Environment
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Pradeep Behera, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,931.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) seeks
to improve students' preparation and success towards an engineering career or an
advanced degree by infusing interdisciplinary risk and resilience training into
undergraduate engineering education, especially in civil engineering.
Undergraduate students are involved in the project as researchers, and outreach
activities to high school and community college students are part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the objectives to: update the
educational experiences in civil engineering and related STEM programs at UDC by
integrating interdisciplinary knowledge and skills development in risk and
resilience; enrich the undergraduate research experiences through creation of an
interdisciplinary summer research program for resilient built environment; and
increase the enrollment and retention rate in engineering programs through
engaging students and outreach to local high schools and community colleges.
This project will contribute to a diverse engineering workforce in the area of
built environment. It is expected that at least 600 students will be directly
impacted by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.