* 1818160
* Network-Based Discovery of Brassinosteroid Regulation of Plant Growth and Stress Responses in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yanhai Yin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Plant steroid hormones called Brassinosteroids (BRs) signal to regulate plant
growth, development and response environmental stresses. However, our
understanding of how this steroid hormone controls thousands of genes to
regulate these processes is incomplete. The project will generate and use
multiple large-scale datasets to model how genes are controlled to govern BR-
regulated growth and drought responses. BR pathways are well conserved among
Arabidopsis and crop plants such as maize, rice and other crops, so the
knowledge obtained from the proposed studies can be used to design strategies to
optimize plant growth and crop production under drought conditions. Moreover,
the project provides excellent training opportunities for graduate students and
postdoctoral associates in modern plant biology. The investigators will also
achieve societally relevant outcomes by providing training opportunities to
underrepresented undergraduates through the George Washington Carver Internship
program as well as engaging high school and community college teachers via
summer internships. Through this partnership with teachers a learning module on
BR-regulation of plant growth will be developed for high-school and community
college students. Furthermore, unpublished data from the proposed studies will
be incorporated into an upper level undergraduate course on functional genomics,
systems, and network biology, freeing students to generate their own hypotheses
during a group project rather than simply reproducing published work. Finally,
the investigators will provide resources to the research community by organizing
a workshop on plant phenomics, proteomics and computational modeling approaches
and by making the data generated publicly accessible through publications and
the Principal Investigator's laboratory website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
genetic studies in Arabidopsis have greatly advanced our understanding of the BR
signaling pathway. BRs signal to regulate BES1/BZR1 family transcription factors
(TFs), hundreds of BR-Related Transcription Factors (BR-TFs) and thousands of
target genes. Although numerous BR-TFs have been identified, the transcriptional
complexes that allow BES1/BZR1 and these BR-TFs to regulate the large number of
BR-responsive genes have not been characterized. In addition, modeling of BR
networks has proven to be a powerful approach to understand how BES1 directs a
network controlling thousands of BR responsive genes. However, previously
constructed BR networks have only considered transcription, overlooking
important regulation at the post-transcriptional and post-translational level.
The project will use an integrated genetics, genomics, and proteomics approach
to establish and experimentally test a comprehensive Arabidopsis Gene Regulatory
Network (GRN) governing BR-regulated growth and drought responses. By combining
cutting-edge proteomics with advanced predictive modeling the project will
generate a comprehensive view of BR-mediated transcriptional regulation and
allow for the identification of novel factors involved in BR responses. First,
investigators will uncover the components and functions of BR transcription
factor complexes by examining the role of two novel BR-TFs. These two BR-TFs
interact with BES1, a master regulator of the BR pathway, as well as a large
number of other BR-TFs, likely forming large transcriptional complexes to
control the expression of BR target genes. Second, investigators will generate
BR transcriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome datasets that are a prerequisite
for a novel approach pioneered by the Co-Principal Investigator to construct
GRNs based on these combined omics data. These combined networks have increased
predictive ability compared to networks based only on transcriptional data and
will provide a vital resource, allowing for a more complete understanding of the
transcriptional program through which BRs control plant growth and stress
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.