* 1818019
* Mechanisms Governing DNA Replication Timing and Copy Number Control During Development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jared Nordman, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 742,799.00

Mechanisms governing DNA replication timing and copy number control during
development &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genomes of eukaryotic organisms contain
millions to billions of base pairs of DNA that must be accurately copied every
time a cell divides. Failure to accurately copy DNA can cause mutations that
alter cell function or even lead to cell death. Given the complexity of copying
DNA, this process can take many hours to complete. DNA is not copied randomly,
but rather particular DNA sequences are replicated at specific times during the
period of genome replication. This project will utilize interdisciplinary
approaches to understand how key factors control when a specific DNA sequence is
replicated. The project will also provide educational and research opportunities
to benefit both teachers and students. First, we will provide direct and hands-
on research opportunities for Nashville area high school teachers to aid in the
development of an experimental-based curriculum. Second, we will develop new
approaches in the classroom to expose undergraduate and graduate students to the
power of using interdisciplinary approaches to solve unanswered questions in
biology. Lastly, we will provide hands-on research opportunities to
undergraduate students at Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rif1 has been shown
to control the replication timing program from yeast to humans, but precisely
how Rif1 performs this function remains unknown. This project aims to identify
how Rif1 activity is regulated during development and thus help determine the
replication timing program. Using Drosophila melanogaster as a model system, we
have found that Rif1 associates with the replication machinery in a
developmentally programmed manner. We will combine the powerful developmental
systems of Drosophila, with biochemical and proteomic approaches to determine
how Rif1 associates with the replication machinery. We will then use a
combination of genetics and genomics strategies to determine how Rif1 influences
replication timing in different developmental contexts. Finally, we will apply
chromosome conformation capture techniques to interrogate the molecular
mechanisms that Rif1 utilizes to regulate the replication timing
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.