* 1818528
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of POGIL, Technology and Research into the Chemistry Curriculum to Increase Students' Success
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2018,11/30/2021
* George Armstrong, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 11/30/2021
* USD 399,718.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Tougaloo College aims to
redesign the pedagogy for teaching two important gatekeeping courses,
specifically General Chemistry and Organic Chemistry by integrating POGIL
(Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning) and introducing cyber and research
labs for enhancing the existing STEM courses to bridge common scientific themes
and increase collaborations. This project is centered on engaging African-
American students by increasing recruitment, retention, graduation rates and job
placement in STEM-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Target
Infusion Project are to improve the performance in gate-keeping courses leading
to an overall increase in retention in the sciences and to strengthen STEM
curricula through incorporation of new pedagogical approaches, which promote a
greater depth of knowledge in the two most important courses taken by all
science majors, leading to an increased enrollment in graduate and professional
schools. The three specific objectives to better prepare science majors for
21st-century challenges and careers are 1) Update program content and
educational experiences in General and Organic Chemistry courses by infusing
POGIL in the teaching pedagogy; 2) Enhance the laboratory courses of General
Chemistry I by the infusion of cyber/virtual-labs which will enable motivated
students to achieve mastery thus increasing success in the next lab courses; 3)
Broaden engagement of students by research interventions in General Chemistry II
and Organic Chemistry II labs. The research-based labs would train the science
majors for their future research internships at research intensive institutions
nationwide, thereby opening up the door toward graduate school. Our curriculum
redesign will provide a model with the enormous potential for liberal arts
colleges to have a major impact on broadening the opportunities for
underrepresented groups in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.