* 1818972
* NeTS: JUNO2: Disaster-Resiliency Strategies for Next-Generation Metro Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

A new generation of metropolitan optical networks is needed to enable the vision
of future 'Smart Cities', where urban population can access a new class of
revolutionary ultra-reliable and low-latency network services such as autonomous
driving, augmented reality and telemedicine. Metro networks will evolve from a
rigid infrastructure, simply designed to collect end-user traffic, to a
composite network-and-computing ecosystem that provides resources needed by an
application. Given the importance of these network services to society, next-
generation metro-area networks (NG-MAN) must be designed to be resilient against
large disruptive events, such as natural disasters or terrorist attacks. This
project will investigate novel resilience strategies for NG-MAN that incorporate
new technical directions, technologies and edge computing. This research has the
potential to enable a high level of availability of critical communications and
services in disaster scenarios that affect metropolitan areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This joint National Science Foundataion and Japan National
Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT)-funded research
project will provide new approaches to the design of disaster-resilient NG-MAN.
There are three main research areas, to address complex network management and
design problems arising in both the pre-disaster phase (i.e., prevention) and
the post-disaster phase (i.e, recovery): i) Disaster-resilient control plane in
NG-MAN. New strategies for control-plane protection will be studied, targeting a
cognitive and hierarchical control-plane architecture that remains operational
even if the main controllers fail. ii) Slice protection for a NG-MAN disaster-
resilient data plane. Different disaster-resiliency approaches shall be enforced
depending on the priority of different network slices and related services,
considering all the elements composing a slice that must be protected, i.e.,
bandwidth, computing and storage resources. iii) Rapid recovery via deployable
recovery units. Rapid post-disaster recovery of a network is critical, and is
facilitated through use of movable devices, e.g., transported over specialized
trucks to restore connectivity or computing facilities. (Mobile units were
deployed after the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan). This project will
explore the deployment of optical burst mode amplifiers for recovery of fiber
plant operation. Evaluation of the proposed approach will be performed using the
NICT testbed in Sendai.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.