* 1818582
* Collaborative Research: Mining Seismic Wavefields
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Egill Hauksson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 04/30/2020
* USD 32,999.00

This award will fund continued development of methods to process huge volumes of
seismic waveform data. This will lead to a great increase in the number of
located and characterized seismic events of various kinds and will potentially
identify patterns in earthquake occurrence that could inform hazard and near-
term rupture forecasting. The initial "Mining Seismic Wavefields" NSF
Geoinformatics grant has led to significant progress dealing with data volumes
that would have been impossible to process when the project began. This award
will fund an additional year of that effort and will maintain this momentum in
technique development to complete the analysis of proof-of-concept projects on
vast waveform data sets, and to deploy the cyberinfrastructure for wider use by
the seismological community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of the research is
that continuous and/or densely recorded data coupled with high performance
computing and scalable algorithms can enable a network-based approach to
earthquake detection that greatly improves the detection of weak and unusual
events that would be difficult or impossible to detect using traditional
approaches. Numerous seismological observations confirm that proximal earthquake
sources generate similar signals. Exploiting the discriminative power of this
similarity has led to many fundamental discoveries; however, most similarity-
based detection methods require prior knowledge of the source waveform, or
template. Blind/uninformed search for signals having unknown signatures based on
pair-wise or multiple matches has seen some success, but naïve implementations
of this approach suffer from quadratic scaling of computation with time such
that problems of interest are inaccessible even for the most capable computers.
Similarly, for dense networks, the availability of continuous waveform data
motivates alternative detection schemes based on waveform similarity at adjacent
stations. This project will further develop efficient data-mining techniques to
enable scalable similarity search of seismic wavefields. Technical challenges to
be addressed as part of the research for spatially sparse recording are to
develop improved similarity-preserving compression for repeating signals
detected over a network, and to improve post-processing of search output that
will both isolate signals of seismological interest and minimize false
detections. For spatially dense recording, this would extend recently developed
wavefield matching techniques to similarity across adjacent stations, which
would enable similarity search across unaliased elastic wavefields in four
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.