* 1818286
* Role of BEN domain proteins in chromatin organization and gene expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Supriya Prasanth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 714,000.00

Accurate control of gene expression is crucial for cell survival and is clearly
dependent on the chromatin state. Chromatin consists of DNA plus histone
proteins that wrap the DNA into a more compact structure. The chromatin
structure can be modified in many ways to target specific protein binding, alter
gene expression, or initiate DNA replication. The project will determine how a
particular protein alters chromatin organization and transcription within the
eukaryotic genome. This interdisciplinary project has a strong outreach
component and will engage undergraduate students in research, which will include
high-resolution microscopy as well as time-lapse live cell imaging. This project
will include undergraduate women and minority students in the research project;
provide opportunities for community college students via research internships;
and support a workshop and symposium on live cell imaging. Exposing young and
bright students to research early on will be highly beneficial and instill in
them a sense of scientific awareness and potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
function of a protein can often be predicted by the presence of domains that are
either distinct functional or structural units. These domains can promote
binding to specific proteins or nucleic acids. The BEN-domain is a protein
domain that is present in diverse proteins in metazoans as well as in viruses.
It is predicted to mediate protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions to
regulate chromatin organization and transcription. BEN domain-containing
proteins are emerging rapidly as an important class of proteins involved in gene
regulation. Several BEN-containing proteins including BANP/SMAR1, Mdg4, BEND
have chromatin-related functions and regulate gene expression. However, the
molecular basis of how the BEN-domain containing gene family regulates chromatin
function and transcription remains to be established. The objective of the
project is to dissect the molecular basis of transcription repression by the
quadruple BEN-domain containing protein BEND3 and determine its physiological
role in mammalian cells. The PIs laboratory utilizes state-of the art cell
biological approaches including time-lapse imaging, super-resolution structural
illumination imaging and combines these observations with biochemical
approaches. This project is relevant to the NSF mission and will further the
understanding of a basic biology question: how chromatin organization dictates
transcriptional regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.