* 1818328
* Chromatin Structure and Dynamics from Nanometer to Micrometer Length Scales
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Newcomer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 374,186.00

The central aim of this project is to develop computational models capable of
describing the structure, dynamics and ultimately the function of DNA in the
cell nucleus. In the cell, as much as a meter of DNA can be packaged into a
dense aggregate that measures only a micrometer. This aggregate consists of a
DNA protein complex that is referred to as chromatin, and its structure is
central to gene regulation. Chromatin exhibits a truly hierarchical structure,
in which modifications at the smallest length scales influence structure and
dynamics over much longer distances. Importantly, deregulation, or "misreading,"
of the underlying DNA has been implicated in numerous diseases, including
cancer. Despite the inherent function of chromatin, its structure in the cell
nucleus largely remains a mystery. This work will seek to resolve that
structure, and potentially shed light on the origin and spread of various
genetic disorders. The project will be carried out by the principal investigator
and graduate students. In addition to receiving advanced training on the
modeling and research aspects of the project, these students will receive
communications training and will participate in programs conceived to provide
local communities with an understanding of the role chromatin plays in our daily
life. As such, this work will offer an opportunity to engage young students in
future scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work promises to answer
important biophysical questions regarding the emergence of large scale
biological behavior from small scale molecular interactions. The proposed
comprehensive model of chromatin will link one-dimensional primary structure and
dynamics to three-dimensional secondary and tertiary structure and motion. It
will rely on existing experimental data pertaining to multiple length scales,
and it will couple top-down and bottom-up modeling design approaches. To do so,
a strategy will be adopted in which advanced sampling techniques are used to
extract free energy differences between different experimentally-proposed
chromatin configurations. A guiding principle in the development of the model
will be to gain the ability to span the range of length and time scales that are
necessary to understand chromatin structure and dynamics. It is anticipated
that, when completed, the proposed model will yield an unprecedented view of the
genome and lead to hitherto unavailable insights into how genetic mechanisms are
altered by external challenges. An important aspect of the project will be to
examine the role of histone and DNA modifications, such as acetylations, on
higher-order chromatin structures. More generally, the three-dimensional,
molecular models envisaged in this project will be the first of their kind, and
will become an important tool for studies of cellular
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.