* 1818132
* Elucidation and Engineering of Complete Firefly Luciferin Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jing-Ke Weng, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

The ability of fireflies to produce light, called bioluminescence, is a
remarkable trait essential for their unique courtship communication in the dark.
Since its initial discovery decades ago, the firefly luciferin-luciferase pair
responsible for the light-giving reaction has become widely used in agricultural
and biomedical research. However, the metabolic pathway underlying luciferin
biosynthesis remains unknown, which greatly limits the potential applications of
firefly bioluminescence in a broader context. This project will investigate
luciferin biosynthesis in fireflies. The new tools identified through this
research will facilitate genetic engineering of autonomous bioluminescence
without the need of supplying exogenous luciferin. Through the topic of
bioluminescence, the scientific outreach activities associated with this project
will also positively impact about 300 local K-12 students and about 100 high
school teachers over the period of three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves interdisciplinary approaches including biochemistry, genetics,
structural biology, and synthetic biology to elucidate and engineer firefly
luciferin metabolism. To resolve the metabolic pathway and enzymes underlying
luciferin de novo biosynthesis, a series of isotopically labeled tracers will be
used in live fireflies to identify the key luciferin biosynthetic intermediates.
The candidate enzymes will be identified through a candidate gene approach, and
their biochemical functions will be characterized both in vitro and in vivo. The
project further seeks to identify additional accessory enzymes that support
luciferin recycling from the luciferase product oxyluciferin. With these newly
identified firefly luciferin metabolic genes in hand, the firefly
autoluminescent system will be reconstituted in several model organisms. This
project will ultimately yield a new set of optogenetic tools with broad
applications in both basic and translational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.