* 1818253
* Computation for the Endless Frontier
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Dhabaleswar Panda, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Walker
* 02/29/2024
* USD 66,999,135.00

Computation is critical to our nation's progress in science and engineering.
Whether through simulation of phenomena where experiments are costly or
impossible, large scale data analysis to sift the enormous quantities of digital
data scientific instruments can produce, or machine learning to find patterns
and suggest hypothesis from this vast array of data, computation is the
universal tool upon which nearly every field of science and engineering relies
upon to hasten their advance. This project will deploy a powerful new system,
called "Frontier", that builds upon a design philosophy and operations approach
proven by the success of the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) in
delivering leading instruments for computational science. Frontier provides a
system of unprecedented scale in the NSF cyberinfrastructure that will yield
productive science on day one, while also preparing the research community for
the shift to much more capable systems in the future. Frontier is a hybrid
system of conventional Central Processing Units (CPU) and Graphics Processing
Units (GPU), with performance capabilities that significantly exceeds prior
leadership-class computing investments made by NSF. Importantly, the design of
Frontier will support the seamless transition of current NSF leadership-class
computing applications to the new system, as well as enable new large-scale
data-intensive and machine learning workloads that are expected in the future.
Following deployment, the project will operate the system in partnership with
ten academic partners. In addition, the project will begin planning activities
in collaboration with leading computational scientists and technologists from
around the country, and will leverage strategic public-private partnerships to
design a leadership-class computing facility with at least ten times more
performance capabilities for Science and Engineering research, ensuring the
economic competitiveness and prosperity for our nation at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TACC, in partnerships with Dell EMC and Intel, will
deploy Frontier, a hybrid system offering 39 PF (double precision) of Intel Xeon
processors, complemented by 11 PF (single precision) of GPU cards for machine
learning applications. In addition to 3x the per node memory of NSF's prior
leadership-class computing system primary compute nodes, Frontier will have 2x
the storage bandwidth in a storage hierarchy that includes 55PB of usable disk-
based storage and 3PB of 'all flash' storage, to enable next generation data-
intensive applications and support for the data science community. Frontier will
be deployed in TACC's state-of-the-art datacenter which is configured to supply
30% of the system's power needs from renewable energy. Frontier will include
support for science and engineering in virtually all disciplines through its
software environment support for application containers, as well as through its
partnership with ten academic institutions providing deep computational science
expertise in support of users on the system. The project planning effort for a
Phase 2 system with at least 10x performance improvement will incorporate a
community-driven process that will include leading computational scientists and
technologists from around the country and leverage strategic public-private
partnerships. This process will ensure the design of a future NSF leadership-
class computing facility that incorporates the most productive near-term
technologies, and anticipates the most likely future technological capabilities
for all of science and engineering requiring leadership-class computational and
data-analytics capabilities. Furthermore, the project is expected to develop new
expertise and techniques for leadership-class computing and data-driven
applications that will benefit future users worldwide through publications,
training, and consulting. The project will leverage the team's unique approach
to education, outreach, and training activities to encourage, educate, and
develop the next generation of leadership-class computational science
researchers. The team includes leaders in campus bridging, minority-serving
institute (MSI) outreach, and data technologies who will oversee efforts to use
Frontier to increase the diversity of groups using leadership-class computing
for traditional and data-driven applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.