* 1818805
* The Development Of A High Resolution Rainfall Record
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Christopher Lepre, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 87,208.00

Dr. Christopher Lepre of the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Rutgers
University (USA) will bring his geological and anthropological expertise to East
Africa in order to study the impact of past climate on the evolution of the
human lineage. The ancient monsoon and its effect on African ecosystems is
thought to be responsible for a number of significant turning points in the
evolution of early humans. Nevertheless, there is a lack of high-resolution and
long-term information about the amount of rain that fell over East Africa during
the interval between 4.0 and 1.0 million years ago. This has obscured
understanding of how climate changes may have influenced early human anatomy,
the development of stone tools, and dietary habits. To address this problem, the
prehistoric rainfall of northwest Kenya will be reconstructed by using
geological fieldwork and laboratory analyses of ancient soils. These ancient
soils directly encase important fossils and archaeological sites that document
the oldest stone tools in the world that are currently known, in addition to the
evolutionary history of such species as Homo erectus and Homo habilis. Further
objectives of the project are to train Kenyan professionals in laboratory
research methods and develop a mobile teaching project through the Rutgers
Geology Museum that provides schools in the United States and Kenya with hands-
on opportunities for learning about fossils, archaeology, and geology.The
research project will provide the scientific community with an advanced
understanding of Earth's ancient climate and methods of reconstruction,
highlight the importance of Kenya for interpreting the human past, and
strengthen the collaborations between the National Museums of Kenya and the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of Dr. Lepre concentrates on
the longstanding questions: Why was there such a diversity of human evolutionary
events during the timeframe of 4.0-1.0 million years ago, and how did the
environment contribute to these events? He will address these questions by
analyzing the iron-bearing minerals preserved in ancient soils. Such minerals,
like hematite and goethite, are formed under certain temperature conditions and
specific quantities of yearly rainfall. Through assessing the ratio of hematite
to goethite in ancient soils, past environmental changes due to climate can be
reconstructed and compared with events of human evolution. Dr. Lepre's
laboratory at Rutgers University is equipped with a spectrophotometer that can
detect hematite and goethite in soil samples through measuring the diffuse
reflectance of light. As these minerals contain iron, additional measurements of
the magnetic properties of the samples will help elucidate the environmental
conditions under which the ancient soils formed. Geologic fieldwork will be
conducted at the Lake Turkana Basin, a geographically remote but world-renowned
fossil and archaeological locality in northwest Kenya. This multidisciplinary
research applies new methods towards the analysis of ancient soils of the Lake
Turkana Basin in an attempt to answer old questions about the environment of
human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.