* 1818978
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud-Based Voice Analysis and Machine Learning to Improve Teaching with Data
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Amy Spinelli, Earshot LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will study how teachers use data to improve their
instruction. In response to widespread understanding that feedback is a
necessary component to improvement, school districts are increasingly investing
in teacher coaches to provide feedback critical for teachers. However, this is
not scalable, and typically only new or underperforming teachers have access to
coaching. Earshot seeks to scale and democratize some aspects of coaching so
every teacher can have access to the personalized data and feedback necessary
for improvement. The goal is for all teachers to maximize their potential,
better engaging students in learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earshot has developed
a cloud-based system using voice analysis to provide data about instruction. The
core innovation is a machine learning process to listen to dialogue between
teachers and students and analyze the quality of the educational exchange.
Funding for this project would enable study of two critical questions: How does
providing data about teacher behavior affect what teachers do in their
classrooms? And, what kinds of resources, content, and support are necessary to
help teachers improve? This research has the potential to transform the way
teachers use data about their own performance and receive the necessary help to
improve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.