* 1818307
* Engineering an organelle with selective small molecule permeability for compartmentalizing multi-enzyme pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Dueber, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

Baker's yeast can be used as an inexpensive, self-replicating factory for the
environment-friendly production of many valuable chemicals. To carry this out
genes from plants and other sources are transferred into yeast. Yeast can grow
cheaply in large-scale fermenters. However, these pathways often do not work
well in yeast. This project will engineer an organelle which behaves as a
specialized container that can be engineered to meet the needs of a variety of
pathways. This synthetic organelle will also be valuable when parts of the
pathway, are toxic to the cell. We will assemble a team of five undergraduate
students from varied backgrounds and train these students as future leaders in
synthetic biology. They will gain expertise in molecular cellular biology and
engineering. This team will gain from peer-to-peer mentoring within a supportive
environment. They will also be mentored by other senior scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this research project is to reprogram
the peroxisome as a synthetic organelle to meet the needs of a variety of
metabolic pathways, providing a generalizable and flexible compartmentalization
strategy for metabolic engineering. The peroxisome provides a promising starting
point for this reprogramming as it is not required for viability in many yeast
species, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Heterologous proteins can be
efficiently imported into the peroxisome via the addition of a short C-terminal
signal peptide sequence. A critical limitation for compartmentalization of many
metabolic pathways, however, is the natural permeability of peroxisomes to
molecules smaller than approximately 700 Daltons. The cause of this leakiness is
hypothesized to result from peroxisome membrane proteins with orifices allowing
these small molecules to diffuse across this membrane barrier. Many desired
applications will require the degree of leakiness to be reduced. Accordingly,
peroxisome membrane proteins not required for organelle biogenesis will be
knocked-out to build a designer peroxisome with reduced small molecule
permeability. Peroxisome permeability can be measured in vivo using enzyme
sequestration assays developed within the lab. A toxic protein and multi-enzyme
pathway will be tested to probe the ability of these engineered peroxisomes to
support compartmentalization at both the single protein and pathway
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.