* 1818899
* Theoretical Physics of Fundamental and Cosmological Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Marc Kamionkowski, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 755,992.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Marc Kamionkowski and
David E. Kaplan at Johns Hopkins University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search to
understand the fundamental laws of physics is at an exciting but uncertain time.
While we eagerly await the discovery of new physics at the LHC or with the next
decade of dark-matter searches, existing null results have forced theorists to
discard old prejudices and think deeply about entirely new ideas for fundamental
physics and novel experimental avenues to seek new physics. Recent developments
in observational/experimental cosmology provide the exciting prospect of opening
wholly new windows to the very earliest Universe and of understanding the
physics driving the accelerated cosmic expansion and the nature of dark matter.
The research of Kamionkowski and Kaplan tackles central problems at the juncture
of theory and experiment in particle physics and cosmology. Their work will
advance new ideas for cosmological observations and fundamental-physics
searches, and they will propose new mechanisms and models that may ultimately
help in the grand synthesis of nature's laws. This research will proceed hand in
hand with the training of students and postdocs who will become scientific
leaders in subsequent generations, and the group will remain vigorous in its
quest to communicate the excitement of particle physics and cosmology to the
general public. Theoretical research along these lines advances the national
interest by optimizing our investment in major experimental facilities in their
quest to understand new physical laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Kaplan will develop new non-accelerator directions for exploring the fundamental
laws of nature while pushing to pursue a deeper understanding of the phenomena
we see. Kamionkowski will develop novel ways to search for new physics with
astrophysical observations and non-accelerator experiments. He will study new
ideas for dark energy, develop novel techniques to decode cosmic microwave
background measurements, and develop theoretical underpinnings to support large-
scale-structure probes of inflation and dark energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.