* 1818694
* Targeted Infusion Project: Developing the Geospatial Data Analytics Certificate Program at Fayetteville State University
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Valentin Milanov, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 475,225.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The Geospatial Data Analytics (GEODATA)
Certificate at Fayetteville State University (FSU) will expose students to new
career opportunities, since geospatial technologies have recently experienced
robust job growth and is rapidly gaining momentum in the industry, with wide
ranging applications. The traditional and online courses will serve a broad
range of students, including underrepresented minorities and non-traditional
students who attend FSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEODATA Certificate program
will educate undergraduate students in computational and data-enabled science in
the context of geospatial applications. The proposed project is based on
educational research that suggests Computer Science curricula can benefit from
creating pathways built from contexts, which are application and domain areas
that cover core knowledge by providing explanations and motivation for students.
The interdisciplinary computing classes of the program are thus expected to aid
in recruitment and retention and provide benefits for students seeking new
career opportunities in STEM. The GEODATA program will add to the growing body
of knowledge on how to motivate students in the study of computing, how to
prepare them for the modern-day job market, and how to develop their core
knowledge and skills by using the geospatial context. Proposed activities
consist of course development and redesign, setting up the geospatial-computing
infrastructure and equipment, implementation of the certification program and
development of fully online counterparts of existing program
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.