* 1818533
* Quantum Phenomena in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
research and education on understanding and controlling quantum properties of
materials. Fundamentally, everything on Earth is governed by quantum mechanics.
Yet, while quantum theory is essential to understanding the gross properties of
materials, for example the existence of both metals and insulators and the
phenomena of magnetism, it rarely manifests itself directly in the more
macroscopic world. This project aims to bridge this gap by investigating
materials in which quantum effects are unusually apparent in laboratory-scale
observations. These quantum materials offer new functionalities that could not
be achieved in more classical substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three main thrusts. The first targets materials that are topological and
magnetic. Topological materials have a kind of internal "twist" that leads to
novel conducting properties. By combining this with magnetism, control over
those properties may be achieved. The second thrust focuses on emergent
"quasiparticles"--objects that behave like fundamental particles of nature but
modified in essential ways--with the unusual property that they are confined to
fewer than the usual 3 dimensions. The third problem addressed is how to modify
the properties of materials using powerful laser light. The forces from such
powerful light can reorganize the electrons in a material, giving them new and
interesting properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves a
combination of development of theoretical techniques, numerical and analytical
calculations, and close interplay with experimental studies. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in an essential way in the research, and
will be trained broadly in analytical reasoning, mathematical methods,
computation, and scientific communication, which form the basis for many careers
in STEM fields, both in and out of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports fundamental research and
education towards understanding and controlling quantum correlations in solids.
In the long term, there are two goals to the program: to develop new materials
and structures with useful functionality not currently available, and to extend
the basic scientific framework to understand matter in new regimes and new
phases. There are three main topics: 1) Interplay of real space and momentum
space topology in itinerant magnets; 2) Sub-dimensional dynamics; 3) Driven
dynamics of Mott insulators. The research will be carried out using a diverse
set of theoretical techniques: phenomenological modeling, statistical mechanics,
field theory, ab initio simulations, many-body numerics such as Monte Carlo
methods and variational wavefunctions, and symmetry
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, the intellectual merit of the
research is in developing and bringing deep theoretical ideas in the theory of
quantum matter to fruition in real materials. The first topic on momentum and
real space topology is a next step after the maturation of the field of
topological band theory, and opens the door to a rich interplay of phenomena
bringing together topological aspects of electronic structure and frustrated
magnetism. The second subject is both related to the frontier of topological
phases and qualitatively new forms of three-dimensional matter, and also is a
point where powerful theoretical techniques from one dimension can be brought to
bear on difficult problems of dynamics. The final area of driven dynamics is a
nascent field, in which a rapid growth of new theoretical ideas surrounding
Floquet many-body problems, combined with experimental advances in ultrafast
technology, offers opportunities for new physics in the solid
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved
in an essential way in the research, and will be trained broadly in analytical
reasoning, mathematical methods, computation, and scientific communication,
which form the basis for many careers in STEM fields, both in and out of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.