* 1818820
* Fast Algorithms for Special Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Joel Hass, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The importance of the numerical simulation of physical phenomena by computers
cannot be overstated. Such computations have become an essential tool both in
scientific research and in industrial applications. The computer codes for these
simulations are usually constructed from basic building blocks, including
algorithms that carry out calculations involving so-called "special functions."
Broadly speaking, special functions are nothing more than functions which cannot
be expressed in terms of elementary operations (e.g., addition, subtraction, and
the computation of square roots) and which arise frequently enough in
mathematical calculations to warrant a name. This project seeks to build more
efficient and comprehensive libraries for a class of special functions which are
solutions of equations known as second order differential equations. One of the
principal uses of these special functions is in representing the solutions of
much more complicated equations which model physical
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To be more precise, this project seeks to
develop fast algorithms for families of special function satisfying second order
differential equations whose coefficients are nonoscillatory. There are no
viable O(1) algorithms for evaluating many such families. Moreover, only in a
few cases are asymptotically optimal algorithms for the corresponding special
function transforms available, and many of those are not readily applicable in
parallel computing environments. This is unfortunate given the many applications
of extremely large-scale special function transforms, especially large-scale
spherical harmonic transforms, which are widely used in astronomy and
geophysics. The methods to be developed in this project are based on the fact
that essentially all second order differential equations with nonoscillatory
coefficients admit nonoscillatory phase functions. This not only provides a
mechanism for the O(1) evaluation of special functions defined by second order
differential equations, it also implies that the associated special function
transforms are Fourier integral operators. Such operators can be applied in
asymptotically optimal time by combining modern butterfly algorithms with
algorithms for the O(1) evaluation of special functions. One of the key
advantages of this methodology is that it is well-suited to parallel computing
environments and large-scale computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.