* 1818293
* Large-scale mapping of genetic interactions across diverse cell types
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anja-Katrin Bielinsky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 850,000.00

Although genomic technology enables efficient sequencing of genomes, it is still
not possible to accurately make predictions of a cells characteristics
(phenotype) from knowledge of its genome alone. Understanding the relationship
between genome and phenotype has implications not just for understanding
biology, but for biomanufacturing, and human health. A key contributor to this
gap in knowledge is the lack of understanding of how multiple genetic mutations
interact to cause changes in phenotypes. In this project the investigators will
develop and validate a hybrid computational-experimental strategy to efficiently
map genetic interaction networks for two types of human cells . The project will
result in a new computational approach for selecting which genes to mutate in
specific cell types to best understand genetic interactions, and will deploy a
genome-wide gene editing pipeline to quantify genetic interactions in the human
cell lines. The resulting data will be useful for understanding the basic
functions of human genes, many of which still remain uncharacterized. The
educational broader impacts of the project will address a key challenge in STEM
disciplines, namely the underrepresentation of women in science and technology
careers by involving middle and high-school students in solving computational
biology problems related to the research through their local Girls Who Code
chapter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New advances in the understanding of the
relationship between genotype and phenotype demand consideration of genetic
interactions. Discovering how combinations of variants in the genome interact to
influence cell function and phenotype is a daunting challenge given the vast
number of possible gene combinations in the human genome as well as complex cell
type- and tissue-specific regulatory mechanisms governing gene function. In this
project the investigators will build on their successful collaboration , during
which they developed a genetic interaction map for the model eukaryote, yeast,
to perform large-scale genetic interaction studies in human cells. Investigators
will develop a new computational approach for optimal selection of query mutants
for genetic interaction screens in specific cell types using initial
measurements of quantitative single mutant phenotypes from three human cell
lines, HAP1 (data previously collected), HEK293T and hTERT RPE-1. A genome-scale
CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing pipeline will be used to perform genome-wide screens
for the selected mutants in the HEK293T and hTERT RPE-1 cell types, which are
from distinct cell lineages. The resulting data will be comparatively analyzed
to map core conserved and cell type-specific functional modules. The results of
the study will help reduce knowledge gap and increase our understanding of how
genomic changes correspond to changes in phenotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.