* 1818659
* A Large-scale Systematic Exploration of the Impact of Culturally Competent Biology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Sara Brownell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 423,003.00

Undergraduate biology education touches on a variety of topics that may counter
cultural beliefs held by undergraduate students. Although these topics are
supported by widely accepted scientific theories, many college students are
uncomfortable learning about them. Past research illustrates that differences
between instructors' and students' beliefs may result in biology instructors
teaching in ways that are not culturally sensitive to student beliefs. Cultural
competence is the ability of one group of people to effectively communicate to
other groups of people who may have different cultural backgrounds and beliefs.
Although there are instructional practices that have been proposed to be
culturally competent when teaching about these topics, there are few rigorous
studies that sufficiently test the effectiveness of these practices and none
examine multiple instructors and/or institutions. For this project, a large-
scale nationwide study will be conducted to explore if and when Culturally
Competent Practices (CCPs) can (1) create more comfortable learning environments
for college students, (2) reduce students' perceived conflicts between their
beliefs and biology, and (3) improve student understanding of biological
theories. Including CCPs in the teaching of biology will lead to a better
educated citizenry, specifically to a better understanding of the scientific
process, which is in the national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although a
large number of published studies recommend CCPs in biology instruction, very
few use data to support their recommendations and no studies use a pre-/post-
measurement design with a comparison group of students not exposed to CCPs.
Additionally, there is currently no systematic and standardized way to measure
the use of CCPs and there is also wide variation in the measurement of student
outcomes, which make comparisons among published studies difficult and
generalizations nearly impossible. Notably, there have been no large-scale
studies done to try to compare the efficacy of CCPs in multiple settings. This
project aims to address these gaps and to develop survey instruments to deploy
in a large-scale national study to systematically measure the impact of CCPs on
undergraduates learning about biology. The project will develop surveys to
measure instructor use of CCPs in biology instruction and student outcomes
resulting from incorporation of CCPs. Three potential student outcomes will be
addressed: (1) student perceived comfort in their biology learning environment,
(2) student perceived conflict between their beliefs and biological theories,
and (3) student acceptance of the tenets of biology. At least 54 life science
instructors teaching over 11,000 students in 84 courses will participate in the
study and deploy the student survey instrument, making this one of the largest
studies conducted on undergraduate biology education to date. The project will
use natural variation between instructors in the use of CCPs in biology
instruction to systematically test the impact of CCPs on student outcomes. The
overarching focus of this proposal is to explore the use of CCPs, which if shown
to be effective, could help make biology classrooms more inclusive, particularly
for students with strongly held cultural or religious beliefs, who comprise a
large fraction of undergraduate biology students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.