* 1818213
* NSF/MCB-BSF:  Collaborative Research:  Towards development of the structural determinants of the Glutamate receptor gating regulation by auxiliary membrane anchored proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Maria Kurnikova, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 543,713.00

High cognitive functions, including quantitative reasoning, learning and memory,
originate in the human brain as a result of communication between complex
networks of neurons connected through synapses. The key molecular element of
this synaptic connection is the ionotropic glutamate receptor (iGluR), a protein
in the postsynaptic neuronal membrane that conducts electrical signals to
deliver messages from the presynaptic neuron. This process of neurotransmission
is modulated by a variety of auxiliary proteins that bind to glutamate
receptors. This project will illuminate how different auxiliary proteins
interact with the glutamate receptor and with each other to initiate and
modulate communication between neurons. This study enhances our knowledge of the
molecular underpinnings of brain function. The research will involve
undergraduate and graduate students, providing an educational environment and
training opportunities at the forefront of brain research. Outreach activities
involving local high schools and colleges are planned as well to promote diverse
participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is increasingly recognized
that the majority of proteins operate in cells within dynamically formed and re-
formed complexes. This is especially important for signaling receptor proteins,
such as ionotropic receptors in the brain that conduct electrical current
through postsynaptic membranes to facilitate fast communication between neurons.
The AMPA receptors (AMPAR) - a subtype of iGluRs - mediate the fastest
excitatory neurotransmission in the mammalian brain. Correspondingly, regulation
of AMPAR trafficking, localization and function is the key mechanism determining
synaptic strength and plasticity that underlies high cognitive brain functions,
such as learning and memory. It has been discovered recently that synaptic
AMPARs function as complexes with a multitude of auxiliary proteins. This
project aims to characterize molecular interactions of AMPARs with the cys-knot
AMPAR modulating proteins (CKAMPs) and their interplay with the transmembrane
AMPAR regulatory proteins (TARPs). A large collection of AMPAR and CKAMP mutants
will be employed to identify interaction domains and specific residues involved
in receptor regulation. Computational structural modeling including docking and
molecular dynamics simulations will be employed to guide further determination
of the protein-protein interfaces, which will be tested by electrophysiology
experiments, and to generate and analyze candidate constructs for successful
structure determination by cryo-EM. This collaborative effort, combining
complementary approaches and continuous exchange of information and reagents,
may provide the synergy needed to reach a new level of understanding of AMPAR
regulation. In addition to providing fundamental insights into AMPAR gating and
regulation, the results of this study will also serve as a roadmap for
investigating AMPAR-mediated processes in synaptic
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, and the Rules of Life Venture Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.