* 1818757
* A Solve-Then-Discretize Paradigm for Spectral Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Alex Townsend, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Spectral methods are one of the big three technologies (along with finite
differences and finite element methods) for the numerical solution of partial
differential equations (PDEs) and are particularly powerful for fluid flow and
airfoil simulations. This research project aims to develop a new infinite-
dimensional framework for solving PDEs to derive competitive computational
algorithms that preserve the continuum structure of differential operators,
promising to overcome many of the hard-and-fast computational barriers with
spectral discretizations. We aim to produce a collection of adaptive, robust,
and industrial-strength iterative solvers for spectral methods to allow for the
accurate resolution of fluid flows. We will also develop tools for computing the
pseudospectra and continuous spectra of differential operators, facilitating
improved understanding of inelastic scattering. The results will help to
demonstrate that spectrally-accurate methods, when done carefully, are flexible,
general, and powerful numerical tools in computational mathematics and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The standard paradigm for solving a PDE is to
first discretize the equation and then solve the resulting linear system. This
approach has a number of drawbacks for spectral methods related to the design of
preconditioners, the introduction of non-normality, and the perturbation of
spectra. The infinite-dimensional framework under development in this project
preserves the continuum structure of PDEs by avoiding the discretization of
differential operators, and instead only discretizes smooth functions, such as
the solution and the source terms of the PDE. Not working with finite sections
of differential operators promises to enable us to develop robust Krylov-based
iterative solvers, motivate preconditioners directly from the differential
operator, compute the continuous part of the spectrum of operators, and develop
a theoretical foundation for the adaptive resolution of solutions and
eigenfunctions based on error analysis. We will apply these new tools to the
numerical simulation of advection-dominated fluid flow as well as inelastic
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.