* 1818140
* Neuronal and molecular basis for magnetic transduction in the nematode C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Andres Vidal Gadea, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 638,606.00

This research will investigate how animals that use the earth's magnetic field
for navigation and transform this force field into meaningful nervous signals
and behavior. The magnetic field of the earth has horizontal and vertical
components and while many animals are known to use either the horizontal (e.g.
salmon), or the vertical component of the field (e.g. sea turtles), how they
detect and translate this information is poorly understood. Determining how
animals detect and process magnetic field information will solve one of the
modern mysteries of sensory neuroscience. It will also improve our understanding
of animal behavior by clarifying how living systems interact with natural and
artificial magnetic fields. More specifically, this research will determine the
subcellular location and nature of magnetic particles in the nematode C. elegans
by identifying the molecules that allow worms to detect and orient to magnetic
force fields. Further, it will elucidate how the nervous system processes
magnetic information. The project will support the training of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as ongoing outreach efforts to
increase science literacy among at risk children. Specifically, high school
students will be trained through an ongoing summer science "boot camp" program
and by recruiting local high school students to volunteer in the lab. They will
learn how to generate hypotheses, perform experiments to test them, analyze and
communicate their findings. Several graduate and undergraduate students will be
given the opportunity to participate directly in the project, thereby gaining a
complete scientific research experience. Graduate and undergraduate students
enrolled in two biotechnology laboratory courses will also benefit by learning
modern molecular techniques in the context of ongoing scientific research. All
participating students will learn basic scientific literacy with the goal of
presenting abstracts at meetings and co-authoring scientific publications based
upon their research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of a behavior relies
on the interaction between the sensory, integrating, and motor systems in an
individual. While much is known about the transduction of most sensory
modalities, how animals detect and orient to the earth's magnetic field remains
one of the final frontiers of sensory neuroscience. Recently, the principal
investigator identified neurons that process magnetic information, identifying
candidate mechanisms for magnetic sensation, and, importantly, the first
magnetosensitive neurons in any animal. This project will determine the cellular
localization of magnetic particles in the tissues of C. elegans by purifying
these particles in animals with fluorescently labelled candidate cells, or
labelling them immunohistochemically. The size and composition of these
particles will be determined using TEM and SEM-EDX analysis. Atomic force
microscopy will be used to measure their magnetic moment and subcellular
localization. To determine which proteins are responsible for assembling
magnetic particles near the magnetosensory neurons, RNA interference will be
used to silence iron-related gene expression. The magnetotactic response of
these animals will then be evaluated, and the localization of magnetic particles
evaluated through immunohistochemistry. Candidate proteins will be tagged using
PCR-fusion. Previous mass spectrometry analysis of magnetic particles isolated
from the tissues of C. elegans revealed them enriched for the mechanoreceptor
PEZO-1 and several proteins involved in touch transduction in other animals. RNA
interference will be used to silence candidate proteins involved in magnetic
transduction and record the resulting changes in magnetic responses in the
magnetosensory neurons using the calcium indicator GCaMP6. Sufficiency will be
tested by means of cell-specific, ORF-mediated, rescue of candidate genes.
Subcellular localization of these proteins will be accomplished through PCR-
fusion to fluorescently tag them. To identify how C. elegans encodes magnetic
fields, GCaMP6 will be expressed in sensory and downstream neurons. Neuronal
responses will be recorded in animals exposed to magnetic fields of varying
directions and amplitudes. Completion of this project will reveal how magnetic
particles are assembled and contribute to the detection of magnetic fields by C.
elegans. The resolution of the magnetic transduction machinery, and the neuronal
basis of magnetic field coding will likely reveal conserved molecular and
cellular strategies for harnessing the earth's magnetic field in the production
of adaptive behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.