* 1818303
* Evolution of the response to fluctuating oxygen availability in facultative anaerobes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Nicole Perna, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 798,208.00

This project will lead to a better understanding of how microbes respond to
changes in oxygen availability. Some organisms can only tolerate very small
fluctuations in oxygen availability. Others, including many bacteria and fungi
are able to live with or without oxygen, and at all oxygen concentrations in
between. These organisms accomplish this flexibility by shifting how they
generate energy from an oxygen-dependent process called aerobic respiration to
oxygen-independent processes like fermentation. This flexibility allows these
organisms to live in a wide variety of different environments, but it comes at a
cost. The overall goal of this project is to better understand the molecular and
genetic basis of that cost. To date, this has been investigated in a very small
number of organisms, leaving a major gap in our understanding of why some
organisms are better equipped than others to adjust to fluctuating oxygen
availability in natural environments. This project will fill that gap by
comparing the molecular response of a much larger number of bacteria. Results
from this project will have implications for understanding how oxygen
availability impacts interaction of bacteria with plant and animal hosts.
Project results will also have implications for biotechnology applications, like
biofuel generation and other engineered bioprocesses which depend on
manipulation of oxygen availability in industrial settings. Finally, this
project will provide training and educational opportunities at the university,
outreach activities to increase science literacy for K-12 students, and
professional development opportunities for high school and middle school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the evolutionary
impact of fluctuating oxygen availability on facultative-anaerobic bacteria. The
project builds on preliminary growth rate and transcriptome data from a small
number of strains of enterobacteria. Aim 1 will measure fitness impacts of
standing variation in natural populations under rigorously controlled oxygen
availability conditions using large-scale phenotyping. Aim 2 will link genetic
and phenotypic variation using association studies with both genome sequences
and transcriptomes, and population genetic tests for genome-wide footprints of
balancing selection. A subset of implicated loci will be validated using genome
engineering. Aim 3 will test whether regular fluctuations in oxygen availability
in experimentally evolved populations leads to persistence of conditionally
advantageous and/or antagonistically deleterious variation. Results from this
project are expected to significantly advance understanding of the significance
of natural variation in the response to oxygen availability and the molecular
underpinnings of fitness tradeoffs in heterogeneous
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.