* 1818234
* Dynamics and determinants of copy number variation in evolving populations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* David Gresham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,001,177.00

DNA copy number variation underlies differences in many inherited traits and is
involved in diverse processes ranging from drug resistance in pathogens to
domestication of animals. The study aims to characterize the dynamics of copy
number variation in evolving populations and to understand the properties of the
genome that facilitate their generation. Using evolution experiments in the lab,
the project will investigate the dynamics with which copy number variation
arises as populations evolve under selection. The project will test the role of
different processes that generate copy number variation using a panel of
mutants. Completion of this study will provide important new insights into the
generation and selection of copy number variation leading to a more complete
understanding of evolutionary processes with potential applications to microbial
drug resistance and industrial microbiology. To broaden the impact of the
scientific training activities, the study will provide opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students from traditionally under-represented
groups to undertake mentored research in our laboratory. In addition, a freely
available, online textbook integrating instruction in genetics, statistics and
computer programming will be completed as part of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To gain quantitative insights into the role of CNVs in
evolving populations, the project will use a newly developed CNV reporter system
that comprises a constitutively expressed fluorescent protein gene linked to
loci at which CNVs are recurrently selected. Using long term experimental
evolution of budding yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) in nutrient-limited
chemostats, the project will use the CNV reporter to quantify the evolutionary
dynamics of CNVs at three loci that have distinct genomic architectures. To
identify the number of unique CNVs that are generated and selected in each
evolving population, the project will employ a lineage tracking method using
random molecular barcodes and FACS-based isolation of CNV-containing lineages.
Using next generation DNA sequencing of lineages containing CNVs, the project
will define the mechanisms by which CNVs are formed. The project will study the
role of different pathways on CNV formation using strains mutant for DNA
replication and repair components. To test the effect of different sequence
elements the project will alter the genomic architecture of the three loci and
test the effect on CNV dynamics and diversity. Finally, the project will also
test whether transcriptional activation impacts CNV formation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.