* 1818161
* Molecular Mechanism of Master Growth Repressor DELLA Signaling in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Tai-ping Sun, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

The plant growth hormone gibberellin (GA) plays a key role in seed germination,
leaf expansion, stem elongation and flower and fruit development. Altered GA
production or responses in cereal crops, e.g., the dwarf cultivars of wheat and
rice, greatly increased the grain yields during the "Green Revolution" in the
1960s-1970s. These examples illustrate the importance of this hormone in
regulating plant development and in agriculture. GA-promoted plant development
is modulated by DELLA proteins, which are master growth repressors that
integrate multiple cellular pathways in response to environmental cues (such as
light conditions, pathogens, cold and drought stresses). Although DELLA plays
such a central role in regulating diverse plant growth processes, very little is
known about how DELLA controls multiple pathways and how DELLA activity is
dynamically regulated. This project will focus on these two important aspects
and elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved. This research will facilitate
more effective strategies to manipulate plant growth and stress responses for
agricultural improvements since DELLAs are highly conserved in plants. This
research project will also have a broad impact in training young scientists,
including a postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student and four undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Recent studies indicate that DELLAs function as
central regulators of multiple signaling pathways by direct protein-protein
interactions with key transcription factors (TFs). DELLAs do not contain a DNA-
binding domain, and are likely to repress expression of target genes by
sequestering their interacting TFs. DELLAs can also activate transcription by
binding to specific TFs. However, the molecular mechanism of how DELLAs regulate
target chromatin and gene expression remains unclear. Preliminary results from
the principal investigator's laboratory showed that two missense mutations in a
specific subdomain of RGA (an Arabidopsis thaliana DELLA) did not affect
interaction with TFs. Instead, they were impaired in binding histone and an
epigenetic regulator. These results raise an exciting possibility that histone
binding may enhance DELLA association with the target chromatin, and DELLA may
recruit epigenetic regulators to induce chromatin structural changes. This
working model will be tested in Specific Aim 1. The roles of different
subdomains in RGA will be defined by analyzing the effects of additional
missense rga alleles on binding to TFs, histone, and epigenetic regulators using
yeast two-hybrid and pulldown assays, and association with target chromatin by
ChIP-qPCR. DELLA activity needs to be strictly modulated in response to internal
and external cues, and it is known that GA induces DELLA degradation. Recent
studies also indicated that DELLA activity is dynamically modulated by post-
translational modifications. Preliminary data indicate that DELLA
phosphorylation is altered under GA-deficient conditions, although the role of
this modification remains unclear. Specific Aim 2 will identify phosphosites in
RGA by MS analysis, and characterize functions of potential protein kinases for
these modifications by genetic and biochemical analyses. This research project
will shed new light on the molecular mechanism of how DELLAs regulate target
chromatin and gene expression, and elucidate the role of phosphorylation in
fine-tuning DELLA activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.