* 1818905
* 2018 Young Topologists Meeting
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Jonathan Beardsley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This travel grant provides partial support for U.S. participation in the "Young
Topologists Meeting 2018", held in Copenhagen, Denmark by Copenhagen University,
July 9th-13th, 2018. The "Young Topologists Meeting" (YTM) is an annual European
conference focused on the work of graduate students and early career researchers
in topology, that brings in participants from all over the world. At the YTM,
junior topologists present their work to a large international audience, and
also attend mini-courses taught by senior topologists. The conference provides
opportunities for the participants to meet new colleagues and mentors, and to
form research collaborations. Its open and supportive atmosphere encourages
early career mathematicians, including those from underrepresented groups, to
pursue research careers in topology.

The YTM is an annual event, first started in 2007, which traditionally
alternates between Copenhagen, Denmark and Lausanne, Switzerland (except in 2017
when it was held in Stockholm). The conference features parallel sessions of
contributed talks by graduate students and early career researchers, covering a
broad spectrum of topics in topology. In addition to these talks, there will be
mini-courses by two senior topologists, discussing the connections between
algebraic topology and other fields, and focusing on open problems and new
directions. This year Michael Hill (UCLA, US) will give a course on equivariant
stable homotopy theory and Kathryn Mann (Brown University, US) will give a
course on foliated fiber bundles and their applications. The conference web page
is available at http://www.math.ku.dk/english/research/conferences/2018/ytm2018.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.