* 1818708
* Targeted Infusion Project: Innovating the Research Educational Experiences in Johnson C. Smith University's lower/upper level Chemistry Courses
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Tracy Brown-Fox, Johnson C. Smith University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2023
* USD 399,911.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Johnson C. Smith University will develop
and implement polymer chemistry courses and research opportunities into the
curriculum of the Department of Natural Sciences &amp; Mathematics. Exposure to
polymer science and widely used characterization instrumentation will better
prepare undergraduates to pursue employment and graduate studies in an area that
has strong employment and entrepreneurial opportunities, but has low
representation of minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
program is to design an upper level research course centered on the synthesis,
characterization and application of synthetic and natural polymers. Specific
project objectives include 1) the development of a Research in Polymer Science
course that will introduce students to polymer science through student-led,
faculty-advised research projects, 2) establish collaborations with local
polymer-based industries through participation in project programming and 3)
implement a Thermal Analysis Certificate program to increase the employability
of JCSU students as technicians/scientists. Most importantly, this project will
increase the institution's research capacity, thus providing additional
opportunities for students to participate in active research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.