* 1818618
* Targeted Infusion Project: Creation of a for Credit Online Scientific Literacy Pre-Freshmen Summer Bridge Program
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Lycurgus Muldrow, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Claville
* 04/30/2021
* USD 444,988.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Morehouse College will implement a
Targeted Infusion Project entitled: Creation of a for Credit Online scientific
Literacy Pre-freshmen Summer Bridge Program. This highly innovative project will
create a new category of problem-based learning products designed to facilitate
student understanding of the scientific research process by using a virtual
laboratory to simulate a research experience. Anticipated outcomes from this
virtual research experience include increasing students? critical thinking
skills, intrinsic motivation, self-management skills, utilitarian scientific
literacy and intent to persist in STEM careers.

The new category of problem-based learning products that will be created to
infuse into the online Scientific Literacy course will occur by modifying an
interdisciplinary research simulation case study (RSCS) entitled Brain Eating
Amoeba. The RSCS is a faculty mentored experience that requires a student to
solve a research case study by assuming the role of a research scientist. The
RSCS Brain Eating Amoeba will be facilitated by a virtual embodied
conversational agent (ECA) instead of a live faculty mentor. This computer-
generated character is created from the face of a real individual and
demonstrates many of the same properties as human face-to-face conversation,
including the ability to produce and respond to verbal and nonverbal
communication. An embodied conversational agent-research simulation (ECA-RS)
case study will be created by combining ECA technology with the comprehensive,
interdisciplinary Brain Eating Amoeba RSCS. The addition of the Brain Eating
Amoeba ECA-RS to the online course will enable its transition to a for-credit
course that will be offered at no cost during the Pre-Freshmen Scientific
Literacy Summer Bridge Program as an incentive for pre-freshmen to participate.
The successful implementation of this program at Morehouse College will increase
retention and ultimately graduation rates of African American students
graduating with STEM degrees and entering into the national STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.