* 1818774
* Implementation Project: The VESTEM Innovation and Collaboration (VESTEMic) Model
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2024
* Kuldeep Rawat, Elizabeth City State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 11/30/2024
* USD 2,279,515.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthening STEM education and research.
The project at Elizabeth City State University seeks to build on previous
successful efforts to improve retention and academic quality of STEM majors,
specifically in chemistry, computer science, mathematics and physics. The
overall goals of this project are to increase the number of students pursuing
STEM degrees and the quality of preparation for graduate school or entry into
the STEM workforce. The theoretical framework is based upon the Louisiana State
University model, which consist of three tenets; mentoring, research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VESTMic project will address the retention
and persistence of STEM students through early contact, beginning in the last
semester of high school and continuing throughout the sophomore year. Activities
include: the Pre-Viking Boot Camp, Self-Regulated Learning, sophomore bridge
program STEM Innovation Research lab. The project will be advised and evaluated
for effectiveness by internal and external advisory boards, an external
evaluator and education researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.