* 1818485
* Wave-Ice-Ocean Interactions along the Arctic Coast
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* James Thomson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 975,283.00

Arctic coastlines, and in particular the northern coast of Alaska, are eroding
at rates of meters per year. Coastal flooding events are becoming more common,
as reductions in seasonal sea ice create large fetches for autumn storms. This
project will improve understanding of oceanographic factors associated with
coastal erosion and flooding, specifically the trend toward increasing surface
wave activity throughout the western Arctic. The investigators will combine
field observations and a coupled modeling system to quantify wave-ice-ocean
interactions along the Alaska's northern coast. The outcome will be an open-
source, process-based modeling system, including model grids and test cases for
the northern Alaska coastal zone. This will enhance basic research, public
infrastructure planning, climate scenario assessment, and policy-making
capability. Public outreach will include K-12 events and public seminars, and
the project will provide training for a postdoctoral researcher.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding wave-ice-ocean interactions along the Arctic
coast is essential to improving the skill of forecast and climate models in the
region. These interactions continue to be a focal point for basic research
because of the complexities and possible nonlinearities associated with these
processes. The project will connect a rapidly changing climatology with the
physical processes that are fundamental to Arctic coastal ocean, incorporating
natural variability on a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. The
investigators will apply recent progress in process-based modeling of coastal
dynamics, provide detailed field observations along the coast for model
validation and calibration, and generate a 20-year hindcast. The hindcast will
then be used to investigate the climate signals in Arctic wave-ice-ocean
coupling and determine: 1) the significance of coastal protection via scattering
and dissipation of waves by sea ice; 2) the thermodynamic and mechanical effects
of increasing wave energy; and 3) the changes in coastal flooding and
circulation associated with increasing wave momentum. These results will fill a
gap between the recent progress modeling wave-ice interactions in deep-water and
existing programs studying erosion at the shoreline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.