* 1818785
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Power Relations in the Context of Agricultural Production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Kacey Grauer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 11,040.00

Doctoral candidate Kacey Grauer of Northwestern University, along with
colleagues from the United States and Belize, will undertake research to study
how power, status, and ecology intersect to foster community survival during
times of water scarcity and political instability. Successful resource
management is essential for societies to prosper, particularly during turbulent
times. With a long-term perspective, archaeology is well-suited to assess
resource management strategies because what is successful in the short-term may
not be successful over hundreds or thousands of years. Turbulent times do not
affect all people equally, and this project will address how degrees of access
to resources change as political and ecological environments change. Throughout
the course of this research project, both Belizean citizens and Northwestern
University undergraduates will be trained in archaeological methods. The results
of this research will be shared through community events, public talks, academic
articles, and an online platform so that a range of individuals including
scientists, government officials, and the general public will have access to its
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grauer and her research team will investigate how
degrees of commoner access to resources changed in a city that thrived through
times of water scarcity and political instability. The research will take place
at Aventura, a medium-sized ancient Maya city in northernmost Belize. The city
flourished from 750-1100 CE, a time when many large Maya cities were abandoned
due to a combination of drought and political upheaval. Important resources
within the city of Aventura were pocket bajos, small non-draining depressions in
the land that were either used for water management or agriculture in the past.
This research will determine how pocket bajos were used and who had access to
the resources they provided. The project will assess how commoner access to
pocket bajo resources changed as drought and political instability increased
regionally. The research team will conduct systematic excavations of a commoner
household and take soil cores from a pocket bajos in Aventura. They will analyze
artifacts and botanical remains to determine chronology and assess who had
access to these important resources through time, as well as what configurations
of power allowed for successful resource management during ecological and
political instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.