* 1818941
* Collaborative Research: Construction and Analysis of Numerical Methods for Stochastic Inverse Problems with Application to Coastal Hydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Troy Butler, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

As observed in past hurricanes such as Katrina (2005), Ike (2008), Sandy (2012),
and the sequence of hurricanes over the 2017 season, flooding due to storm surge
and rainfall causes tremendous damage to coastal communities. Preparing for
future hurricane impacts requires the ability to predict characteristics of
inland flooding due to surge, most importantly water levels, currents, and
extent of inundation. Accurate predictions of surge require determining critical
inputs to models related to the physical characteristics of coastal regions that
are expensive to obtain and evolve in time. This research project focuses on
quantifying and reducing uncertainties in these critical inputs using novel
mathematical techniques to both extract information from existing data and aid
in the design of future data collection efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project focuses on the construction, analysis, and
implementation of numerical methods for a stochastic inverse problem defined by
the melding of observational data and high-fidelity mathematical models to
perform scientific and engineering inference and prediction for complex physical
systems. This research applies broadly to complex, time-evolving physical
systems depending on high dimensional parameter spaces. Mathematical areas
utilized in this research include computational measure theory, differential
geometry, functional analysis, probability theory, and numerical analysis.
Dissemination of results to the broader scientific community will be
accomplished in part by the development and implementation of computational
algorithms in public domain code that are applied to a state-of-the-art storm
surge model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.