* 1818942
* NeTS: JUNO2: Collaborative Research: STEAM: Secure and Trustworthy Framework for Integrated Energy and Mobility in Smart Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 263,517.00

The rapid evolution of data-driven analytics, Internet of things (IoT) and
cyber-physical systems (CPS) are fueling a growing set of Smart and Connected
Communities (SCC) applications, including for smart transportation and smart
energy. However, the deployment of such technological solutions without proper
security mechanisms makes them susceptible to data integrity and privacy
attacks, as observed in a large number of recent incidents. If not addressed
properly, such attacks will not only cripple SCC operations but also influence
the extent to which customers are willing to share data. This in turn will make
trustworthiness in SCC applications very challenging. To address this, a
synergistic team of researchers from the US and Japan, under the JUNO2 program,
will collaborate on this project, called STEAM (Secure and Trustworthy framework
for integrated Energy and Mobility) to develop a framework to ensure data
privacy, data integrity, and trustworthiness in smart and connected communities.
The collaboration provides the project with a significant amount of automotive
(transportation) data from Japan, and also access to a testbed in Japan.
Although the target applications are smart mobility and smart energy (the choice
is deliberate to exploit the complementary strengths of Japan and US in these
two domains), the proposed techniques and solutions have wide applicability to
other domains, such as smart healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of
the STEAM project lies in its integrated approach to handling security and
trustworthiness in SCC applications. Specifically, the research team will
develop innovative privacy-preserving algorithms and models for anomaly
detection, trust and reputation scoring used by application providers for data
integrity and information assurance. Towards that goal, they will study trade-
offs between security, privacy, trust levels, resources, and performance using
two exemplar applications in smart mobility and smart energy exchange in
communities. Finally, they will design a modular, secure and trustworthy
middleware architecture that implements privacy-preserving algorithms, resource
constraints, and trustworthiness of data sources or content and decision-making
schemes. The project has access to smart meter data from Texas, California, and
Ireland and a large volume of automobile data from Japan. The evaluation plan
includes integration of the project's anomaly detection and trustworthy
decision-making algorithms into a smart vehicle route planning application and a
transactive energy system in a plug-in electric vehicle testbed in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.