* 1818385
* Biophysics of Phase Separation in Protein-RNA Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ashok Deniz, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 712,986.00

The project will develop and use novel tools to study how cellular materials are
organized to facilitate chemical and biological functions that support life,
while integrating broader impacts in teaching, training and outreach. The
biology of humans and other organisms is critically dependent on interactions
and chemistry of a host of cellular molecules. A key mechanism that underlies
these correct interactions in a huge background of other molecules is the
selective organization of molecules into different compartments. Indeed,
cellular compartmentalization by a surrounding membrane has been studied in
detail for decades. In contrast, another type of cellular compartment that lacks
a membrane is common but less well-studied. These membraneless or "droplet"
organelles are spontaneously formed by a phase transition (referred to as
liquid-liquid phase separation, a process similar to oil-in-water droplet
formation). In this project, novel methods to address unfilled gaps in our
understanding of the physical principles underlying this process will be
developed. The work is expected to result in new tools, insights and predictive
principles that are broadly applicable in cell biology. The project will also
integrate broader impacts in teaching, training and outreach, and aim to broaden
participation in science. The work will be used as an excellent training ground
for students in performing interdisciplinary research in a cutting-edge and
timely area of research. The multidisciplinary nature of the research will also
facilitate enhancement of graduate student curriculum, as well as outreach and
communication of the research area to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several membraneless organelles in cells contain
proteins and RNA, both cellular macromolecules that are involved in a wide range
of cellular processes. Understanding how molecular-level structure and
interactions of these molecules link to the biophysics of droplet formation and
membraneless organelles continues to pose challenges. The project will develop
and use a combination of novel single-molecule and ensemble methods to study a
series of important questions in this area. Single-molecule methods can provide
access to critical information that is normally hidden by averaging over a large
number of molecules. A method will be developed to probe size and conformational
distributions in droplets smaller than typically detectable currently, by use of
multicolor single-molecule detection. Another method will be developed to probe
intermolecular interactions and conformational properties using single-molecule
and chemical biology tools. These new tools and existing methods will be used to
probe the determinants of complex phase transitions, non-equilibrium
substructure formation and conformational patterning of protein-RNA droplets.
The project is expected to reveal new insight in these aspects of cellular phase
transitions and their functional consequence&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.