* 1818280
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Cross-activation of ubiquitin and Rub1 to understand their roles as separate protein modifiers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Fushman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 641,586.00

Just as facial recognition must pick out minor differences between seemingly
similar individuals, cells too must discern minute differences between extremely
similar, yet different proteins. At the focus of this research project are two
proteins that are extremely similar in size, shape, and general features, yet
behave quite differently. Both proteins are exceptional in that they attach to
other proteins to alter their fate; in this manner, the influence of these two
"protein modifiers" extends to essentially every aspect of cell biology. Yet, as
similar as these two sibling proteins are, one is promiscuous - and as its name
Ubiquitin implies, is ubiquitous throughout the cell - whereas the other
"Resembles Ubiquitin 1" (Rub1) is shy and relegated. How does this happen? What
are the molecular recognition devices that decide to give Ubiquitin free rein to
roam throughout the cell, yet corral its more introvert sibling, Rub1, to a more
localized pen? Correspondingly, their chores differ too: whereas Ubiquitin
causes countless proteins to be sent to the cellular dump yards, Rub1 actually
encourages its (carefully selected) targets to function properly. In joint
teamwork, the laboratories of Prof Fushman at University of Maryland and Prof
Glickman at Technion-IIT have found that Ubiquitin and Rub1 are not quite as
segregated as generally thought. By molecular trickery some Rub1 appears to
masquerade as ubiquitin and vice versa. Does this reflect inefficiencies in
molecular recognition security checks, or does some fuzziness in their
respective tasks play a positive role in cellular survival? Using a slew of
biophysical, biochemical and molecular cell biology tools at their disposal,
this project aims at understanding the unique properties of Rub1 and Ubiquitin
and how these two proteins signal for distinct cellular outcomes despite their
overwhelming similarities. Designing unique mutations, this project will study
what happens when Rub1 and Ubiquitin swap roles inside cells. How far can one
push molecular trickery before the cellular defenses catch on and either
overcome the trespassers, or as in some pathological cases, apparently give up?
The results of this research project will clarify just how recycling of old
proteins through the use of Ubiquitin modification, helps keep cells young and
healthy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at detailed comparison of
Ubiquitin and Rub1, their physico-chemical properties, the conjugation
targets/landscapes, and their binding partners in order to understand their
unique properties and how these proteins signal for distinct cellular outcomes
despite their overwhelming similarities. The research will test the hypothesis
that although the two proteins are present as separate modifiers across eukarya,
they are not maintained as completely non-interchangeable signals, and the
cellular machinery allows for some cross-activation, primarily of Rub1 into the
Ubiquitin signaling system. The mechanisms, prevalence, and the outcomes of such
cross-activation are in the focus of this project. To achieve these goals, three
Aims have been formulated. The first is to compare structural, biophysical, and
biochemical characteristics of Rub1 and Ubiquitin as monomers and their ability
to form polymers (homogeneous and mixed). By using established enzymatic and
binding assays for each signal, this research will map at the atomic/residue
level the distinguishing properties that define Rub1 and Ubiquitin as separate
signals. The second Aim is to chart the extent of the "Rubylome" (i.e., the
repertoire of Rub1 conjugation targets) and how it compares with the more
extensively studied "Ubiquitinome". Studies of the Rubylome have been
significantly hampered by the inability of current approaches to properly
distinguish Rub1 and Ubiquitin conjugation sites. By using an innovative mass
spectrometry approach, this project will obtain a full picture of unique versus
shared conjugation targets, in particular the extent to which mixed
Rub1-Ubiquitin polymers exist. The third Aim is to reveal to what extent
Ubiquitin and Rub1 are maintained as separate signals in vivo, and what is the
cellular outcome of their cross-activation. By engineering Rub1 and Ubiquitin
variants capable of penetrating each other's signaling pathways, both in cells
and in reconstituted enzymatic cascades, this research will characterize the
resulting perturbations. Information garnered will be used to understand the
unique properties of Rub1 and of Ubiquitin that enable these two proteins to act
as distinct cellular signals. These comprehensive studies and comparison of
Ubiquitin to Rub1 and of the outcomes of their cross-activation will (i)
identify unique cellular conjugation targets and receptors for Rub1, (ii) reveal
the inherent determinants of the Rub1 signal and the Ubiquitin signal, and (iii)
provide a better understanding of what makes ubiquitin Ubiquitin. This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.