* 1818383
* Cytokinesis without an actomyosin ring: studies in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* John Pringle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2022
* USD 900,000.00

This project is about the evolution of cell division and will have broader
significance in several ways. First, it will help to counter the excessive focus
of research in cell and molecular biology on the animals, fungi, and land
plants. There is an enormous amount to be learned about the huge diversity of
other interesting cell types, many of which are also ecologically and/or
economically important. Second, it will provide Chlamydomonas researchers not
only with new biological insights but also with valuable research tools, such as
improved methods for regulated transgene expression and synchronization of cell
division. These tools should be of value not only for basic research but also
for biotechnology, particularly in the biofuels industry, which in turn could
have benefits for fuel supplies and environmental conservation. Third, it will
support the research career of a very talented young scientist and help him to
progress into an independent academic position. Finally, it will help to support
the involvement of undergraduates, high-school students, and public-school
teachers in research, with special emphasis on the teachers because of the large
numbers of students that they themselves then go on to teach. Nearly all
previously hosted students (including many from underrepresented groups) have
gone on in STEM fields, and the teachers have all carried ideas and materials
from the laboratory back to their classrooms. These patterns should continue
under the current project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit the
evolutionary position and experimental advantages of the green alga
Chlamydomonas to elucidate the still-obscure core mechanisms of cytokinesis, the
final step in cell division. The focus is on how cells can form division furrows
in the absence of a "contractile actomyosin ring" (CAR). The CAR is found in
animals and fungi and is composed of actin filaments, type II myosin, and other
proteins. It has long been thought to provide the force for furrow ingression
via an actin-myosin interaction like that in muscle. However, many cells that
normally have a CAR can divide without it, as can the vast number of cell types
(such as Chlamydomonas) that form furrows but have no type II myosin; thus,
there must be another driver(s) of furrowing. To elucidate these mechanisms,
several related aims will be pursued. First, a combination of microscopic,
biochemical, pharmacological, and genetic methods will be used to analyze the
possible roles of the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons. Second, a similar
combination of methods will be used to explore the possibility that the primary
driver of furrow formation is localized growth of the plasma membrane and
extracellular matrix. Third, unbiased and targeted genetic screens will seek
mutants with specific defects in cytokinesis; characterization of these mutants
should help to reveal the underlying mechanisms that drive furrow formation.
These studies should help to elucidate both the shared mechanisms underlying the
seemingly diverse modes of cytokinesis in modern organisms and the evolution of
these modern mechanisms from those of ancestral cells. Several lines of evidence
suggest that the ancestral and still-core mechanism of cytokinesis is the
localized deposition of new cell membrane and extracellular matrix, and that the
actin and microtubule cytoskeletons play auxiliary roles in this process.
Chlamydomonas is an attractive system in which to investigate these issues. It
is evolutionarily distant from the organisms on which cytokinesis studies have
previously focused; divides by furrow formation but does not have a type II
myosin; has one conventional actin, one unconventional actin, and a well
developed microtubule cytoskeleton; displays an enrichment of both actin and
microtubules around the cleavage furrow; and has many genetic tools already
available. Its mechanisms of cytokinesis have hardly been studied, and
elucidating them should contribute to a needed paradigm shift in the cytokinesis
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.