* 1818758
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Visualization Skills and Engineering Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 10/16/2017,08/31/2021
* Sheryl Sorby, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 372,185.00

Engineers are known problem-solvers and the engineer of the future will be
tasked with solving traditional problems as well as the ill-defined
interdisciplinary problems faced by our society. Engineers will need to be able
to think holistically about a myriad of factors and visualize a solution that
solves the technical problem while satisfying cultural, environmental, societal,
and economic constraints. Spatial visualization skills have been linked to
success in engineering and mathematics as well as to creativity and technical
innovation. Unfortunately, of all of the cognitive processes identified through
previous research, spatial skills exhibit the most robust gender differences,
favoring males. Improving spatial skills has been shown to be effective in
improving the success of engineering students, particularly
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducting a large-scale study
involving undergraduate engineering students in order to answer research
questions regarding the role that spatial visualization plays in solving two
types of engineering problems. Convergent problems are typically those that have
a unique solution that is based on prior theories. Divergent problems have
multiple possible solutions. Since engineers are asked to solve both types of
problems, it is important to know how spatial visualization skills impact how
students attempt to solve these problems and the solutions that are ultimately
obtained. The project is employing a mixed methods approach that includes
electroencephalograms (EEGs) as a brain imaging technique to answer questions
about the links between spatial visualization and engineering problem solving.
The results from this research will close a gap in what is currently known about
brain function, spatial visualization and engineering problem solving. The
results could be used to improve the success of students in undergraduate
engineering degree programs and to ensure the full participation of women in the
engineering workforce. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.