* 1818302
* SusChEM: Direct Bandgap Ge:C on Silicon for Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Mark Wistey, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 243,170.00

Non-technical Description: This SusChEM project explores a new approach to grow
Group IV materials with high electron-photon conversion efficiency and potential
for future solid state lasers and compact optoelectronics compatible with
silicon. These materials could enable faster data connections between computer
chips while consuming less energy. The approach is to add a small amount of
carbon to germanium to make a new alloy semiconductor, Ge:C, with strong
optoelectronic properties, making it a potential alternative for laser materials
besides the conventional III-V materials. A new synthesis and growth technique
eliminates the major sources of defects in the grown material. Ge:C-based
material replaces toxic and scarce elements such as arsenic and indium in
semiconductor lasers. The research project motivates first-year undergraduate
students in engineering and physics, and encourages undergraduate students to
pursue graduate studies. Outreach activities include involving women in science
and underrepresented minority high-school students in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goal of this project is to
demonstrate Ge:C-based alloy semiconductors with a direct bandgap and high
optical gain. The films are grown by molecular beam epitaxy using
tetra(germyl)methane (4GeMe) as a precursor, which is synthesized in electronic
grade by the team. The specific tasks are: (1) Experimental verification of band
anticrossing in Ge:C and related alloys; (2) ab-initio simulations of band
structure and desirable compositions for Ge:C materials; (3) Growth of highly
crystalline Ge:C with minimal interstitials or other unwanted defects; and (4)
Growth with pseudo/surfactants for substitutional C, and demonstrating direct
bandgap emission. The advantage of the 4GeMe precursor is that it pre-bonds each
C atom to four Ge atoms, preventing undesirable carbon-carbon bonds at the
substrate surface. By eliminating these defects, this study provides direct
experimental demonstration on highly mismatched alloys with small bandgaps and
enables the predictive modeling to design related highly mismatched alloys with
high optical gain and suppressed Auger recombination. This experiment and theory
combined project closes the knowledge gap between the thin film growth and
modeling of the Ge:C thin film systems, and provides a chemical route to grow
highly crystalline Ge:C with direct bandgap and high optical gain.