* 1818682
* Data Driven, Engagement Based, Adaptive Learning, Growth Mindset Pedagogy Informed Course Redesign with Early Research Experiences for STEM Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Eric Mintz, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,929.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate program
provides support to design, implement, study and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the quality of
their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education and research. This project at Clark Atlanta
University provides a strategic approach to redesigning foundational STEM
courses to increase student success. The project is guided and informed by an
on-going evaluation, as well as by an internal advisory
committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to improve
students' mastery and use of foundational STEM concepts, improve student
learning outcomes, and increase the number of students matriculating in graduate
programs after graduation. Evidence-based activities are designed to improve
retention, persistence, and graduation rates of STEM majors. The strategies
employed are: adaptive learning technologies and supplemental instruction;
workshops for students on self-efficacy and growth mindset pedagogy; faculty
development workshops on mentoring undergraduate students and teaching
differently, self-efficacy and growth mindset pedagogy; and early research
experiences for students. School of Education faculty will assess and study
which of these interventions or combinations thereof are most
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.