* 1818178
* RUI:  Methanogenesis from quaternary amines
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Xin Wang, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 343,030.00

This project will investigate mechanisms by which methane-producing
microorganisms can utilize an important and understudied class of compounds to
produce methane. Methane, the key component of natural gas, plays an important
role in global carbon cycling and atmospheric processes. Some methane-producing
microbes (methanogens) have recently been shown to convert a group of compounds
called quaternary amines (QAs) to methane. QAs are abundant compounds in many
different environments, and methanogenesis in the human gut has been linked to
the development of heart disease. Current knowledge of how methanogens can
convert QAs to methane and how prevalent this process is in the environment is
distinctly lacking. This gap in knowledge leads to potential inaccuracies in
computer-generated models predicting the role of methanogenesis on Earth's
atmosphere. This research project will address this gap in knowledge by 1)
investigating the physiological mechanisms of methanogenesis via QAs and 2)
identifying and quantifying the microorganisms responsible for this process in
different environments. This research will also benefit students at the Miami
University Hamilton, part of a community-based division of Miami University that
serves students from first-generation, lower socioeconomic status, and under-
represented minority groups. These students will contribute to the research
project through classroom activities and undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quaternary amines (QAs) are abundant natural
compounds that have recently emerged as important substrates for microbes in
anoxic environments, including methanogens. The breakdown of QAs has direct
implications for diverse processes from global biogeochemical cycling to
atherosclerosis in humans. Understanding of the mechanisms of anaerobic
catabolism of QAs by methanogenic archaea, namely QA demethylation, is lacking.
Early data suggest that pyrrolysine-lacking (non-pyl) methyltransferases from
the COG5598 protein family are involved in QA-dependent methanogenesis along
with cognate corrinoid binding proteins, but these pathways have not been
elucidated. Determining the function of multiple enzymes from this family will
facilitate better identification of the role of members of COG5598 in methane
production. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that non-pyl COG5598
enzymes are responsible for QA demethylation and initiation of QA-dependent
methanogenesis as part of a three-component corrinoid-dependent methyl transfer
pathway, and that organisms encoding these pathways can be identified within the
environment. In this work the investigators will: 1) identify pathways for QA-
dependent methanogenesis from glycine betaine and tetramethylammonium using
comparative proteomics and biochemistry techniques, and 2) determine the
identities and relative abundance of predicted QA-utilizing methanogens in
different environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.