* 1818797
* Travel Grant for International Workshop on Characterization of Porous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Alexander Neimark, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

Geological coal and shale deposits, the cell membrane, and concrete are but a
few examples of porous materials. The properties of porous materials are
completely different from those of non-porous solids, as the pores give both
structure and function. For example, chemical mixtures flowing through a porous
solid may begin to separate, as one component of the mixture may act more
strongly with the surface of the pore. This principle is the basis for the use
of porous materials as mass separating agents, and the application of nearly
unlimited materials as adsorbents and membranes. Today a number of new
applications for porous materials are emerging, including as electrodes in the
electrical energy storage systems, batteries, supercapacitors, and advanced
membranes for water desalinization that have molecular-level specificity for
solutes. Advanced characterization techniques will continue to catalyze these
new developments, as these techniques increase our understanding of molecular
interactions with pores, which is a necessary aspect of creating new paradigms
for material design for chemical and biological separations.

This award supports participation of graduate students, post-doctoral research
associates, and untenured junior faculty, for travel to the 8th International
Workshop on Characterization of Porous Materials in Delray Reach Florida, USA,
on May 6-9, 2018. In this interdisciplinary workshop, the latest developments
relevant to the characterization of porous materials will be presented by
participants from academia, government, and industry. Multiscale
characterization and modeling is the theme of the meeting, as indicated by the
sub-title: "From Angstroms to Millimeters". As this area undergoes a
Renaissance, applying ever more complex characterization techniques to new
problems, the advanced characterization is enabling the design of new materials
with molecular-level specificity combined with process-level optimization. These
advances will help to commercialize new materials to help reduce the parasitic
energy losses from chemical separations in the production of commodity
chemicals, processes which account for over 10% of the worlds energy
consumption. This travel grant will support up to 15 participations from US
Universities to travel to this conference, and proactively position young
investigators to lead research in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.