* 1818788
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Charting a Path to Trans-disciplinary Collaborative Design
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Mujde Erten-Unal, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 348,057.00

Hampton University is conducting a design-based research project in
collaboration with Old Dominion University to document the effectiveness of an
interdisciplinary collaborative program in Adaptation to Sea Level Rise.
Investigators will implement cycles of design, enactment, analysis, and redesign
of pedagogic methods in an existing interdisciplinary hybrid set of courses
devoted to studying adaptation to sea level rise for urban neighborhoods in
Norfolk. Virginia. The existing course set combines lecture, community
engagement, and an active design studio. The course set is taught under the
aegis of an established cross-university, interdisciplinary entity, the Coastal
Community Design Collaborative. The overarching objective of the project is to
model effective trans-disciplinary collaborative research and design in
teaching, learning, and productivity. The project is expected to provide a path
to emerging fields requiring the synchronistic inputs from multiple disciplines
while strengthening a community of practice around an emerging field to
stimulate interest and success of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses two research questions: (1)
What pedagogic tools, curricular support, and teaching strategies can foster
trans-disciplinary collaboration among students from engineering, architecture,
and science programs? Researchers will evaluate impacts on students' short- and
long-term career interests. (2) What shifts in focus and methods are required
for faculty to effectively lead a trans-disciplinary design studio? Research
data will include recorded lectures, testing, focused interviews with subject-
matter experts, and evaluation of electronic discussion board material. Data
will be collected in an authentic setting, and the research methodology will
employ formative evaluation to produce research findings. The project can
potentially increase the number of underrepresented STEM students with trans-
disciplinary experience to undertake the challenges of engineering solutions to
coastal impacts of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.