* 1818675
* RAPID: Resilience Assessment for Communications right after Emergencies/Disasters (RACE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Sandra Cruz-Pol, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 128,856.00

This project aims to perform critical radio frequency measurements in Puerto
Rico using fast deployable wireless technologies. The project will study how the
system is affected by weather phenomena, atmospheric propagation, complex-
terrain topography, altitude, and user knowledge. Hurricanes Irma and Maria
severely damaged the island's telecommunication infrastructure. This has
significantly affected the quality of life in Puerto Rico and delayed the
recovery effort. Backup wireless technologies have been deployed, and the
project aims to study the system performance. In addition, the team will also
engage the community in outreach activities while traveling to various locations
in Puerto Rico to conduct measurements. They will create basic learning modules
on radio frequency LTE signal, Software Defined Radios, etc., and give open
seminars to general public in the impacted areas. This also provides a unique
opportunity to collect feedbacks from audience regarding their utilization of
the telecommunication systems during recovery
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project team will assess the
performance of emergency backup wireless base stations installed on balloons
floating over Puerto Rico temporarily to help the restoration of wireless
network. The research team including two graduate students and eight
undergraduate students will travel to perform measurements and collect data from
several locations in Puerto Rico. The data will be analyzed and a wave
propagation model will be constructed to study signal characteristics traveling
through stratosphere, which is different from terrestrial wireless communication
channel. The result will be very useful for the future development and
deployment of resilient telecommunication infrastructure.