* 1818526
* CAREER: Integrated Online Coordinated Routing and Decentralized Control for Connected Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2017,07/31/2023
* Lili Du, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 488,988.00

Traffic congestion jeopardizes the function of urban transportation systems and
has a growing negative effect on the health of urban economies. It also
increases air pollution with numerous negative health impacts on our citizenry.
A promising solution to alleviating traffic congestion is to establish
coordinated driving mechanisms. This is enabled by recent connected or even
autonomous vehicle technologies and advanced onboard computing facilities.
However, engineers who design such mechanisms are still lacking scientific
knowledge and effective tools that can be proven as efficient and reliable for
use by the general public. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) program award is to develop innovative approaches to the coordination
of connected vehicle drivers- online route choices. This will be done by
exploiting emerging information and computing technologies equipped in connected
transportation infrastructure. This approache will improve transportation system
mobility, safety, and environmental sustainability without sacrificing the
interests of the individual vehicles. This research will deepen our
understanding of the competition among vehicles on limited traffic resources. It
should also reveal the impacts of the decisions of individual vehicles on
traffic congestion, and offer a new paradigm of real-time traffic
control.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives of this CAREER
project are: (a) developing coordinated mechanisms for drivers - route choices
to mitigate over-competition; (b) engineering collective effects of drivers -
decisions to improve system-level performance; and (c) implementing the
coordinated routing mechanisms and decentralized traffic control in an online
environment. If successful, this project will lead to: (1) game-theory based
modeling, analysis, and design techniques for coordinated routing mechanisms;
(2) innovative methods for integrating decentralized control into individual
routing decisions via intentional information perturbation techniques; and (3)
better understanding of convergence, efficiency and robustness of distributed
algorithms for decentralized congestion control. The reseach approaches include:
(a) using game theory, optimization, and traffic dynamics to design and analyze
coordination mechanisms; (b) using equilibrium analysis, price of anarchy,
bounded rationality, and decentralized control for the study of collective
effects; and (c) developing distributed algorithms for implementation and
carrying out a theoretical analysis of these algorithms. This project will
involve underrepresented K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate college
students in numerous research tasks, and disseminate research findings through
multiple channels, such as national/international workshops and conferences, as
well as journal publications.