* 1818550
* Subsurface Structure and Flow Regime for Rocky Mountain Hillslopes with Different Geologies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Thijs Keleners, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 568,356.00

Snowmelt from mountainous regions in the western US is a vital source of water
for agriculture, industry, cities, and natural ecosystems in the dry inter-
mountain basins. The transformation of snowmelt into streamflow in mountainous
regions is influenced by the interplay between climate, vegetation, and geology.
The role of the subsurface in transporting water from the point of infiltration
to the stream is currently poorly understood. This study uses state-of-the-art
instruments to image the subsurface of six Rocky Mountain hillslopes with
different geologies. In addition, computer simulation models are used to
calculate subsurface water flow and storage dynamics and to predict streamflow.
An important goal is to find predictable relationships between geology and flow
regime. The resulting insights are critical for understanding the impact of
current and future climate and land use scenarios on the magnitude and timing of
streamflow. Such insights will facilitate better land and water management by
agencies, companies, and individuals. Two graduate students and three
undergraduate students will gain experience with a broad range of geological and
hydrological measurement and computer simulation techniques as part of the
project. In addition, a traveling museum exhibit will be constructed in
collaboration with the University of Wyoming Geological museum to engage
residents and visitors of the Rocky Mountain region in geological and
hydrological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study combines state-of-the-art
geophysical and hydrological measurement and modeling techniques to examine
subsurface water flow and storage in hillslopes with three different geologies.
The following research questions will be answered: Q1. How different or similar
are the weathering zones of the six Rocky Mountain hillslopes selected for this
study that represent old granitic surfaces, young volcanic surfaces, and recent
glacial deposits over Precambrian rock?, Q2. To what level of detail can
subsurface hydraulic properties and flow regimes be determined for the six Rocky
Mountain hillslopes?, and Q3. What is the impact of hillslope subsurface model
complexity on streamflow and water balance predictions at the watershed scale?
Three of the hillslopes are in Wyoming and are currently being measured by the
two investigators. The other three hillslopes are proposed in Critical Zone
Observatories in Idaho (2) and New Mexico (1). The six hillslopes are paired so
that each of the three geologies are represented by two hillslopes. Measurements
will consist of shallow seismic refraction to determine subsurface porosity
structure, time-lapse electrical resistivity tomography to determine vadose zone
water dynamics, and hydrological monitoring to assess water inputs and hillslope
hydrologic response. Numerical models will be combined with parameter estimation
algorithms to estimate subsurface hydraulic parameters. Integrated watershed
modeling will be used to investigate the effect of hillslope model complexity on
streamflow and water balance predictions. The study focusses on subsurface
hydrological processes and streamflow generation but also contributes to a
better understanding of hillslope weathering processes and hillslope ecological
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.