* 1818781
* SusChEM: Small-Molecule Enantiopurity Measurement in Living Cells as a Method to Accelerate Biocatalyst Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 11/17/2017,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Heemstra, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 258,857.00

The Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Chemistry Division of the
National Science Foundation funds this project. Professor Jennifer Heemstra of
the University of Utah is developing methods to rapidly assay reaction
conditions for the selective production of small molecules. This research aids
in the use of enzymes to catalyze key steps in the synthesis of therapeutics and
other high value chemicals. The reactions currently used to generate these
products often require metal-containing catalysts and organic solvents. The
disposal of both catalyst and solvent pose an environmental hazard. In contrast,
enzyme catalysts are environmentally benign, as the enzymes themselves are non-
toxic, and they are used in water rather than organic solvents. The broader
impacts of this research are demonstrated in multiple ways. This research
provides training to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. Also
included is an outreach activity aimed at improving the retention of college
women in STEM disciplines. The research has potential to benefit society by
facilitating the discovery of new, environmentally benign methods for the
synthesis of high-value chemicals such as small-molecule
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objectives of this proposal
are to explore methods to rapidly generate DNA biosensors for small-molecule
targets of interest and to deploy these sensors in living bacterial cells.
Methods are developed to enable the selection of DNA biosensors for an
enzymatically-produced small molecule that is a pharmaceutical intermediate. The
proposed research explores the ability of fluorescent DNA biosensors to be
transfected into bacterial cells and used to quantify the intracellular
concentration of a target analyte.