* 1818090
* NMR-Based Approaches for Investigating Protein-Surface Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Nicholas Fitzkee, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 651,855.00

The overall goal of this project is to determine the mechanism for how proteins
interact with nanoparticle surfaces. Protein-surface interactions are a
significant consideration in many scientific fields, from engineering protein-
functionalized nanoparticles (NPs) to preventing the attachment of marine
organisms to ship hulls. Understanding the mechanism of interaction may lead to
better strategies for controlling protein-surface interactions. The project will
focus specifically on gold nanoparticles. A better understanding of protein-gold
nanoparticle interactions could lead to more sensitive ways to detect molecules
in the environment. The project is expected to produce two important results.
First, it will lead to better predictive models for understanding why proteins
interact with gold nanoparticles. Second, it will reveal the structural
characteristics of proteins once they bind. In addition, the project supports a
summer training camp for undergraduate researchers in the southeast. This
program, called Biochemistry Boot Camp, trains students how to use computational
tools for interpreting protein structure and function. These tools are used not
only in this research project, but many others as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study the forces involved in
protein adsorption using novel NMR-based approaches for monitoring protein
interactions with gold nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are useful for studying
protein-surface interactions because of their extremely high surface to volume
ratio. This project will characterize the biophysical forces involved in
multiple protein adsorption to gold nanoparticle surfaces, using novel
approaches to monitor adsorption in real time. Specifically, it will identify
the structural properties that control adsorption kinetics and thermodynamics to
gold nanoparticles. The project will also investigate the structure of several
small model proteins after they have attached to the gold nanoparticle surface.
Thus, this work addresses one of the key challenges in the field of
nanotechnology while laying the groundwork for new investigations into
generalized protein-surface interactions. In addition, the project is expected
to result in new NMR-based tools for studying proteins on other types of
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Cellular and Molecular Biosciences and the
OIA/EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.