* 1818197
* Effects of retrotransposon activity on asymmetric cell division
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* M. Joan Curcio, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 647,064.00

Retrotransposons are discrete segments of DNA (of viral origin) that contain all
of the genetic information necessary to generate a copy of themselves and insert
that copy back into the host cell DNA. The ability of retrotransposons to
increase their copy number has ensured their success as invaders of host cell
DNA in organisms from yeast to primates. The potentially mutagenic activity of
retrotransposons is tightly suppressed in most cells, except those that divide
asymmetrically, including stem cells and cells of the single-cell organism,
brewer's yeast. Asymmetric cell division produces two cells with different
potential, one with the capacity for self-renewal and the other with the
capacity to perform specialized functions. A key requirement for asymmetric cell
division is that each of these cells inherit a specific centrosome. The
centrosomes comprise two intracellular bodies onto which chromosomes are
anchored. Migration of the centrosomes, each with their complement of
chromosomes, to opposite ends of a dividing cell ensures that chromosomes are
equally distributed between the two cell products of cell division. The research
outlined in this project stems from the investigagtor's discovery that stress-
triggered retrotransposon activity in brewer's yeast interferes with the typical
pattern of centrosome inheritance. The project will determine how the activity
of retrotransposons influences the inheritance of a specific centrosome by the
self-renewing cell and differentiated cell, and explores the consequences of
disrupting the normal pattern of centrosome inheritance on chromosome
segregation, cell division and the production of two cells with different
potential. This research aims to explain how events occurring in single cells
can influence the reproductive capacity and lifespan of the entire populations.
The Broader Impact activities will include extensive laboratory-based training
for a postdoctoral fellow, a graduate student, a high school student and also an
undergraduate student to participate in the project each summer, with priority
given to underrepresented minorities from institutions with limited research
opportunities. The undergraduate research opportunity will focus on building
self-identification as a research scientist, regardless of gender or racial
representation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many types of asymmetrically
dividing cells, including embryonic and germline stem cells, neural progenitors
and Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells have a canonical pattern of centrosome or
spindle pole body (SPB) inheritance that intrinsically regulates the orientation
of the mitotic spindle, chromosome segregation and the capacity of cells to
self-renew. Remarkably, these same asymmetrically dividing cell types are also
permissive for the activity of retrotransposons, although host defense
mechanisms usually hold retrotransposons in check to maintain the integrity of
asymmetric cell division. It is not known how unleashing retrotransposon
activity compromises asymmetric cell division. While examining the inherent
asymmetry of nucleocapsid assembly sites of the Ty1 retrotransposon in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the principal investigator's laboratory discovered
that derepressing Ty1 activity substantially perturbs the canonical pattern of
SPB inheritance. The goal of this project is to understand how Ty1
retrotransposon activity influences SPB inheritance and how the resulting
alterations in SPB inheritance affect spindle orientation, chromosome
segregation and the self-renewing potential of yeast cells. Protein-protein
interaction assays will be used to investigate the mechanism of cross-talk
between Ty1 nucleocapsid components and SPB components, particularly the coiled-
coil SPB assembly protein, Spc42. Moreover, genetic and environmental
manipulation of Ty1 retrotransposon activity and quantitative fluorescence
microscopy-based assays of single cells will probe potential correlations
between post-transcriptional steps in retrotransposition and (a) the SPB
inheritance pattern, (b) the orientation of the mitotic spindle, (c) chromosome
transmission fidelity, and (d) the replicative potential of mother and daughter
cells. This research addresses a critical question that has not been addressed
in the scientific literature previously: can sites of retrotransposon
nucleocapsid assembly sequester host proteins with essential roles in SPB
assembly to alter spindle orientation and the maintenance of differential cell
fates by asymmetric cell division? Research to address this question will
provide new insights into the relationship between retrotransposon activity and
cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.