* 1818709
* Broadening Participation Research: Applying Innovative Culturally Responsive Pedagogy for African American Middle School Teachers and Students to Broaden the STEM Pipeline
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Max Fontus, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Prairie View A&amp;M University and the Alief Independent School District are
examining ways to recruit and retain underrepresented minority STEM teachers.
Investigators will combine Community of Practice (COP) and Cultural
Responsiveness (CR) theory into a framework to investigate the effectiveness of
an innovation to better prepare students seeking to pursue careers as STEM
teachers. They will use a mixed-methods research design to answer five research
questions that a) bridge the COP/CR training with teacher efficacy, b) connect
teacher competency with their mastery of the Texas College and Career Readiness
standards, c) track how teachers' mastery of the Texas College and Career
Readiness standards impact the performance of the students taught by the
participants, d) capture the number of students transitioning to high school who
select the STEM endorsement tract, and e) assess the effectiveness of the
intervention. The investigators will capture educators' confidence and ability
to effectively teach and interact with middle schools via established self-
report scales. Thus, the research will illuminate how these educators can affect
student performance and their scores on the state's standardized tests. The
underlying assumption is that teachers who undergo COP/CR training will
positively influence students to pursue careers as STEM teachers and to remain
in those careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Community of Practice and Cultural
Responsiveness practices adhere to the Framework for 21st Century Learning
advocated by the Partnership for 21st Century Learning. Approximately ten
teachers will be recruited and trained, and five seventh grade science and five
eighth math teachers will be placed in Alief ISD middle schools at the end of
the project period. The study will address five research questions to achieve
this outcome: (1) How does the infusion and training of COP/CR practices impact
the efficacy of STEM teachers who teach minority students? A pre- and post-test
design will be used to compare scores from the three subscales of the Teacher's
Sense of Efficacy Scale. (2) To what degree do teachers who receive COP/CR
training report enhanced knowledge of appropriate STEM practices as determined
by the Texas Education Agency's College and Career Readiness standards?
Descriptive measures from teachers' self-report and lesson plans will provide
indicators of the skills needed to motivate future teachers. (3) What are the
math and science performances of students who are taught by the COP/CR training
teachers? A causal-comparative design where classrooms with COP/CP teachers will
be compared to classrooms taught by non-COP/CR trained teachers. Investigators
also will use t-tests to test the difference in SAAR mathematics and science
scores. (4) To what degree are students of the COP/CR trained teachers following
a STEM endorsement path to enrolling in a STEM degree program? Investigators
will apply a Pearson's Chi-square test of independence to analyze the data. (5)
How has the initiative advanced the minimum Texas STEM benchmarks for
recruitment and retention of qualified STEM teachers and academic success in
STEM-related subjects? Interview data from school administrators will be
collected and analyzed. The project is expected to produce evidence about an
effective intervention to increase the number of qualified underrepresented STEM
teachers that could be replicated in other settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.