* 1818012
* Reconstructing the Biology of Ancestral Vertebrate Genomes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Jeramiah Smith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

This project will reveal the deep evolutionary history of vertebrate genomes,
specifically a phenomenon known as programmed genome rearrangement (PGR) that
removes a substantial portion of DNA from most cell types in the animal body
during early embryonic development. The animals whose genomes will be analyzed
include simple vertebrates such as sea lamprey, elephant shark and little skate.
Also important is the impact that this research will have on the two lamprey
species that are of critical cultural importance to the indigenous people that
inhabit their native ranges (the Pacific lamprey and pouched lamprey), and
biocontrol of invasive sea lamprey. Undergraduate, graduate and professional
training in bioinformatics will be provided together with outreach to students
and underrepresented groups in tribal communities of the Pacific Northwest and
New Zealand and in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies will leverage several analytical approaches that were recently
developed for lamprey, in order to more accurately reconstruct the ancestry and
evolution of vertebrate genome biology. First, genome assemblies will be
generated for several taxa that strategically fill sampling gaps in the tree of
life (sharks, hagfish and lampreys). Chromosome-scale scaffolding of these
assemblies will employ a single-sperm sequencing approach to develop dense
linkage maps for species that are not amenable to laboratory culture. The
physical structure and gene content of the vertebrate ancestor and the ancestors
of all major vertebrate lineages will be reconstructed. Second, comparative
sequencing of DNA from germline and somatic tissues will shed light on the
origin(s) of programmed genome rearrangement and the evolution of sequences that
are targeted for elimination. Third, comparative embryological methods and
bisulfite sequencing will be used to characterize patterns of DNA methylation
and test the hypothesis that programmed genome rearrangement is mechanistically
tied to fundamental silencing events that occur during the earliest stages of
vertebrate development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.