* 1818906
* Driving forces in aqueous two-phase systems for vaccine development
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Caryn Heldt, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2022
* USD 359,990.00

Worldwide, there is a need for less expensive vaccines. To achieve better
vaccine coverage, vaccine production processes need to be low-cost and allow for
continuous operation, which is not possible with current vaccine production
technology. A primary objective of this project will be to explore aqueous two-
phase systems (ATPSs) to fulfill the need for new viral particle purification
processes that could reduce the cost of vaccines and be run as a continuous
operation. ATPS could also reduce the development time for a new vaccine,
allowing for pandemic vaccines to come to market sooner. In addition to
vaccines, a better understanding of ATPS could aid in future cell separations
for advanced cell therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significant increase in
the manufacturing of vaccines worldwide has created an opportunity to re-think
current vaccine manufacturing methods. Currently, ATPS is not used industrially
due to the large number of variables that need to be determined during the short
development timelines that are imposed on vaccine process development teams. The
long-term goal of this project is to determine the dominant forces in ATPS for
the separation of viral particles to aid industrial adoption. Preliminary work
has indicated that hydrophobicity is the dominant force in viral particle
separation in a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-citrate ATPS. The expected outcome is
to reduce the variables tested in the development of viral particle purification
processes and provide a framework to implement ATPS separations. Affinity ATPS
will be used to maintain a constant driving force for the virus to partition to
the PEG-rich phase. With this constant driving force established, the PEG
molecular weight will be changed and the viral separation will be compared to
the constant affinity driving force. Osmolytes will be added to the PEG-citrate
ATPS to increase the hydrophobicity and to separate the hydrophobicity driving
force from the increase in surface tension that restricts virus recovery. All of
the work will be integrated by providing a framework using the Design of
Experiments (DOE) approach to isolate the hydrophobic effect of viral ATPS.
Results of the project will provide a detailed understanding of the driving
forces in ATPS that will allow easier implementation of this method for viral
particle manufacturing. Through this approach the PI will systematically
determine the key variables that control viral particle separations. An
important goal is to determine the effect of hydrophobicity on the separation of
viruses and to determine the magnitude of the hydrophobic force on the ATPS
separation. In terms of the broader impacts, the fundamental knowledge gained
from this work may guide the design of low-cost separation and manufacturing
processes that will increase access to vaccines worldwide. Importantly, the
experimental design framework can be applied to other large biomolecules such as
those employed in viral gene therapies and cell therapies. Outreach to high
school students will be conducted through Summer Youth Programs (SYP). The SYP
activity will explore the separation of gold nanoparticles in ATPS and teach
students about bioprocessing, model systems, and the need for control in
ATPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.