* 1818695
* Catalyst Award: Integration of Biotechnology and Cyberinstruction in the Biological Sciences at Fort Valley State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Seema Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
supports the development, implementation, and study of evidence-based innovative
models and approaches for improving the preparation and success of HBCU
undergraduate students so that they may pursue STEM graduate programs and/or
careers. Through this one-year project, Fort Valley State University seeks to
redesign/upgrade its curricula to integrate biotechnology, genomics and cyber-
infrastructure [Anywhere, Anytime Learning]. The proposed project will
invigorate existing courses by integrating biotechnology applications into the
curriculum and pedagogical practices. Cyberinfrastructure and learning will also
be infused in laboratory activities, in which bioinformatics tools are
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to redesign and integrate
biotechnology and cyberinfrastructure components into core courses, specifically
Biotechniques, Cell &amp; Molecular Biology and Genetics. This will provide
students with an in-depth understanding of the cycle of scientific problem
solving, the nature of iterative experimental design and the role of an adaptive
approach that will uniquely prepare them for graduate study or the biotechnology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.