* 1818298
* Regulation of dual nitrogenases in response to nitrogen stress in a cyanobacterium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Teresa Thiel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2022
* USD 325,000.00

Cyanobacteria are ancient microorganisms that were among the first organisms to
produce oxygen on earth. Today, cyanobacteria are important organisms in the
environment. They get their energy from sunlight, their carbon from carbon
dioxide in the air, and their nitrogen from the nitrogen gas in the air. They
are important not only as free-living organisms, but also as partners in many
symbiotic associations with plants and fungi. The cyanobacterium Anabaena can
use the energy from sunlight to convert nitrogen gas in the air to ammonia. This
process is called nitrogen fixation. In contrast, chemical production of
fertilizer requires large amounts of fossil fuels and produces greenhouse gases.
The project will investigate the regulation of nitrogen fixation in Anabaena,
one of the best characterized cyanobacteria in terms of growth, physiology and
genetics. A second key objective of this project is to involve, educate, and
support diverse students as members of the research team. This project will
include high school students, especially from underserved school districts,
undergraduates and graduate students, working together as active participants in
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anabaena is unique in model cyanobacterial
systems in that it has two homologous nitrogenase systems. One functions only in
specialized anaerobic cells called heterocysts under aerobic growth condition,
while the other functions only in anaerobically-grown vegetative cells. This
research will determine the mechanisms that control expression of these
complementary nitrogenases, focusing on global mechanisms that respond to
nitrogen stress. This project will characterize the two primary activator
proteins, CnfR1 and CnfR2, which lead to differential expression of the two
nitrogenase gene clusters in heterocysts or vegetative cells. Further, the
research will determine, at a system-wide level, the role of known global stress
factors and transcription factors, in regulation of the two nitrogenase systems.
Taking a synthetic biology approach, nitrogenase genes from Anabaena will be
expressed in a strain that lacks this capability, as part of the longer term
goal of producing a "nitroplast", a hypothetical cyanobacterial-like organelle
in a plant cell that could fix nitrogen for the plant. The goal of moving
nitrogenase genes to plants is to reduce reliance on nitrogen-containing
fertilizers for crop production. These objectives will be achieved by combining
traditional genetic techniques with synthetic biology
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.