* 1818297
* Dissecting the Sphingolipid Metabolic and Regulatory Network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Teresa Dunn, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Sphingolipids are the most abundant lipid component of the membrane that
surrounds plant cells. This membrane separates the plant cell from the
surrounding environment. Sphingolipid composition is important for the plant's
ability to survive variable growth conditions, such as drought and freezing, and
to fight infection from pathogenic fungi and bacteria. Plant cells vary the
amount of sphingolipid synthesized depending on environmental conditions. This
project examines how plants make the required amount of sphingolipid for optimal
growth. If there is too little sphingolipid, the plant's cells will not be able
to grow and the presence of excess sphingolipid can trigger cell death. This
project shows how sphingolipid metabolism is regulated and generates a computer
model to predict the regulation of sphingolipid levels in plants. Regulation of
sphingolipid metabolism is investigated under optimal growth conditions and in
response to pathogen infection. The results of this project will enable plant
breeders and biotechnologists to predictably alter sphingolipid metabolism in
crops, such as corn and soybean. With the knowledge derived from this project
plant breeders will be able to maintain plant productivity in response to
drought, soil salinity, pathogenic fungi and bacteria and other environmental
challenges. The project engages high school and undergraduate students in
sphingolipid research to advance STEM education. Graduate student participants
are trained broadly in the convergence of computation with experimentation to
address significant biological questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses fundamental gaps in knowledge of sphingolipid metabolic regulation in
plants and its impact on biotic stress responses by integrating computational
modeling with experimental approaches. Relative contributions of biosynthetic
and catabolic reactions for sphingolipid metabolic regulation are determined
through a kinetic model derived from metabolic flux analyses of wild-type and
mutant plants exposed to biotic stresses. An extensive toolbox of plant mutants
and engineered yeast strains are used for biochemical and genetic studies aimed
at understanding mechanisms through which orosomucoid-like proteins function as
central regulators. These regulators control the amounts and types of
sphingolipids produced in response to biological stresses. Findings from these
studies contribute to iterative kinetic model improvement through design-build-
test-refine cycles for a more quantitative and mechanistic understanding of
sphingolipid metabolic regulation in plants. The project also advances the study
of plant sphingolipids through development of a web portal that contains
information on sphingolipid structural diversity, metabolism, function, and
analysis and disseminates project-derived metabolic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.