* 1818288
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the list of determinants of rates of protein evolution and dissecting their molecular bases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Alvarez-Ponce, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 454,078.00

In any organism different proteins evolve at very different speeds; the amino
acid sequences of certain proteins remain virtually unaltered during hundreds of
millions of years, whereas other proteins change dramatically in very short time
periods. These different rates of evolution of protein sequences are connected
to their structures and functional roles, but it remains unclear which of these
factors have an independent effect on rates of evolution and what is the
relative importance of each factor. This project will investigate the reasons of
evolutionary rate variation, and the underlying molecular mechanism. The project
will provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and
the project team will conduct a number of outreach activities involving high
school students and the general public. Members of historically underrepresented
minorities will be actively targeted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevailing view
is that rates of protein evolution are primarily determined by gene expression
levels, with highly expressed proteins usually evolving slower -- a trend known
as the expression-rate (E-R) anticorrelation. However, the reasons for this
anticorrelation remain unclear. This research will use a combination of
experimental and computational methods to test different predictions of the
hypotheses proposed to explain the E-R anticorrelation. In addition, the impact
of other, unestablished factors on rates of protein evolution will be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.