* 1818985
* High Impact Technology Exchange (HI-TEC) 2018: Deepening Engagement and Strengthening Connections
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Michael Lesiecki, CORD
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2020
* USD 277,078.00

In 2009, several Centers funded through the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program worked collaboratively to develop a conference that would broaden
the impact across ATE supported industry areas. This annual High-Impact
Technology (HI-TEC) conference has drawn participants mainly from the ATE
program's community of centers and projects. The activities proposed for this
project will open new opportunities nationwide for the ATE centers to broaden
their impact and develop new networks of project and industry collaborators in
their areas of technology focus. This broadening can increase the impact of ATE
projects across the nation and strengthen the American economy in high-demand
fields that drive our most competitive industries. The proposed project will
also strengthen HI-TEC's ability to help address issues faced in technological
education everywhere. Examples of such cross-cutting issues include recruitment
of diverse and underserved student populations, integration of research into the
classroom, faculty development techniques, and best practices in
education/industry partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 2018
conference is "Partnering with Industry for the New American Workforce." The
proposed activities would build upon HI-TEC's record of success to accomplish
three goals: 1) Expand engagement in the conference by industry, ATE projects,
and faculty engaged in advanced technological education who may not be currently
supported by the ATE program; 2) Strengthen actionable connections between ATE
projects and centers and others associated with the ATE community; and 3) Deepen
sharing and broaden implementation of evidence-based models and best practices
used by ATE projects and centers. These activities will be conducted within the
framework of HI-TEC's existing structure, and will strengthen HI-TEC's impact
nationally and, in turn, strengthen the impact of ATE centers and projects. This
project will develop two new opportunities for participant engagement at the
conference: the Technological Education Forum (TEF) and the Industry
Partnerships Forum (IPF). Educators and industry personnel will learn from each
other and collaborate to address issues facing advanced technological education.
The conference's design, which stresses pedagogy, technology, program building,
and workforce development, provides a unique professional development
opportunity that enables educators to acquire new knowledge and skills. The
evaluation activities will focus on both short-term outcomes and medium-term
performance-based outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.