* 1818651
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel clutch mechanism for a more intuitive, stable prosthetic knee
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Paul Pomeroy, Xonotiv LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,542.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project lies in helping more amputees walk safely with less
effort. There are approximately 800,000 individuals living with a major lower
limb amputation, and this number is growing largely due to diabetes. For 50,000
amputees each year who need a new prosthetic knee, two options exist: learn to
use a traditional prosthetic knee or attempt to obtain a high-tech, computer-
controlled knee. The former require the amputee learn and execute specific
technique(s) to walk safely, while the latter do so automatically but cost
$30,000 to $100,000 and require physical qualification, greatly limiting their
availability. The novel prosthetic knee developed here offers stability
automatically, regardless of amputee technique. It prevents buckling while
simultaneously allowing the user to walk safely with whatever leg motions the
user is able to generate. Since it requires no electronics or power, it is
available to all amputees regardless of ability, and at a fraction of the cost
of high-tech knees. Amputees will be able to walk farther with less effort,
improving health and quality of life, and easing caregiver burden. Additionally,
this design could be adapted for use in orthotic, robotic or exoskeletal
systems.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and test a novel prosthetic knee.
Funding would be used to build prototypes and conduct mechanical, analytical and
destructive testing. This testing is necessary to demonstrate that the design is
feasible, safe for humans, and deserving of further development with amputees.
An independent engineering design review will be obtained, prototypes will then
be bench tested for function in a biomechanics lab, and an independent lab will
provide destructive testing to prove ultimate strength of the device for
comparison against known standards. The anticipated technical results include
proof that the device can support the weight of a 300lb person, and quantitative
evidence that the device will afford intuitive and universally available
stability to amputees through its innovative swing- and stance-phase
functionality. This work would advance the knowledge of prosthetics,
rehabilitation and bipedal locomotion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.