* 1818759
* EAGER: Introducing a design element into stratospheric aerosol geoengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Douglas MacMartin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,529.00

The National Academies of Science recommended in 2015 that more research be
undertaken to understand solar geoengineering, that is, approaches such as
stratospheric aerosol injection that would cool the climate by reflecting some
sunlight back to space. Introducing a design element into solar geoengineering
research provides a critical shift in perspective that will fundamentally alter
the conversation surrounding geoengineering, and inspire further research. Only
recently have models been able to simultaneously capture the full coupling
between aerosol microphysics, chemistry, and stratospheric dynamics. By taking
advantage of this state-of-the-art capability, this research will enable a
better assessment of what can and cannot be achieved through an intentionally
designed stratospheric aerosol injection strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
plausible that temporary and limited geoengineering deployment could be used to
reduce climate risks, but making such an assessment requires understanding
projected impacts. This research aims to take a major step forwards towards that
objective by developing a well-designed strategy based on an exploration of the
design space. This is essential to ensure that future decisions regarding these
approaches are well-informed. Furthermore, the multidisciplinary perspective
gained by applying engineering optimization, dynamic systems, and feedback
design to climate science provides an opportunity to broaden both communities
with the potential to spark additional insights and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.