* 1818656
* I-Corps: nanoHUB platform for STEM research, education, and collaboration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Gerhard Klimeck, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is twofold: it
lowers cost and knowledge barriers for smaller companies and startups which need
to run scientific simulations, and it reduces time to market for product design
firms by allowing faster, more integrated access to simulation tools and data.
This project provides an end-to-end, user-oriented, cloud computing
infrastructure that embraces the needs of all three critically involved
stakeholders: users, model/tool providers, and computational resource providers.
The cloud model has proved to be a cost effective, reliable solution to many
information service challenges, and a cloud-based platform for scientific
simulation and computation has the potential to impact the high-tech community
by inducing a fundamental shift in the way scientific simulation and data are
used. Small companies, especially emerging startups, need not invest in
simulation software, but instead can utilize an extensive simulation ecosystem
for product design. Companies with access to this platform will become less
restricted by local computational resources, and more productive with a larger
suite of simulation tools to solve design problems.

This I-Corps project is based on a comprehensive infrastructure to host and
execute scientific simulations and store and access the output data with ease.
With multiple simulation codes available in one place, workflows can be created
which use the output of one tool to provide input to the next. This modular
approach enables users to combine different tools and customize the workflow to
their own needs. Simulation outputs are all stored and the resulting scientific
data can be mined for knowledge. User actions are also recorded and analyzed to
enhance the user experience. Through customer discovery activities within
I-Corps and continued requirements gathering from existing and potential
communities, this cloud-based simulation platform will potentially change how
researchers, students, educators, and industry practitioners engage with
simulation and data on a day-to-day basis.