* 1818082
* Understand the functional mechanism of the DSP1 complex in the 3' end maturation of plant small nuclear RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Bin Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 682,608.00

This project will contribute to fundamental knowledge related to splicing and
gene expression in plants. Ultimately, this type of information will facilitate
the engineering of plants for agricultural production. The primary goal of this
project is to dissect the mechanism governing the biogenesis of small nuclear
RNAs, which are core components of the splicing machinery and hence important
for gene expression. This project will train students and provide them with
skills needed to productively contribute to STEM industries and occupations.
This project also includes an effort to increase diversity in STEM by recruiting
and training members of underrepresented groups and first generation students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) are the basal components of
the spliceosome. They guide the formation of spliceosome and catalyze the
splicing of mRNAs, which is a key step in decoding genetic information stored in
the genome and thus they play a crucial role in regulating gene expression.
Consequently, snRNA biogenesis is fundamental to biology. snRNA 3' end
maturation, which requires cleavage at the 3' end of the primary transcript of
snRNAs, is essential for snRNA biogenesis. snRNA 3' maturation evolved
differently among metazoans, fungi and plants. The protein factors involved in
snRNA 3' end processing were unknown in plants. Consequently, the mechanism
governing plant snRNA 3' maturation is not clear. The goal of this project is to
better understand plant snRNA 3' maturation. The DSP1 complex required for snRNA
3' maturation was recently identified in Arabidopsis. This project will dissect
the functional mechanism of the DSP1 complex through testing the following
hypotheses: 1) The DSP1 complex functions as complex to process pre-snRNAs; 2)
The DSP1 complex requires cis-elements within pre-snRNAs for its recruitment and
activity; 3) The DSP1 complex has other targets beyond snRNAs, which are
important for development. The completion of this project will provide insight
into snRNA 3' maturation mechanism, a long-standing question in plant
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.