* 1818498
* 2018 Bioinspired Materials: Bioinspired Multifunctional Dynamic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Zhibin Guan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides support for the travel and conference registration fees of
students and young investigators as participants in the 2018 Gordon Research
Conference Bioinspired Materials, in Les Diablerets, Switzerland, June 24 - 29,
2018. The meeting will allow young investigators to network with establish
researchers to discuss cutting edge research about new ideas and future concepts
of how to harness or mimic designs and the methods used in nature to achieve
them. The overarching goal of this research is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the synthesis, directed self-assembly and hierarchical
organization of natural occurring materials, and uses this understanding to
design new synthetic materials whose structure, properties and function mimic
those of natural materials or living matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Gordon
Conference will bring together researchers in biomedical engineering, materials
science, synthetic biology, genetics, and clinical medicine to discuss the
cutting edge of research in the area of new bioinspired artificial materials
that are exquisitely developed for high functionality in specific applications.
This is a cross-disciplinary conference, designed to build bridges between
fields to advance science and engineering in this area. In particular, the
conference will focus on fundamental understanding of how particular materials
should be designed to be "symbiotic" with biological entities and how to get
similarity in functioning of biomaterials with their living counterparts. The
conference will include a broad range of researchers, from graduate students and
post-doctoral trainees to world leaders in this area, to disseminate the latest
advances and develop connections to advance this key field of research moving
forward. Award funds will be used to support students and trainees so that they
can present their research and develop the research network necessary to advance
both science and their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.