* 1818679
* Broadening Participation Research Project: STEP into STEM, Investigating Successful Transitions and Effective Pathways into STEM
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Marwan Bikdash, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,998.00

Researchers at North Carolina A&amp;T State University will conduct a
longitudinal study using big data analytics to advance the knowledge and
evidence base for successful strategies to encourage underrepresented minorities
to pursue STEM pathways. The goals of the project are to characterize and
understand pathways to STEM, assess STEM intervention effectiveness at
universities across the nation based on institutional system/program metrics for
student success, and recommend ways to increase the number of underrepresented
minority women pursuing STEM degrees and careers. The study will examine factors
that influence transitions to STEM for undecided/non-STEM students and
demonstrate specific systematic/programmatic interventions that are effective.
The research will be guided by a triangulation of social cognitive career
theory, student persistence theory, human capital theory, and vocational
anticipatory socialization theory. The project is an innovative approach to
better understanding factors that motivate students to elect STEM degree
programs, and it is expected to develop a core set of best practices metrics for
STEM transitions and pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary data sources
for the study are the High School Longitudinal Survey and the Beginning
Postsecondary Students Survey. The data will be analyzed to examine student
pathways into STEM, with a focus on students who are undecided about their
majors upon entering community college and four-year degree programs. The
specific research questions are (1) what are the academic, socioeconomic, and
demographic supports and barriers for underrepresented minorities (URM)and
undecided/non-STEM major transitions to STEM?; (2) what effective pathways and
higher education institutional systems/programs support URMs, undecided/non-STEM
successful transitions to STEM?; (3) which institutions have data-based evidence
to support their best practice intervention strategies?; (4) what implementable
strategies will support successful transitions and effective pathways into STEM,
particularly for URMs and undecided/non-STEM students from minority serving
institutions?; and (5) what shared metrics are recommended for institutions to
use nationally to assess successful transitions and effective pathways for URMs
into STEM? Analytical techniques will include Random Forest, Principal Component
Analysis, XGBoost, and Deep Learning to analyze the large datasets and conduct
the meta studies on the variables. The study results could impact policy and
practice at higher education institutions at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.