* 1818706
* Implementation Project: The DREAM STEM Project: Enhancing Academics, Entrepreneurship, and STEM Career Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Tanina Bradley, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,249,992.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthen education and research. The
project at North Carolina Central University seeks to build on previous
successful efforts to increase participation of African-American students in
STEM disciplines. The goal of the project is to educate STEM students who are
critical thinking problem solvers, knowledge creators, skilled innovators, and
are entrepreneurial. The project will impact all STEM majors at the institution,
but directly supports over 200 students annually as researchers, peer tutors,
summer institute or conference participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has the objectives to: increase enrollment and retention in STEM degree
programs; increase persistence and graduation rates in STEM degree programs; and
produce highly-skilled STEM graduates who can create and innovate. Each
objective is supported by a set of evidence-based strategies and activities,
such as proactive advising and mentoring, active-learning and inquiry-based
teaching strategies, identity as a scientist, and entrepreneurship in science
education. The project expects to produce strong effects on students'
motivation, self-efficacy, and commitment to STEM that will lead to higher
academic and professional outcomes for the students. A research study will be
conducted to investigate the effects of active-learning instructional approaches
in STEM courses on student motivation for learning and their academic
performance. The project will be advised and evaluated for effectiveness by
internal and external advisory boards and by a team of
evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.