* 1818312
* Unraveling the early events of the iron deficiency response at cell-specific resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Scott Peck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,105,201.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: How plants sense iron: Unraveling the
early events of the iron deficiency response at cell-specific resolution
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: David Mendoza-Cozatl, Univ. of Missouri,
Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Scott Peck, Univ. of Missouri, Columbia;
Dmitri Nusinow, Danforth Plant Science Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is an
essential nutrient for humans, and plants are the main dietary source of iron
not only for humans but also for livestock. Iron deficiency in humans has been
described by the World Health Organization as the most common nutritional
deficiency affecting nearly 2.2 billion people (~30% of the world's population).
Therefore, understanding how plants sense, take up and re-distribute iron in
edible tissues is essential. Traditionally, iron sensing by plants was believed
to occur exclusively by roots that are in close contact with iron sources in the
soil, however, provocative preliminary data from our laboratories and others
suggests that plants rapidly sense changes in iron concentrations in specialized
cells located in leaves, termed companion cells. This project will focus on the
early events of iron deficiency responses in plants and on the communication
between leaves and roots to adapt when iron becomes scarce. In addition, this
project will provide training to undergraduate and graduate students on cutting-
edge molecular biology techniques, particularly techniques that address changes
in specific tissues such as the veins of plants, which have been shown to play
an important role in leaf-to-root communication. Moreover, this project will
emphasize collaborative work between students from different disciplines
including computer sciences, biochemistry and plant sciences. Learning how to
communicate across disciplines is critical for developing novel techniques and
instrumentation to study in detail how plants respond and adapt to changes in
nutrient availability. In the long-term, students capable of understanding and
bridging different disciplines will be well-equipped for the current competitive
job market in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this project is the identification of molecular mechanisms mediating iron (Fe)
sensing and homeostasis in plants. Respiration and photosynthesis heavily depend
on the redox properties of iron to generate and store energy; however, this
reactivity makes iron extremely toxic at high concentrations. Therefore, plants
need to sense the levels of Fe within tissues and regulate Fe uptake to prevent
overload and cellular damage. Despite significant advances in identifying
molecular components of the Fe deficiency response in plants, the sensing and
precise location of Fe sensing in plants remains unknown. More recently, it has
been found that specific cells within the leaf vasculature (companion cells) are
capable of sensing changes in iron availability more rapidly than roots. This
project will use a cross-disciplinary approach to address the long-standing
question about the spatial (where) and temporal (when) responses to iron
deficiency in plants by identifying and integrating transcriptional and protein
networks at cell-specific resolution. Several techniques, such as proximity
labeling, have been specifically adapted to plants to pursue proteomic studies
in specific tissues. Cell-specific translatome analyses during early stages of
iron deficiency will be used to define the primary (early) and secondary
(responses) to iron limitation in the vasculature and will guide high-throughput
protein-DNA binding experiments to identify the molecular mechanisms driving
early responses to Fe deficiency in companion cells. Experimental approaches
will be complemented with modeling and simulation to produce an integrated view
of plant responses to changes in iron availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.