* 1818240
* Structure Determination of Membrane Proteins in Aligned Discoidal Lipid Bilayers by Solid-State NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Alexander Nevzorov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 717,000.00

Membrane proteins perform a variety of important biological functions including
signal transduction, energy conversion, molecular recognition, and ion transport
in the living cells. Despite the primary importance of membrane proteins in
biology, however, the number of their solved structures remains relatively
scarce. It should be also emphasized that many of these structures have been
determined under the conditions that were very distinct from those encountered
in the living cells (such as cryogenic temperatures, near absent lipid
molecules, high protein packing density). By contrast, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) is a minimally invasive yet an exceptionally informative
technique which makes it possible to study membrane proteins under nearly
physiological conditions. The present research will focus on the development of
native-like membrane mimetics and new spectroscopic methods, which will allow
one to determine structures of membrane proteins under full hydration, high
lipid-to-protein ratios, and physiological temperature by solid-state NMR. As
broader impact of this project, interdisciplinary research projects will be
offered to a diverse group of students and the results of this research will be
promoted to graduate curricula and Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) education via summer mentorship of high school teachers as
part of the Kenan Fellows Program at North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop discoidal lipid
mimetics based on polymer-stabilized lipid nanodiscs that will radically improve
spectral resolution due to their exceptional magnetic alignment and fast
rotational diffusion about their axes. The magnetic alignment of the nanodiscs
will be achieved by fine-tuning their diameter and adding lanthanide-chelating
species to enhance their magnetic properties. The discoidal membrane mimetics
will be applied to structure determination of polytopic membrane proteins
including proteorhodopsin and human acetylcholine receptor, which exhibit
insufficient resolution in the traditional aligned lipid bilayers such as
magnetically aligned bicelles. New pulse sequences will be developed for
selective excitation to decrease peak crowdedness in the NMR correlation
spectra. Moreover, computational methods for the analysis of multidimensional
spectra will be developed including automated spectroscopic assignment
algorithms to streamline the structure determination
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.