* 1818346
* Synthetic Biology: Impacts of structural alterations on function in a mobile enzyme sequestration platform (mESP)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2023
* USD 967,658.00

This project is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Human Resources cluster
in the Division of Biological Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for
alternative transportation fuels that can supplement or replace fossil-based
fuels (e.g., gasoline and diesel) is an ongoing global concern. The same
chemical conversion technologies that are used to produce bioethanol and
biodiesel are being used to produce biofuel. This process involves the use of
harsh chemicals (e.g., acids) that create a hazardous materials handling and
disposal problem for producers. Enzyme-based conversion of feedstock to biofuel
presents fewer hazards and is, arguably, more environment-friendly.
Unfortunately, microbial or abiotic enzyme-mediated reactions are typically not
as efficient as chemical catalysis. This project is focused on designing and
testing an experimental enzyme sequestration platform system that enhances
enzymatic efficiency under conditions of high temperature and extremes of pH.
Such conditions are common in industrial reaction processes. The project has its
foundation in fundamental biochemistry research in which mobile enzyme
sequestration platforms are modified and examined for effectiveness. The
platforms are investigated to characterize their ability to protect enzymes and
enhance enzymatic efficiency under harsh reaction conditions. The project
engages students who are part of the Individuals from Historically
Underrepresented Groups in Science (IHUGS). Outreach to high school students and
research training for IHUGS participants are activities that form part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in synthetic biology combines two
natural systems and one artificial system in constructing and testing a set of
unique mobile enzyme sequestration platforms (mESPs). The resulting designed
system enhances enzymatic activity under conditions of low pH and high
temperature. The chimeric platform consists of select subunits from the
Sulfolobus group II chaperonin complex (heat shock protein complex) and
components from the cellulolytic anaerobic bacterium Clostridium thermocellum.
Enzymes that can bind to the platform may be of one or more enzyme classes
depending on use. This research project addresses fundamental hypotheses on the
synthetic system's structure and function and examines the principles for the
assembly and function in multi-enzyme systems. The project uses methods of
microbiology, molecular biology, protein biochemistry and nanotechnology. This
platform technology may be used in biofuel production, bioremediation, and a
host of other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.