* 1818592
* Parallel Semiclassical Methods for Seismic Wave Propagation, Inversion, and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Xu Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,928.00

Predicting seismic events, locating hidden resources and deepening our
understanding of our planet's internal complexity require overcoming challenges
from multi-interdisciplinary sciences including mathematics and geophysics. The
proposed research will initiate projects to develop parallel semiclassical
methods for seismic wave propagation, inversion and data analysis, with results
computed, visualized and explored to create three-dimensional imaging of inner
Earth structure. Specifically, the projects include development of the frozen
Gaussian approximation (FGA) to handle elastic wave propagation in high-
contrast, heterogeneous media, inversion of background velocity using full
waveform inversion by constructing a surrogate model based on FGA to enlarge the
search-function spaces used in the particle swarm method, and application of
developed mathematical theory and associated computer programs to collected
seismic data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The projects will develop semiclassical
approaches for seismic wave propagation, inversion and data analysis, leading to
quantitative imaging of our Earth's whole inner structure, and provide deep
understanding of seismic activities. The research introduces a mathematically
systematic way of attacking requests on reducing time of simulation in seismic
tomography and inversion processes. More broadly, these new methods and models
will provide fundamental advances in computational mathematics, leading to
practical benefit in the field of geophysics, which plays such significant roles
in responsible use of resources. The expected results will find applications in
other emerging science and engineering fields such as spin-transfer torque in
materials science and E. coli chemotaxis in biology, some of the problems the PI
has also been working on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.