* 1818546
* Conference on Statistical Learning and Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Annie Qu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Columbia University will host a three-day conference on Statistical Learning and
Data Science/Nonparametric Statistics, June 4-6, 2018 in New York City. The
objective of the conference is to bring together researchers in statistical
learning, data science and nonparametric statistics from academia, industry, and
government. Statistical machine learning is widely recognized as a very active
area of interdisciplinary research, closely related to statistics, optimization,
and computer science. In addition, it also plays an essential role in the new
important areas of data science and big data. Due to advances in technology,
massive and complex data in the "big data era" are prevalent in almost every
aspect of modern scientific research. It is critical to manage such huge amounts
of data, and make reliable prediction and inference. Statistical machine
learning techniques have developed substantial flexibility in handling such
data, with a wide range of applications in diverse scientific disciplines.

This conference is expected to (1) bring together researchers from different
disciplines, including statistics, computer science, machine learning,
engineering, and biomedical and other related research fields, to address recent
development and emerging issues in statistical learning, data science and
nonparametric statistics, (2) promote interactions and collaborations among
researchers, (3) discuss new ideas and future research directions for
statistical learning and data science, with a focus towards knowledge discovery
in sciences and engineering, (4) provide an excellent opportunity for junior
researchers to interact and learn from leading scientists in the field. The
conference will consist of three plenary sessions, 55 invited sessions and
poster sessions. Conference topics include unsupervised, semi-supervised and
supervised learning, with applications in rankings, text and web mining, network
analysis, bioinformatics, high-dimensional data, functional data, genomics, drug
discovery, intrusion and fraud detection. NSF funding will provide travel
support to students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career researchers to
encourage their participation in this event. The conference website is
https://publish.illinois.edu/sldsc2018/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.