* 1818131
* Collaborative Proposal:  Role of tRNA base modifications in genetic code accuracy and cellular fitness
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Rebecca Alexander, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2023
* USD 454,934.00

Organisms are presumed to maintain a high accuracy of translation to ensure that
little variation occurs in the sequences of proteins involved in essential
cellular functions. However, a relaxed translational stringency has recently
been observed across all branches of life, suggesting that under certain
circumstances organisms may tolerate higher translation error rates than
previously estimated. Indeed, a decrease in translation stringency has the
potential to yield new proteins that provide short- or long-term survival
benefits. The overall objective of this project is to understand the connections
between tRNA base modifications, changes in translation accuracy and cellular
fitness. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive interdisciplinary
training through their work on this project. An evolution-in-action module
(EvolvingSTEM) has been implemented in New Hampshire and Pennsylvania high
schools and will be introduced to biology students in two Winston-Salem, North
Carolina public high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the
hypothesis that modification of the tRNA wobble base is a tunable component of
translation rather than a toggle switch that when turned off leads to error
catastrophe. This proposal has three objectives. Molecular dynamics and enzyme
kinetics approaches will be used to characterize evolved BcTilS:tRNAIle2
variants in vitro and in silico in order to understand the catalytic and
conformational changes that occur in these variants. The in vivo effects of
TilS:tRNAIle2 dysfunction such as which amino acid is inserted at AUA codons,
which amino acid is present at the 3'-end of tRNAIle2, and what is the metabolic
mechanism of enhanced fitness will be investigated. Finally, noncanonical
cellular partners of TilS and tRNAIle2 that may play alternative or additional
roles in enhanced bacterial fitness will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.