* 1818934
* Collaborative Proposal: RAPID: How do extreme flooding events impact migratory species?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Leslie Ries, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2019
* USD 55,021.00

Extreme weather events can alter resources in dramatic ways, which can have
positive, negative, or neutral impacts on species. In the case of hurricanes and
tropical storms, heavy rains could trigger an unusual pulse of plant growth or,
if extreme, drown critical resources. This substantial shift in resource
availability almost certainly impacts the survival, reproduction, and growth of
local populations; however, the extent to which migratory species are impacted
is much less clear. Out-of-season resources may disrupt migration as individuals
alter their normal behaviors, with potential negative consequences if arrival to
winter or summer habitat is delayed or blocked. Alternatively, migratory species
may avoid gaps in resources by shifting their routes, or even capitalize on
resources that peak following heavy rainfall events, improving their survival at
stopover locations and fitness at destination habitats. Texas is a critical
migratory pathway in North America for many species of birds, bats, and insects
and its position bordering the gulf coast means that it is also subject to many
severe weather events during the tropical storm season. The recent flooding
associated with Hurricane Harvey, the most extreme rainfall event in US history,
provides a unique opportunity to investigate how plant resources shift in
response to disruptive weather events. Further, hypotheses on the demographic
responses of migratory species will be rigorously tested at both local and
regional scales. This project will study the impact of Hurricane Harvey on a
model migratory species, the eastern North American monarch butterfly (Danaus
plexippus L.) population, with the goal of developing a framework to understand
the impact of extreme flooding events on migratory species. The results will
inform conservation efforts for the monarch butterfly, population models, and
climate forecasting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the
effects of Harvey on monarch dynamics in the local Texas migratory corridor and
evaluate the potential for carry-over effects into the monarch's overwintering
population in Mexico and summer breeding population in central and eastern North
America. The project will accomplish this through three key activities. First,
data will be collected at survey sites throughout the affected area during the
fall, winter, and spring of the 2017-2018 migratory season. Second, the impact
of Harvey and other recent extreme rainfall events will be explored using
climate data and remotely-sensed satellite imagery to model vegetation growth.
Finally, monarch population models will link local conditions in Texas to the
overwintering population in Mexico, and subsequently to spring and summer
generations. This research advances macrosystems ecology by expanding the
spatiotemporal scale at which carry-over effects from resource disruptions may
impact migratory species, and providing a framework for incorporating conditions
experienced by animals during migratory periods (the least-studied stages of the
annual cycle) into population models to evaluate mechanisms governing long-term
trends.