* 1818665
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enriching Student Learning through Biophysics and Music at Winston Salem State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Myron Brown, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,924.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Winston Salem State University seeks to improve
undergraduate students' preparation and success by promoting multidisciplinary
learning through integrating physics, music, and biology. Undergraduate students
are involved in the project as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has the goal to establish an enriching interdisciplinary experience for
undergraduate students that intersects physics, music, and biology through
course redesign, research, and outreach. This will be achieved through the
following activities and strategies: a course entitled "Music Physics/Acoustics"
will be redesigned to integrate active learning through the use of music to
enhance learning in physics and biology; undergraduate students will conduct
research with the faculty; and undergraduate students will be involved in
disseminating the components of the project through presentations, a one-week
summer research program, and interactions with the K-12 community. This project
is guided by formative and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.