* 1818722
* Targeted Infusion Project: Enhancing the Undergraduate Computing Curriculum by Infusing Cybersecurity and Digital Forensics Concepts
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* David Umphress, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 398,829.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Alabama State University seeks to enhance the computing
curriculum by integrating cybersecurity and digital forensics concepts.
Undergraduate students are involved in the project as
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the objectives to: adapt
methods for cybersecurity training in computing courses and integrate
cybersecurity concepts in existing courses; create a new course on digital
forensics; develop and test instructional materials; design and develop a cyber
range; use war-gaming to teach cybersecurity concepts; collect and analyze
achievement of outcome based on student and industry feedback; support faculty
development in cybersecurity; and guide students to obtain cybersecurity
certification. This project will enhance understanding of how cybersecurity and
digital forensics concepts can be integrated within a classroom environment and
translate into a framework of pedagogy and materials relevant and enabling for
teaching computer science. The project will directly benefit about 300 students
and is designed to improve the quality of STEM education, thus increasing the
minority STEM talent pool of rigorously prepared students for the workforce,
graduate or professional school. The project will be guided by an external
evaluator, as well as internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.