* 1818283
* A novel role for polysaccharide monooxygenases in signaling, chemotropic interactions and cell fusion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Michael Marletta, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

It has been estimated that up to one quarter of the world's biomass is of fungal
origin, comprising approximately six million species. To interact with one
another and respond to environmental cues, these species communicate and respond
via chemical languages. In filamentous ascomycete fungi, the formation of an
interconnected, multinucleate hyphal network is constructed via communication
and fusion of germinated asexual spores (germlings) and hyphae. In nature,
filamentous fungi play important roles in decomposition of plant and animal
matter, nutrient cycling and nutrient transport in the hyphal network, including
an association with plants, both as symbionts and as pathogens. This project
defines a new biological function during hyphal network formation for a class of
oxidative enzymes, termed polysaccharide monooxygenases (PMOs), that play a role
during signaling, chemotropic interactions and cell wall remodeling during
somatic cell fusion in filamentous fungi. Previously, this class of enzymes has
only been associated with extracellular degradative capacities, providing a
paradigm shift in the cellular function of this class of proteins. The discovery
of a role for copper-dependent PMOs in cell signaling, along with the
characterization of new substrates for these enzymes, will greatly impact this
field of research; genes encoding PMOs have been found in human and plant
pathogens and may also be involved in symbiotic relationships. This project
brings expertise on cell signaling, cell biology and genetics with deep
expertise in biochemistry and structural biology on PMOs, and provides an
excellent training opportunity for undergraduate, graduate students and
postdoctoral associates. Workshops will be developed on the use of the
filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa to identify and characterize molecular
players involved in cell-cell communication and fusion in collaboration with
educational science organizations and will form the basis of an intensive three-
week undergraduate course at the University of California - Berkeley. Live cell
imaging movies from this project and others will enrich educational aspects on
the role of fungi in the environment in exhibitions provided by the Mycological
Society of San Francisco and the Bay Area Mycological Society. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Chemotropic interactions between fungal germlings (or hyphae in a
colony), initiates cell communication, followed by a switch from cell growth to
cell wall breakdown and membrane merger at the contact point between adhered
cells. A role for a predicted PMO, HAM-7, is required for chemotropic
interactions and functions through the cell wall integrity (CWI) MAP kinase
signaling pathway in filamentous fungi. Strains lacking ham-7 fail to undergo
cell fusion and thus lack an interconnected hyphal network. The ham-7 gene and
its relatives form a unique clade among PMOs in fungi. The substrate for the
HAM-7 PMO is currently unknown and defining the activity of HAM-7, its substrate
and role in chemotropic interactions and cell fusion using biochemical methods,
structural biology, cell biology and genetics is a major objective of this
project. A second PMO, CWR-1, which is predicted to use chitin as a substrate
based on homology, functions as a negative regulator of the switch from cell
growth to cell wall disassembly during cell fusion. A predicted membrane
protein, CWR-3 is required for CWR-1 to function in cell wall disassembly,
suggesting it may function as a receptor for the product of the CWR-1 enzymatic
activity. This project will link the function of polysaccharide monooxygenases
oxidative capacity with the enigmatic properties of chemical languages involved
in germling/hyphal communication that dictates the behavior of cells seeking to
undergo vegetative fusion with their own kind. The work described in this
project will be transformative in defining new biological roles for this class
of enzymes/proteins that may be broadly applicable to both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic species that encode PMOs in their genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.