* 1818255
* Molecular Mechanisms of Bacterial Helicase Assembly and Activation at a Replication Origin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 945,000.00

Molecular Mechanisms of Bacterial Helicase Assembly and Activation at a
Replication Origin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to understand
an essential feature of DNA replication through a structure-based analysis of
assembly of the bacterial DnaB replicative helicase at the origin of DNA
replication. Replicative helicases unwind duplex DNA into templates for
replication. In contrast to the extensive understanding of the translocation of
DnaB along single stranded DNA (ssDNA), relatively little is known about the
mechanisms of helicase opening, helicase assembly on ssDNA, and closing of the
helicase as mediated by helicase loaders, which this research will address. A
main mission of scientists-teachers is to attract and retain of students to STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields and to prepare an
educated citizenry for the 21st century. City College of New York (CCNY) has the
additional mission of providing a high-quality education to the children of New
York City (NYC), new immigrants, minorities, and those without economic means.
To meet these missions, the PI will 1) mentor and train younger colleagues
through research on DNA replication, a fundamental biological process; 2) lead
undergraduate research programs; and 3) perform educational outreach to four
public schools in NYC, each with a significant minority
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of mechanisms used by cells to
replicate DNA are essential for understanding how genomes are inherited and
evolve. In E. coli, the replicative helicase is a closed protein ring whose
assembly on single stranded (ss) DNA requires specialized loading factors.
Assembly of the helicase takes place during the initiation phase of DNA
replication. The major events of this phase include selection of sites where
replication will begin, melting of a segment of origin DNA and then loading the
helicase on ssDNA. The helicase-loader complex first captures the hexameric DnaB
helicase and then engages ssDNA at the origin. This leads to expulsion of the
loader from the origin complex, and concomitant helicase activation with
adoption of a closed spiral conformer. The planar and spiral structures of the
helicase are known, however, less is known about the mechanisms of helicase
loading. The investigators have determined the structure of the DnaB helicase
bound to the P helicase loader from phage &amp;#955;. This project will focus on
insights obtained from the structure. Insights from the structure obtained in
this research, when combined with those from other groups, lead to a new model
of the helicase assembly pathway in bacteria. The aims below seek to extend and
test insights obtained from the investigators' revised model. Aim #1 focuses on
evaluating and extending insights obtained from the BP model. In aim #2, they
pivot to analysis of the BP complex bound to origin derived ssDNA. They will
further explore one feature of their model: that the DnaB helicase, while bound
to the helicase loader, may make few, if any, contacts to ssDNA. Instead, most,
if not all, of the contacts will be made by the loader within the helicase-
loader complex. In aim #3, they turn their attention to mechanisms associated
with delivery of the BP complex to the phage &amp;#955;
origin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.