* 1818672
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Experimenting with an Augmented Reality Facilitated Instructional Model to Enhance STEM Education
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Farshad Amini, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 05/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Jackson State University will develop and test +an augmented reality facilitated
instructional (AR-FI) model to improve STEM learning and academic success for
undergraduate students. The investigators will examine the efficacy of a new
model that could influence visual-spatial ability, improve student engagement,
highlight instructors? teaching decision-making in STEM classrooms, and boost
retention and academic performance. The proposed model is substantiated by the
research literature on cognitive models, learning behavior, and successful STEM
education practices. The project team will integrate visual-spatial learning
with augmented reality in an immersive, interactive environment using DiedricAR
and Tintisha Technologies models and create situated learning scenarios to test
knowledge application, comprehension, application, and synthesis in selected
STEM subjects. The expected outcome of the project is an augmented reality
facilitated instructional model that can be used to transform traditional
learning at Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve design, implementation,
evaluation, and redesign in an accommodating five-stage cycle: preparation,
first experiment period, evaluation and redesign, second experiment period, and
evaluation and publication. The investigators hypothesize that (1) there is a
positive relationship between the AR-FI model and improvement of African-
American STEM students' spatial ability, (2) there is a positive relationship
between the AR-FI model and student engagement in STEM courses, and (3) there is
a positive relationship between the AR-FI model and improvement of African-
American students? academic performance in STEM courses. Freshman and sophomore
students in four selected STEM courses will use their personal smartphones or
tablet to experience immersive activities through augmented reality situations.
The four assessment tools that will be used to triangulate the learning process,
procedures, and accomplishment of the proposed project objectives include
questionnaires, semi-structured interviews, classroom observations, and student
reflections. The questionnaires will be conducted through online survey tools,
and the quantitative data will be filtered and statistically analyzed.
Regression analysis will be conducted to establish the relationship for
students' engaged learning index and learner empowerment scale. For course-
embedded assessment, quizzes and group projects will be used to assess student
learning improvement. The study will provide new perspectives for STEM faculty
to motivate students intrinsically, engage students more powerfully, and
increase retention of underrepresented STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.