* 1818211
* DISSECTING HORMONAL CROSSTALK DURING TOMATO FRUIT DEVELOPMENT
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Cristiana Argueso, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 552,487.00

Plants are essential for human life, providing food, fiber and a multitude of
chemicals used in medicine and other aspects of our everyday life. Phytohormones
are chemicals produced by plants to control plant physiology. This research
applies recent technologies to simultaneously measure the levels of several
types of phytohormones during plant development. In addition, levels of
phytohormone-regulated gene expression are assessed and the resulting data are
used to determine how these molecules work together to orchestrate plant growth.
Results from this research provide essential knowledge for cultivating the
future generation of advanced crop varieties with increased productivity and
environmental stress tolerance. In addition, this research generates the first
Hormonal Atlas of a plant species. This Hormonal Atlas, constructed with the
assistance of college undergraduate students, will be available to the general
public as well as to the scientific community, for purposes of education and
research. Outreach activities are conducted to promote participation of K-12 and
undergraduate students in science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
plant development is crucial for efforts of manipulating plant growth and yield.
Phytohormones are essential regulators of plant growth and responses to the
environment. This project uses recent technologies of high-throughput mass
spectrometry and gene expression to generate quantitative outputs and define
essential crosstalk relationships between the different hormonal pathways in
tomato. The context of the study has a focus on fruit development. This research
provides important insight on hormonal crosstalk and is likely to predict known
as well as yet unidentified hormonal interactions. Such interactions may form
the basis of future efforts for the development of synthetic hormonal networks
with different functionalities. With the use of synthetic fine-tuning of plant
growth, advanced crops with increased yield are possible. In addition, this
project generates metabolomics, genetic, molecular and bioinformatics tools that
will be available to the scientific community. These tools are expected to
greatly contribute to the understanding of phytohormone regulation of other
aspects of plant physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.