* 1818858
* NeTS: JUNO2: Resilience in Next-Generation Intelligent Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Suresh Subramaniam, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 384,056.00

The world's telecommunication infrastructure is dominated by fiber optics
because of its tremendous bandwidth. Huge investments have been and continue to
be made in that infrastructure in order to support the Internet, which is at the
center of business and daily life. As demand for bandwidth grows, however, the
network becomes more complex and harder to manage and protect against natural
and other disasters. Network designers are therefore increasingly turning toward
optical nodes composed of simple building blocks of essential functions. This
project aims to equip the network infrastructure with resilience against
failures, both small-scale (due to component or system degradation) and large-
scale (due to disasters, for example). Resilience schemes at multiple levels,
ranging from component-level to network-level to service-level, will be
developed. This is a collaborative project with researchers from Nagoya
University and Kagawa University in Japan. The collaboration will leverage the
extensive laboratory equipment for prototyping and testing the developed
technology and the close interaction with industry that the project's Japanese
collaborators have. The results of the project will increase the trustworthiness
of optical networks, which form the backbone of our information and
communications infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses
challenging problems in designing trustworthy optical networks at multiple
granularities ranging from component level to network level and to service
level. Cost-efficient architectures and practical and intelligent algorithms for
surviving multiple failures and for providing service-level availability
guarantees will be developed by leveraging multiple techniques such as machine
learning and Markov decision processes. Our research objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(a) Design highly reliable optical nodes that consist
of unreliable components by introducing redundancy in a cost-effective
manner.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Design intelligent algorithms for surviving multiple
failures at the network level.&lt;br/&gt;(c) Design trustworthy service resource
management algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;(d) Develop a small-scale node prototype and
evaluate its performance in a system testbed. This will be achieved using the
laboratory facilities at the project's Japanese partner institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable new theory and algorithms to be
incorporated into advanced graduate classes and new experimental projects to be
developed for undergraduate students. The project will recruit students from
underrepresented minorities, and includes extensive K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.