* 1818497
* RAPID: A Quasi-Experimental Study of Corporate Policy Effects
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Alan MacEachren, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2019
* USD 72,000.00

In response to public outcry over abusive and negative messages in social media,
social media outlets are embarking on a set of policy changes to clarify
existing standards and facilitate more reporting and removal of abusive content.
The research will examine the effect of these rule changes on negative messages
through sentiment analyses of online messages sent before and after any policy
shifts. By identifying sources of individual and geographic variation in the
effects of the rule changes, it will shed light on the social and cultural
factors that shape responses to corporate rules and that contribute to patterns
of cyber aggression. The research also will identify organizational practices
that aid, or fail to aid, in limiting the negativity of everyday online
interactions.

This research will use a convergence of expertise in different disciplines to
accomplish its goals. Data will come from three sources: 1) online messages that
target individuals on the basis of their demographic characteristics, 2)
messages that contain common slurs, and 3) messages that include the location
from which they were posted (geo-tagged). These will be captured and processed
by extending geographic visualization and analysis techniques and information
retrieval methods, and by using computational methods to compute sentiment and
to assess the positivity and negativity of social media messages. Statistical
analyses will show if new corporate rules result in significant decreases or
possibly increases in level of sentiment negativity. They also will show whether
abusive communications become more evasive and less identifiable following
corporate rule changes.