* 1818796
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-sensitive Detection of Lipoarabinomannan (LAM) and Interferon-Gamma (IFN-g) as Biomarkers for Detection of Tuberculosis (TB)
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Syed Barizuddin, Plasmonic Diagnostics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,876.00

This SBIR Phase I project is intended to develop a noninvasive, ultra-sensitive
molecular detection system for Tuberculosis (TB). Although the prevalence of TB
has diminished, it still remains the second leading cause of death from an
infectious disease. The latest global TB report from the World Health
Organization with data compiled from 205 countries put the figures at 1.5
million fatalities and 9.6 million infections annually. The proposed technology
uses the nano- Plasmonic Grating (P-GRAT) properties to enhance the detection
signal of the TB biomarker by more than 100X. This results in detecting
concentrations in femto-gram/milliliter range resulting in early detection and
treatment. The specificity, faster results, low cost/test and ease of use, makes
this system a substantive innovation in the TB diagnostic market. The TB testing
market accounts for $1.5 billion annually of which North America is the second
largest in terms of generated revenue due to the higher pricing for TB
detection. The proposed technology will benefit the patients with early
diagnosis and provide the health care professionals with early treatment
options. With all the advantages this technology has to offer, it is expected to
gain a significant share in the market place and generate a revenue stream.

The main limitation of the immunoassays is their inability to detect extremely
small fluorescence signals that are associated with ultra-low concentrations of
biomarkers. The proposed nano- Plasmonic Grating (P-GRAT) technology can
overcome this limitation due to its exceptionally efficient light coupling,
reduced scattering, high signal-to-noise ratio and directional
excitation/emission. As a result, a fluorescence enhancement of P-GRAT is 100X
or higher compared to a glass substrates or polyurethane well plates. Such
enhancements translate to ultrasensitive detection and early diagnosis.
Commercial immunoassays require hours to days to achieve pg/ml sensitivity. In
comparison, P-GRAT can detect pg/mL range concentrations in less than three
hours. P-GRAT utilizes a simplified design to exclude expensive optics like
laser sources, high-magnification objective lenses and filter cubes. The use of
3-D printed parts to fabricate the system and use a smartphone as the detector
further reduces the cost. We intend to develop and commercialize a noninvasive,
ultra-sensitive (fg/ml) molecular detection system for Tuberculosis (TB). TB
specific biomarkers Lipoarabinomannan (LAM) and Interferon gamma (IFN-g) will be
detected in urine and saliva. P-GRAT is a platform technology and can easily be
adapted for the ultra-sensitive detection and diagnosis of other diseases, such
as Zika, Ebola, HIV and Cancer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.