* 1818878
* Research in Field Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sumit Das, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sumit R. Das at the
University of Kentucky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of his research, Professor
Das aims to explore the unification of gravity with quantum mechanics using a
variety of new theoretical and conceptual tools. He will also study the
properties of a variety of quantum-mechanical systems when they are not in
equilibrium. Both these problems are among the most important foundational
problems in physics. Consequently, research in this area serves the national
interest by advancing fundamental science in the United States. Professor Das
will also involve graduate students in this research, thereby providing them
with the valuable training necessary to develop into independent scientists and
educators. In addition, the results of this research will be used to enhance
classroom education. Professor Das also plans to give public talks about the
subject of his research in various forums, particularly "Science for Everyone,
KY", which will serve to increase scientific awareness within the larger public
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Das will study
aspects of the holographic correspondence which relates gravitational physics to
non-gravitational theories which live in lower numbers of spacetime dimensions.
This correspondence has been used to understand puzzles related to the Hawking
radiation of black holes by mapping these puzzles to problems in conventional
quantum theory of the type which appears in electroweak and strong interactions.
At the same time, this correspondence has thrown valuable light on difficult
problems in strongly interacting quantum many-body systems which appear in
particle physics, nuclear physics, or cold-atom physics, by mapping these
problems onto problems in classical gravity. Overall, the projects to be tackled
have two principal goals. The first involves deciphering the precise way in
which the lower-dimensional non-gravitational theory metamorphoses into a
higher-dimensional theory of gravity. This will be done by exploring solvable
models, particularly those whose gravity descriptions contain black holes, and
by applying the ideas of quantum information theory to understand the emergence
of space. The second aim is to apply gravitational physics to gain insight into
universal aspects of how systems achieve thermal equilibrium --- a question
which lies at the heart of many diverse areas of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.