* 1818969
* A Two-Way Research Street: Geometric Algorithms in Optimization and Computer-Based  Discrete Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jesus De Loera, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 366,736.00

At the foundation of the progress in artificial intelligence and data science
that is changing society (e.g., driverless cars) is the mathematical theory of
optimization. For example, convex and non-linear optimization is the engine at
the core of the very successful deep neural-networks. The first part of the
project develops the mathematics necessary to solve optimization theory
challenges (e.g., larger amounts of data, uncertain data) and to create faster,
more accurate optimization algorithms. Computers are changing the nature of
mathematical research and discovery too. For instance, computers can derive
formulas and proofs automaticaly, computers can search for examples, and now
they can more easily extract patterns thanks to machine learning. The second
part of the project investigates the use of algorithms from artificial
intelligence and algorithms to attack problems in mathematics, especially in
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in computational mathematics has two
interacting components: The first component is to apply methods from convex
geometry, algebraic geometry, geometry of numbers, and combinatorics to develop
new algorithms for mixed-integer optimization problems arising in data science,
especially the clustering of data with special conditions. The project also
studies augmentation (primal) algorithms for integer and mixed-integer
variables, these are algorithms that generalize the pivoting used for the
simplex method. The second component of the project investigates geometric and
combinatorial problems amenable to be investigated with computers. The
computation of a number of fundamental combinatorial quantities in convex
geometry, including the exact value of integer Caratheodory numbers for cones,
quantitative Helly numbers, and integral Radon-Tverberg numbers, will be
emphasized. The project presents a computer-based approach to prove or disprove
several theorems in&lt;br/&gt;discrete geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.