* 1818684
* Collaborative Research: Structure Preserving Numerical Methods for Hyperbolic Balance Laws with Applications to Shallow Water and Atmospheric Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alina Chertock, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This project will significantly contribute toward development of computational
methods for shallow water and related models and will provide considerably more
powerful tools for studying a variety of water waves and atmospheric phenomena.
Special attention will be paid to applications arising in oceanography,
atmospheric sciences, hydraulic, coastal, civil engineering, in which rapid
changes in the bottom topography, Coriolis forces, friction, multiscale regimes,
and uncertain phenomena factor heavily. The studied problems will include
shallow water flows in multi-connected river channel systems, tsunami wave
propagation and low Froude regime shallow water models, dynamics models of
tropical cyclones and clouds with uncertain data.The newly developed tools may
have a great potential in designing coastal protection systems and investigating
the effects of sediment transport on shelf drilling platforms as well as
contributing to a better prediction of tropical cyclones trajectories and
tsunami wave propagation and on-shore arrival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on development of new structure preserving numerical methods for
hyperbolic balance laws with applications to shallow water equations and related
models. Shallow water models are systems of time-dependent partial differential
equations (PDEs) that are derived using physical properties such as conservation
of mass and momentum, and hydrostatic or barotropic approximations. Naturally,
these applications, especially in cases of high space dimensions, require
development and implementation of special numerical methods that are not only
consistent with the governing system of PDEs, but also preserve certain
structural and asymptotic properties of the underlying problem at the discrete
level. The development of new numerical techniques will be based on high-order
shock-capturing finite-volume schemes, asymptotic preserving, adaptive moving
mesh and stochastic Galerkin methods utilizing major advantages of each one of
these methods in the context of studied problems. Besides providing examples
that corroborate the numerical approach, the foregoing applications are of a
substantial independent value for a broad class of problems arising in today's
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.