* 1818493
* Topology in Dimensions 3, 3.5 and 4
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Ian Agol, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides partial support for the
Conference on Topology in Dimensions 3, 3.5 and 4, to be held at the University
of California Berkeley from June 25 to 29, 2018. Topology studies the
mathematical properties of "spaces," from the physical 3-dimensional space and
4-dimensional space-time in which we carry out our daily lives, to much more
abstract spaces such as the space of all possible configurations of a robot or
all possible solutions to an equation. This conference will bring together
researchers working on the interplay between three and four dimensional topology
to share state of the art knowledge, hear talks from a select group of
internationally renowned experts, and develop new collaborations. This grant
will support travel expenses for graduate students, early career researchers and
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a fundamental nexus of problems,
including the smooth 4-dimensional Schonflies and Poincare conjectures and their
connection to decompositions of 3-manifolds, which is deeply rooted in and has
long motivated the work of Abby Thompson (working mostly in dimension 3), Marty
Scharlemann (working in 3.5-dimensional topology), and Rob Kirby (working mostly
in dimension 4). This conference uses the collective legacy of these researchers
as an organizing theme with the goal of reinvigorating work on these
foundational problems, reminding the community of the power of their tools, and
showcasing recent topological advances in the spirit of their work. Speakers
will share old and new ideas and participants will have sufficient time for
discussion with each other and with the speakers and for the forging of new
collaborations. We have specifically asked certain speakers to give historical
talks to help maintain continuity with the past as our rapidly developing field
moves into the future. These talks will be of especial benefit to students and
younger researchers, and will also help in the process of archiving the
mathematical past. The conference website is at
https://sites.google.com/sjsu.edu/thompscharbyfest/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.