* 1818558
* Life STEM-Planning Project: Streamlining the Biology Curriculum and Improving the Quality of Student Academic Preparation and Achievement
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Radman Ali, Morris College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 06/30/2020
* USD 198,804.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support for projects to design, implement, and assess strategies that
can lead to comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the number of
students receiving undergraduate degrees in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) and enhance the quality of their preparation by strengthening
STEM education and research. This two-year planning project at Morris College
seeks to eliminate the "one-size-fits-all" Biology curriculum to develop career
directed pathways in effort to improve retention and 4-year graduation rates for
under-represented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to the call for
action in the preparation of minority and under-represented students in STEM,
the project objectives are to streamline the biology curriculum to 1) develop
two new career tracks in Bio-Cyber Security and Biology-Forensics and 2)
increase enrollment for first-generation students in the biology program,
enabling them to succeed academically and professionally. This inter-divisional
collaboration and local and state agency partnership is positioned to increase
STEM student enrollment and student preparation for graduate school or direct
entry into the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.