* 1819982
* STTR Phase I:  A Direct Lithium-Ion Battery Recycling Process Yielding Battery-Grade Cathode Materials
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Zheng Li, Li Industries, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project advances a cost-
effective and scalable direct recycling method for producing battery-grade
cathode materials from end-of-life (EOL) lithium-ion batteries. The
commercialization of the proposed direct lithium-ion battery recycling
technology will lower the energy consumption and emissions associated with
battery production, reduce demand for raw battery materials and decrease
lithium-ion battery manufacturing cost. Using directly recycled materials
instead of raw battery materials will diminish or even avoid the negative
environmental impacts from mining and processing ores and from disposal of
hazardous waste. Reducing battery cost will facilitate the implementation of
more efficient electrified vehicles, thus reducing petroleum demand and vehicle
emissions. Finally, research on the end-of-life lithium-ion battery cathode, on
the direct recycling process and on the recycled materials will advance the
understanding of intercalation chemistry in nonaqueous and aqueous media and of
electrode degradation during electrochemical cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is to advance the direct recycling technology
through the design and demonstration of a scalable electrochemical flow system
capable of non-destructive relithiation and the optimization of post treatment
operation for the recovered materials. The electrochemical flow system is
capable of restoring the lost lithium in the EOL cathode material at any state
of charge (SOC) and can be scaled to a commercially viable size. The cathode
materials recovered in the proposed direct recycling process retain the same
structure and morphology and exhibit equivalent electrochemical performance
compared to the commercial virgin cathode materials. The recovery of high-value
cathode materials substantially improves the profitability of lithium-ion
battery recycling and is a key element of the business
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.