* 1819822
* SBIR Phase I:  AuraPeel - On-Demand Light Switchable Adhesives
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Kaushik Mishra, Polylux LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the use of novel photo-switchable adhesives in medical dressings to improve
patient safety, hospital compliance and potentially change the standard of care
in the field of adhesive dressings. The proposed work differs drastically from
other research endeavors to create dismantlable adhesives, whose drawbacks
include high costs, difficulty to scale, biocompatibility issues, and inability
to effect switching in application within short times. This new research offers
advantages of significantly lower costs and easier scale-up using readily
available adhesive industry infrastructure. Medical adhesive dressings that
easily lose peel adhesion addresses a significant unmet need for preventing
medical adhesive related skin injuries (MARSI), a prevalent but under-recognized
injury that affects 7% of all patients across all age groups and healthcare
settings. MARSI causes about 1.5 million injuries annually in the US alone and
it is estimated that MARSI caused $850M in payments withheld to hospitals due to
low patient satisfaction. This project is pursing the creation of a medical
dressing that addresses these concerns while being cost competitive, easy to use
and most importantly, safe to the patient's skin. Prototype medical dressings
will be characterized and tested based on customer
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
I project presents a novel adhesive technology platform where use-case
characteristics at application are decoupled from end of life/removal
characteristics through photo-switching. Photo-switchable medical adhesive
dressings that lose peel adhesion upon application of light address a
significant unmet need for preventing medical adhesive related skin injuries
(MARSI), a prevalent but under-recognized injury that affects 7% of all patients
across all age groups and healthcare settings. The proposed work differs
drastically from other research endeavors to create dismantlable adhesives as
the proprietary photo-switchable molecules enable change in human safe
conditions and in short time frames. The proposed Phase 1 SBIR project would
evaluate different proprietary multifunctional crosslinkers to increase the
speed of the photo-switch by about 50% to meet clinician needs. This would be
followed by experimentally evaluating methodologies to fabricate adhesive lined
films for optimal optical switchability at different thicknesses and for
different substrates. Finally, the learnings from the above two steps about
adhesive coated films will be combined with an existing skincare lamp to
demonstrate proof of product. Product performance will be characterized and
tested to optimize performance based on customer
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.