* 1819331
* SBIR Phase I:  Platform to Elucidate the Causal Mutations Behind Human Inherited Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* eMalick Njie, GENETIC INTELLIGENCE
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of an artificial intelligence-based
software platform to elucidate inherited diseases by identifying the causative
genetic factors in the whole genome at large, not just the tiny portion of the
genome called the exome. This technology will help solve the longstanding
problems of multigenic inherited diseases and help unlock the full potential of
gene therapy modalities such as CRISPR, which require knowledge of the causal
mutation for targeting. With a defined genetic target, truly curative
therapeutics and early, accurate diagnostics will be made possible. Through this
platform, pharmaceutical companies will benefit from a shortened drug
development cycle and a lower risk of clinical trial failure while diagnostics
companies will be able to develop fast and accurate molecular diagnostics
targeting the mutations identified by the platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to build a build a proof-of-concept software
platform that employs a combination of supervised and unsupervised machine
learning algorithms to process, sort, and analyze human whole genome sequencing
data from an Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) cohort from a set genetic
background. ALS is an incurable, debilitating disease whose genetic causes
remain largely unknown. Identifying these mutations will enable the development
of efficacious treatments for the conditions. Three main objectives will be
accomplished for the platform. One, the ability to process full-size, high
coverage human whole genome data automatically through the pipeline in a
scalable manner. Two, the ability to identify the genetic background of a test
subject with a top-5 error rate of &lt;1%, an important verification step to
minimize incorrect cohort stratification from false ancestry self-reports.
Three, the ability to rapidly identify at least one genetic feature known to be
associated with ALS (e.g., SOD1, C9ORF72), which will help provide early
validation for the platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.