* 1819917
* SBIR Phase I:  Quasi- Semi-Active Seats (QSAS) for Heavy Machinery
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Jonathan DeShaw, ACTIBIOMOTION, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project focused on a novel seat
design that reduces vehicle-based whole-body vibration and shock will 1) better
protect human health while 2) addressing major transportation markets including
trucking, agriculture, construction, military vehicles, and mass transit, as
well as automobiles and water-/land-based recreational vehicles. The envisioned
socio-economic impact is significant: Continual exposure to whole-body vibration
and shocks can cause discomfort, reduction in work performance, and chronic low-
back pain for vehicle operators and passengers. Low-back pain is the largest
component of disability among all occupational-related injuries. Though so-
called "active" seats can help reduce these vibrations/shocks, their high cost
is a major barrier. The low-cost seats being pursued here could benefit millions
of vehicle operators. The work will also result in a greater scientific and
technological understanding of the sources/effects of and potential remedies for
whole-body vibration and shock. The suspension system market is projected to
grow at a CAGR of 5.11%, by value, from 2016 to 2021. The market is expected to
grow from USD 52.38 Billion in 2015 to USD 67.22 Billion by 2021. The market for
bus seats alone is expected to be at $10.03 Billion by the year
2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project is focused on the feasibility of a quasi-semi-active seat (QSAS)
technology. Seating design for heavy equipment and vehicle operators has faced a
trade-off between performance and cost. The most-complex 'active seats' reduce
vibration but are cost-prohibitive at $3,500. Semi-active seats are simplified
active seats and perform better than passive seats, but still magnify input
vibration and cost several thousand dollars. Passive seats are the least
expensive, but they magnify input vibration at low frequencies. Recent
design/material advances and strong preliminary data set the stage for
developing an innovative passive seat at a fraction of the cost of semi-active
seats that will reduce input vibration at low frequencies. Phase I feasibility
will be shown using sliding friction to mitigate vibration at low frequency. A
QSAS prototype will be built and used to show potential in laboratory and field
settings. Technical challenges will involve material selection that will show
maximum vibration mitigation and dissipation, as well as integration of the
cushion with a suspension system that can handle the weight of a seated person.
The research will determine effective performance parameters under different
magnitudes and frequencies of vibration that simulate realistic operational
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.