* 1819609
* Support of the American Chemical Society Graduate Student Symposium, New Orleans, March 18-20, 2018
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Lisa McElwee-White, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 10,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A team of six graduate students from the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Florida is organizing a symposium at the 255th
National Meeting of the American Chemical Society (ACS) entitled, ?Finding Our
Place at the Bottom: A Symposium in Memory of Richard Feynman.? The late Richard
Feynman was a titanic figure in theoretical physics who, in the 1950s,
envisioned a future in which materials could be produced and manipulated on a
sub-microscopic and even atomic scale. In the year in which Prof. Feynman would
have turned 100, this symposium celebrates the pioneering collaborations between
chemists, physicists, and engineers that have made such nanomaterials
commonplace. The symposium features a series of twelve lectures from preeminent
faculty, industry scientists, and government researchers in the field of
nanoscience, including topics such as solar energy harvesting, atom-by-atom
manipulation, and improving sustainable materials. As this symposium is fully
student-organized, the organizers are receiving invaluable training and
networking opportunities that will aid them in their future careers. In
addition, travel funding for members of underrepresented groups in the sciences
is being offered to enable their access to this symposium (scheduled on March
20) and the ACS Meeting as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Nanoscience has emerged as one of the dominant fields of research in the 21st
century, largely due to advances in theoretical understanding of nanomaterials
and improved synthetic techniques by which they are realized. The Graduate
Student Symposium at the 255th ACS National Meeting celebrates the
multidisciplinary nature of nanoscience with the goal of educating and inspiring
attendees. The graduate student organizers operate with minimal faculty
involvement, so they are also receiving significant experience in symposium
logistics, advertising, and fundraising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.