* 1819012
* Numerical Methods and Analysis for Multiscale Kinetic Equations with Uncertainties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Shi Jin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 36,983.00

Kinetic models provide the bridges between microscopic and macroscopic
descriptions for physical systems; they have a wide range of applications,
including astronautics, nuclear engineering, plasma physics, and semiconductor
device modeling. These models often involve multiple time and spatial scales,
which pose tremendous difficulties in numerical simulations. Moreover, since
kinetic models arise from approximations, there are intrinsic uncertainties in
the equations employed and the data (initial conditions and boundary values)
used. This project aims to develop efficient numerical methods and to conduct
analysis for multiscale and uncertain kinetic equations. The questions under
study concern fundamental issues in scientific and engineering computation in
the modern age -- multiscale modeling and simulation and uncertainty
quantification. Some of the research results are expected to provide excellent
additions for graduate courses in applied mathematics and scientific computing,
thus contributing to training of the future generation of researchers in modern
applied mathematics and scientific computing.

The project aims to develop and analyze numerical methods for multiscale kinetic
equations with uncertainties. The work addresses the numerical challenges of
multiple time and spatial scales as well as intrinsic model uncertainties in
collision kernels, scattering coefficients, initial and boundary data, forcing
and source terms, etc. The investigator plans to tackle these numerical
challenges via several computational and analytical tools: asymptotic-preserving
schemes to deal with multiple scales; polynomial chaos expansion and stochastic
Galerkin (and other non-intrusive) methods for the random uncertainties; and
hypocoercivity theory to study the regularity, stability, sensitivity, and long-
time behavior of these methods. The hypocoercivity analysis provides new
numerical analysis tools to study a wide class of physically important nonlinear
partial differential equations in mathematical physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.