* 1819381
* SBIR Phase I:  Ion Mobility Spectrometer for Macromolecular Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2019
* W Benner, Ion Dx, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide analytical technology that will foster the
commercial development of complicated biomanufactured products. The most
pressing need is to reduce the time and cost to bring the latest generation of
biotherapeutic drugs to market. Currently, upwards of eight years and $1B is
spent to move a candidate drug from discovery through final approval. Along the
way $300M is consumed by analytical testing procedures to certify the product.
The American healthcare system will benefit from new and less expensive
analytical technologies that reduce certification costs and lead to less
expensive drugs. Manufacturing efficiency also can be improved using the
proposed technology. Biomanufactured products are harvested from cultured cells,
and there are times when the culturing process fails to produce a perfect
product. Detecting impurities and spoilage during manufacturing will further
reduce manufacturing costs and directly benefit the consumer through the
delivery of better therapeutic products and treatment
regimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to quantify
the validity of an ion mobility spectrometer as a high-throughput tool for
screening conformational variation, purity, and aggregation of biotherapeutic
drugs. Conformation imparts functionality to a protein and any variation in
conformation implies there is a variation in biochemical activity, which is
undesirable. Ion mobility is a technique that determines molecular cross-
section, which in turn is a measure of a molecule's conformation. The gold
standard for determining protein conformation is x-ray crystallography, a
methodology limited by throughput. There is an unmet need to develop faster ways
to measure protein conformation. The proposed technology determines a protein
conformation rapidly across all phases of biotherapeutic drug development from
discovery, expression system testing, scale up and manufacturing. Additionally,
the patented design for this ion mobility spectrometer provides a way to measure
changes in conformation that might result as a consequence of exposure to
thermal, chemical, and photo-induced stress as needed for drug stability and
developability testing. The proposed work will quantify resolution,
reproducibility, accuracy, and throughput for this benchtop instrument. The
evaluation will be performed using antigen-antibody pairs and several
biotherapeutic drugs in collaboration with an academic group and industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.