* 1819052
* Close Evaluation of Layer Potentials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Arnold Kim, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This research project addresses several outstanding questions in the numerical
solution of boundary value problems using boundary integral equation methods. In
addition to advancing knowledge within the field of computational mathematics,
this research aims to lead to innovations that will provide an efficient and
accurate research computing platform complementing ongoing experimental research
in fluid mechanics and electromagnetics. The project includes an
interdisciplinary, team-based approach with graduate training and education
components that will also serve as recruiting tools to further promote women and
underrepresented minority graduate students in science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to introduce,
analyze, and implement new high-order numerical methods for the close evaluation
of layer potentials. Layer potentials are used to represent solutions of linear
elliptic partial differential equations in boundary integral equation methods.
The close-evaluation problem refers to large errors incurred by high-order
quadrature rules when evaluating layer potentials at points near the boundary of
the domain despite being highly accurate elsewhere in the domain. Addressing the
close-evaluation problem is important for many applications, including Stokes
flow problems and the field of plasmonics. A current challenge is to develop
efficient, easily-implementable methods that address the close-evaluation
problem in three dimensions. This project will address the challenge by
identifying and analyzing the nearly-singular behavior of these integral
operators using asymptotic analysis. The main objectives of this project are to
(1) develop new methods to address the close-evaluation problem, (2) analyze the
error and investigate efficiency and computational issues, and (3) extend the
methods to other linear elliptic partial differential equations. Results from
this project are expected to enable development of novel, accurate, and
efficient computational methods that address the close-evaluation
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.