* 1819435
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioinert Viscoelastic Gels as Diseased Soft Tissue Lubricants
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Benjamin Cooper, Articulate Biosciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,945.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to demonstrate the technical feasibility of a
first-of-its-kind injectable gel for treating osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis, a
disease of the body's joints, affects greater than 27 million Americans, and the
proposed activity will de-risk the proprietary gel technology to warrant
continued development of a medical device for treating osteoarthritis. The
product is a bioinspired polymer gel solution, to be administered by injection
into the joint, which will lubricate, cushion, and protect the joint's cartilage
from wear, and thereby slow the progression of osteoarthritis. Upon successful
completion of this project, the company aims to complete the preclinical and
clinical studies required to gain regulatory approval for the product emanating
from the proposed activity. From this project, a deeper fundamental
understanding of body-biomaterial interactions will be gained, benefiting
engineers, clinicians, and ultimately patients. The anticipated commercial
success of this product will result in job creation both before and after
completion of product development. As joint pain is one of the leading causes of
missed work, disability, and general depreciation of quality of life, successful
completion of the proposed high-technical-risk project will lay the foundation
for development of an impactful medical device which will treat the highly
prevalent disease osteoarthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation of this
project's technology lies in the patented synthetic techniques and composition
of a tissue-protective gel solution that remains in the joint capsule at
therapeutic concentrations for significantly longer than current injectable gels
remain. All injectable viscoelastics approved in the United States for treating
osteoarthritis are comprised of hyaluronic acid, a biopolymer which degrades
rapidly upon injection; in contrast, the product in this project uses a
synthetic, bioinspired polymer which resists degradation and maintains effective
viscoelastic properties for four months, whereas current products'
viscoelasticity is degraded after one week. The project's first objective will,
through a radiolabeled biodistribution study, ascertain the gel's distribution
throughout the body following injection into rodent knees, to demonstrate 100%
clearance out of the animal and no accumulation within any tissues or organs.
The project's second objective will develop the material processing techniques
and syringe filling protocol for formulating the gel into its final product form
and ensuring product performance and safety specifications are met. Completion
of these objectives will allow product to be made under FDA-compliant Design
Control for a pivotal large animal study to be conducted following this project,
along with completion of formal biocompatibility testing for submission to FDA
to seek approval for a First-in-Human clinical trial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.