* 1819398
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Platform for Multiplexed Drug Profiling Using Yeast Synthetic Agglutination
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* David Younger, A-Alpha Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop a preclinical drug characterization
platform capable of profiling the effect of a drug candidate on whole protein-
protein interaction (PPI) networks. PPIs play a pivotal role in most diseases,
and are considered high-impact therapeutic targets for cancers, autoimmune
diseases, infectious diseases, and more. Over 40 clinically relevant PPIs have
been disrupted successfully with small molecules, and several have entered
clinical trials. One recently approved cancer drug, Venetoclax, is expected to
reach $2.2B in sales by 2020. Despite the enormous clinical and commercial
potential of PPI disrupting drugs, preclinical characterization remains a major
challenge. Pharmaceutical companies are limited by slow and laborious techniques
to measure protein interactions that require each protein to be purified, and
each PPI to be measured separately. As a result, only a small subset of relevant
interactions are tested during preclinical drug development, which leads to a
high incidence of failure during clinical trials. The proposed platform for PPI
network characterization is expected to have a major commercial and societal
impact by enabling more thorough preclinical screening of PPI inhibiting drugs,
reducing the overall cost and time associated with drug
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
and commercialize a novel platform for screening PPI disrupting drugs that
provides quantitative accuracy, enables simultaneous characterization of whole
PPI networks, and eliminates the need for protein purification. This platform
combines the throughput of a cell-based assay with the accuracy of a
bioanalytical technique by linking yeast haploid mating efficiency to the
affinity of proteins displayed on the cells' surfaces. Preliminary results
demonstrate that next generation sequencing of diploid cells may be used to
accurately measure many PPI strengths simultaneously. The goal of this project
is to demonstrate that the proposed platform can correctly recapitulate whole
disease-relevant PPI networks and accurately characterize well-studied
inhibitors in a format that is compatible with existing high-throughput
screening workflows. To demonstrate feasibility, the well-studied BCL2 PPI
network, which contains unstable proteins and considerable complexity, will be
analyzed to identify each pairwise PPI and compared to known interactions from
the literature. The yeast strains and assay parameters will then be optimized
for screening water insoluble small molecule drugs and 96-well plate
compatibility. The ultimate goal of this project is to establish a new platform
technology for the preclinical characterization of PPI inhibiting drug
candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.