* 1819326
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Wearable Retinal Imaging Device for Improved Monitoring of Multiple Sclerosis at Home
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Samantha Scott, JuneBrain, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will help advance the health and welfare of
individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) - a debilitating chronic inflammatory
disease affecting nearly 1 million people in the United States. A non-invasive,
wearable retinal imaging device will be developed for at-home patient use that
detects changes in MS disease activity, enabling patients and their physicians
to track responses to treatment and detect disease flare-ups between clinical
visits. Early detection and proper treatment of MS is crucial to reducing the
risk of disease progression and disability. Current practice relies on
infrequent neurological and radiological exams to assess changes in disease
activity and treatment efficacy. However, there is currently no way to monitor
MS in real time between these visits. Research relating retinal pathology to MS
processes in the brain demonstrate that retinal imaging can provide early
detection of disease events, offering an alternative monitoring pathway. This
device will thus help reduce increases in patient healthcare costs associated
with increasing disability, and potentially impact the research and care of
patients with other brain conditions that manifest in the retina, including
traumatic brain injury, epilepsy, and addiction. Following FDA approval, the
device will be sold to MS patients, neurologists, and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will yield a novel retinal
imaging device that uses optical coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus
autofluorescence (FAF) to assess retinal biomarkers associated with MS
progression. While OCT and FAF are widely-used modalities for imaging the
retina, the proposed device differentiates itself from current technologies in
that it is specifically designed for use by MS patients at home. This will
include a ruggedized, ergonomic, and wearable design suited for those who suffer
from low mobility and other symptoms that make trips to a clinic difficult.
Patients will use the device briefly once a week, during which time retinal
images will be automatically acquired, analyzed, and sent to a physician for
remote review. As such, it will further increase engagement between patients and
physicians by making patients more proactively involved in their disease
management. For this project, the following objectives are planned: 1) Develop
the OCT component of the device to acquire high-resolution and repeatable images
of layers in a healthy tissue-mimicking phantom retina, 2) Develop the FAF
component of the device, and 3) Validate the device?s ability to acquire high-
resolution and repeatable images of retinal layer thicknesses and
autofluorescence in post-mortem retinas from MS patients and healthy
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.