* 1819842
* SBIR Phase I:  Hacking Eye Movements to Improve Attention
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Joseph Snider, Brainleap Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to commercialize a suite of gaze-driven training
games that are designed to train attention orienting, focus, and inhibitory
control. These video games are played with one's eyes, instead of a mouse or a
touchscreen. By combining the gaze-driven aspect with embedded training
principles, the games are uniquely effective in training attention. Attention is
a foundational cognitive skill that is essential for academic success, much like
reading is foundational to learning other subjects. The proposed project will
result in a stand-alone system for elementary and middle schools to use in both
special education and standard education programs for training attention control
in children with attentional focus challenges. This product is particularly
applicable for children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and those with
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), because their academic
performance suffers from their attentional challenges. A key technical
innovation for this project is the development of a suite of assessments that
provide feedback on student performance on par with validated laboratory
assessments of attention. The in-game assessments will be validated against the
laboratory standards. At the end of this project, the suite of intervention and
assessment games will be ready to deploy for testing in school settings as part
of a SBIR Phase II project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attention skill lies
at the foundation of cognitive control and one's ability to scaffold successful
classroom learning, yet existing laboratory tools to accurately measure
attention's many facets are out of reach of the teachers and educators on the
frontlines. This SBIR Phase I project brings innovation to the standard methods
of attention assessment by creating easy to use assessment tasks that attract
the attention of school children and whose validity will be compared to gold-
standard lab assessments. This will make accurate assessment of attentional
function more reliable even when delivered without an assessment expert present,
and this project opens the market for attention training games that can show
unbiased, quantitative improvement. This innovation will be broadly useful to
allow a wide range of individuals to assess attention, but this specific project
seeks to commercialize lab-quality attention intervention games for use by
educators in schools with a software suite featuring interleaved assessment and
training. This approach will provide feedback for school staff as well as ensure
that the next steps in attention training are appropriate for the learner's
current skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.