* 1819367
* SBIR Phase I:  Project Trident: A Three-Pronged Automated Solution to Satellite Derived Littoral Bathymetry Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Kyle Goodrich, TCarta Marine, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 223,655.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the establishment of the analytical
framework and software for a global bathymetry mapping system based upon freely
available satellite imagery, three independent extraction methods, and ongoing
data collection to create geospatial products for a wide range of applications.?
Shallow water zones are crucial to the world?s ecology, economy, and culture. An
estimated 70% of the world?s littoral zone is not mapped to modern standards,
and traditional methods of mapping these areas are prohibitively expensive and
dangerous. Through remote sensing techniques, this innovation will produce
detailed bathymetric data for shallow water areas around the globe at far lower
costs than traditional methods. This is particularly significant for
impoverished remote, low-lying islands which have scarce resources for mapping
the natural environment on which their economies heavily rely. ?Additionally,
shallow water bathymetry data is vital to geospatial intelligence and to
accurately assessing the feasibility and environmental impact of projects
relating to global trade/port development, aquaculture, tourism, and resource
development.? The results of this innovation will provide a modern baseline of
seabed topography for future scientific analysis, change detection, and greater
understanding of the marine environment.

The proposed project addresses the budgetary and health and safety challenges of
nearshore bathymetry mapping by advancing three distinct methods of calculating
satellite derived bathymetry. These methods rely on different parameters of
measurement for water depth retrieval, enabling the advantages of one method to
overcome the shortcomings of another. This will create a self-validating method
for leveraging advanced remote sensing algorithms in an integrated software
platform with ongoing data collection to produce 10-30m resolution bathymetry
elevation models.? Extraction methods utilize underwater stereophotogrammetry
from multiple overlapping images, wave kinematic detection from multispectral
imagery, and measurement of variable attenuation of multispectral signals
through the water column.? Research will be conducted on computer vision
applications for assessing and allocating images based upon metocean and
atmospheric parameters; seafloor spectral segmentation techniques and effects on
subsequent multispectral depth retrieval; automation of stereophotogrammetric
seafloor target identification and correlation, and integration and automation
of wave kinematic derived depth values with multispectral depth retrieval
values.? Statistical analysis of resulting data from this combined processing
method, evaluated against in situ data for trial locations, will provide direct
comparisons for accuracy reporting, algorithm refinements, computational
optimization, and determine overall technical and commercial feasibility of
future global implementation.?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.