* 1819846
* SBIR Phase I:  4th-Phase Water Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Chien-Chang Kung, 4th-Phase Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to optimize water utilization, thereby improving
agricultural production. It is projected that the human population will exceed 9
billion by 2050. To meet the expected demand, global food production must
increase by more than 50% by 2050. This SBIR project will have impact not only
in expanding fundamental knowledge of plant utilization of water but also in
contributing to agricultural productivity, an urgent and practical need for
human survival, in a sustainable manner.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to commercialize the advanced water-treatment
technology that could enhance plant growth, and therefore improve crop output in
agricultural applications. In short, a thin layer (about 100 microns, as thin as
a human hair) of interfacial water was found to exist with a slightly higher pH,
net negative charge, and a tendency to exclude impurities. These findings were
similar to those found by other independent research groups working with xylem
cells in plants and muscle cells in animals. Several hydrogels and polymers were
also found to contain interfacial water with similar properties. Initial studies
regarding the practical use of the interfacial water were conducted in a plant
system. On average, initial results show a rapid growth rate of around 10% to
20% improvement compared to the control group; preliminary findings that have
now been confirmed to be similar amongst four different plants, namely chick
pea, wheatgrass, basil, and pea shoots. This SBIR will enable continued testing
and scale up the interfacial water generator to meet water demands for customer
validations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.