* 1819877
* STTR Phase I:  Manganese Oxide-Carbon Nanosheet Anodes for Extreme High Power Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Rahul Mukherjee, EnerMat Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the advancement of improved lithium ion batteries.
The project will evaluate new battery chemistry enabling more rapid charging
rates then currently available in the worldwide energy storage marketplace. Such
high power density batteries would cater to a major emerging battery segment
where current lithium ion battery technologies fall dramatically short.
Successful development of this innovation will provide benefits to both current
and future applications. Clearly, large scale deployment of a markedly superior
energy storage device will have significant societal benefits by accelerating
the move away from fossil fuel in many applications and products. For instance,
a viable regenerative braking energy storage technology based on the proposed
technology would result in a tremendous reduction in electricity used by subway
trains, with a concomitant reduction of CO2 emissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to address the core of
the microstructure - performance relations in energy storing materials,
answering a series of fundamental questions regarding how a charge carrier is
reversibly or irreversibly stored at high rates in manganese oxide - carbon
nanocomposite anodes. In conventional LIBs, it is the graphite-based anode that
limits charging rates, with catastrophic lithium metal plating and dendrite
growth occurring at increased currents. It is expected that many of the existing
"Graphite - Inherited" paradigms regarding fast rate in anodes would be done
away with, or substantially redefined with the proposed approach for designing
high power lithium ion batteries based on an inexpensive hemp-derived carbon
nanosheets and nanostructured manganese oxide anodes. A much clearer
understanding of the synthesis - structure - property relations in such
nanocomposites will have wide-reaching scientific and technological
implications. Research and development activities will focus on structural
optimization and manufacturing scalability along with fabrication and testing of
near-commercial pouch cell form factors in order to demonstrate device-level
performance and commercial viability of the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.