* 1819738
* SBIR Phase I: Hydrothermal Growth Strontium Beryllium Borate (SBBO) for deep UV Nonlinear Optical Applications.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Henry Giesber, HT CrystalSolutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 217,730.00

The?broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is represented by the development of a company
in a unique field of single crystal growth addressing needs in solid-state
lasers. Single crystal growth represents a small and highly specialized, but
absolutely essential, area of modern materials technology. Solid-state lasers
are commercially vital because they are compact, durable, relatively
inexpensive, and field deployable in many technologies. Single crystals are
essential components to solid-state lasers and thereby represent significant
commercial potential. This project will enhance the skill set of specialty
manufacturers of high quality single crystals for solid-state lasers. It
represents an unmet commercial need in short wavelength solid-state lasers and
also will expand the technological skill set of single crystal growers. This
last point is especially important, as there is a serious lack of skills,
technology and infrastructure in solid state laser production in this country,
and this makes the US increasingly dependent on offshore suppliers of essential
materials. This program will help train the next generation of critical
materials manufacturing experts in the US.

The proposed project intends to address the development of new single crystals
called Strontium Beryllium Borate (SBBO). These crystals are an enabling
technology for the manufacture of short wavelength solid-state lasers lasing at
and below 266 nm. Such lasers have many potential applications but at present
there are no materials capable of practical performance at these very short
wavelengths. This shortcoming represents a significant commercial opportunity.
The project will examine production of single crystals of a new material to meet
this need using hydrothermal synthesis, which employs very hot water at high
pressures as a growth environment. In this Phase I project, research will be
undertaken to develop a growth protocol of large single crystals of this vital
material, A feedstock will be perfected, and seed crystals will be produced.
Transport conditions will be optimized, and suitable temperature gradients will
be identified. Preliminary evaluation of crystal quality will be performed.
Suitable crystals will be sent to collaborators in the laser manufacturing
industry for preliminary production of solid-state short wavelength lasers. The
seed crystals and growth protocols from the research in this Phase I program
will be used in a Phase II project for development of a full-scale commercial
manufacturing process for this crystal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.