* 1819740
* SBIR Phase I:  Air-breathing electrochemical devices for long-duration grid-scale energy storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* William Woodford, Baseload Renewables, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2018
* USD 223,258.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to unleash the full potential of renewable
electricity generation sources such as wind and solar photovoltaic by augmenting
those generation assets with ultra-low-cost energy storage that matches the
dispatchability and dependability of fossil fuels. The combination of renewable
generation sources with ultra-low-cost, long-duration energy storage enables a
new class of generation assets "baseload renewables" which further US energy
independence and leadership in the wind and solar industries. Due to their
fundamental cost positions and/or inability to scale, existing energy storage
technologies are unable to meet the price and performance requirements for these
long-duration energy storage applications; even the most aggressive forecasts
for pricing indicate that lithium ion batteries are an order of magnitude too
expensive for these applications.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop ultra-low-cost (<$20/kWh), long-
duration (>24h rated duration) energy storage solutions to enable renewable
generation sources to be a cost effective, widespread, drop-in replacement to
fossil fuel electricity generation. Air-breathing aqueous sulfur batteries
provide a unique platform for the development of system-level long-duration
storage assets meeting these stringent cost and performance targets. The
technology platform leverages low-cost, abundant chemicals such as sulfur,
water, and air, to enable an ultra-low-cost electrochemical energy storage
system. In Phase I of this SBIR, a prototype air-breathing energy storage device
will be developed and demonstrated that significantly reduces the power cost
($/kW) of this technology. This will be achieved by systematically investigating
and optimizing the electrochemical active and inactive materials and by
designing cell and system architectures which are optimized for long-duration
air-breathing electrochemical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.