* 1819545
* STTR Phase I:  Feasibility of a two-phase test tube assay for rapid detection and enumeration of Vibrio vulnificus and Vibrio parahaemolyticus in oysters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Chris Ramezanpour, Secure Food Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of a detection assay to reduce
the incidence of Vibrio-related infections. Infections from Vibrio
parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus are the leading causes of seafood-borne
infections and fatalities, respectively, and stem primarily from raw oysters.
Development and implementation of rapid, accurate, inexpensive and easy-to-use
testing methods would expand Vibrio data collection and enhance preventive
measures by state shellfish labs (monitor harvest areas), and oyster processors
and post-harvest processors (quality control at facilities). The assays will be
available to users in simple, ready-to-prepare kits. These kits will make it
easy for non-specialized personnel to test oyster lots still under refrigeration
without disrupting logistics, and help U.S. oyster processors and post-harvest
processors improve risk management tools and access export markets with
restrictions on Vibrio levels. The tests also will improve environmental risk
evaluations for harvest areas by state shellfish labs, FDA, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, and other members of the National Shellfish
Sanitation Program. The tests will be marketed in the U.S., and other large
oyster producing nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to develop two-phase, thermostable test tube media formulations for the
detection and enumeration of pathogenic V. parahaemolyticus, total V.
parahaemolyticus, and V. vulnificus in oysters. The goal is to demonstrate a)
&gt; 95% sensitivity and specificity of each test with pure cultures and oyster
samples; b) 24-hr detection time; c) ease-of-use of the ready-to-prepare kits,
based on time, steps, equipment, materials and feedback from industry; and d)
low cost. The main technical hurdles are: 1) Increasing formulation volumes for
test tube assays since linear increases of agar layer volumes in test tube media
formulations could impact Vibrio organism motility, and consequently detection
speed and accuracy; and 2) replacing a non-heat stable antibiotic component,
Polymixin B of the V. vulnificus test, with a heat stable alternative, like
ampicillin or lincomycin, to improve ease-of-use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.