* 1819727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inductive Construction of Multi-Dimensional Environmental Processes from Point Soil Data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Christian Renschler, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2020
* USD 12,965.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze the spatial and
temporal distribution patterns of radioactive elements (radionuclides) released
by a nuclear accident and will test new methods for assessing radioactive
contamination levels in soils. This project will address the technical
challenges that researchers and decision makers face when designing and
conducting field measurement to determine soil contamination levels, and it will
improve existing analytical methods currently used for environmental
contamination incidents. Project findings will enhance mitigation strategies to
reduce the impact of contaminants on human and environmental health. Monitoring
radioactivity levels in soils is particularly important because elevated
radioactivity can affect human health through external exposure and through
ingestion of agricultural products or livestock products. By assessing the
radioactivity levels in soils in the context of background topography and
physical processes, this project will enhance the understanding of radionuclide
behavior in landscapes. Such enhanced understanding will help policy makers make
informed decisions about remediation and safety measures in the event of a
contamination incident. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.

Delineating distribution patterns of contaminants from a limited number of soil
samples poses challenges, especially in mountainous terrain with mixed land-use
types such as is the case in Fukushima Prefecture in Japan, where forests, farm
fields, and residential areas were contaminated by the radioactive fallout
following the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident precipitated by the
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in March 2011. The doctoral student will focus her
attention on radiocesium, which becomes attached to clay soil particles
(colloids) and becomes immobile. These colloids can gradually move downward in
soils or are redistributed through surface runoff, erosion, and deposition.
These characteristics raise two principal questions: (1) Do the soil samples
collected at certain points reflect the influence of topography and physical
processes? (2) Does the collected data represent an accurate picture of the
contaminant distribution patterns and their changes? In the past, analysis of
the spatial distribution of contaminants used correlation and clustering
techniques or other analytic methods like semivariograms and kriging. Because
the use those types of approaches were not satisfactory for sites like those in
Fukushima, the doctoral student will use stepwise multi-spatial scale analysis
that considers horizontal, diagonal, vertical, and temporal soil distributions.
The multi-spatial scale analysis then will be combined with terrain structure
analysis. The structure of terrain includessoil collection points, hillslopes,
flow paths, and watershed patterns. By combining this terrain analysis with
numerical or distance-based analysis at different scales, this project will
employ a more sophisticated spatial analysis approach for mountainous
landscapes. Although this project will focus on methods developed for the
Fukushima area, this approach will have utility at other sites, including
locales in the U.S., where background factors might affect radioactivity levels
resulting from accidental dispersing of radioactive materials at various spatial
scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.