* 1819306
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Closed Systems for Manufacturing Autologous Dendritic Cell Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Rossi, FLASKWORKS
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is in the development of new technologies to manufacture
personalized therapies for cancer and other diseases that are based on a
patient's own cells. Such therapies have shown remarkable success in recent
years, however, manufacturing these therapies is challenging because mass
production techniques cannot be employed when each patient receives a unique
therapy. Indeed, for therapies based on dendritic cells, which are an important
part of the human immune system, there are no manufacturing systems currently
available that can perform all of the required steps. This project will address
this major unmet need by leveraging advanced concepts in engineering and biology
to design an integrated system for cost-effective manufacturing of dendritic
cell therapies. Given the large number of personalized cell-based therapies
currently in clinical trials, and recently approved therapies, such a system is
expected to address a major societal need and have significant commercial
potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
manufacturing system to cover the steps involved in the manufacturing of
autologous dendritic cell therapies. Because of the low abundance of these cells
in blood, dendritic cells are typically generated from blood-derived monocytes.
Following differentiation of monocytes into dendritic cells, these cells are
then matured and stimulated with tumor-specific antigens. These steps represent
discrete unit operations that require a system capable of handling both adherent
and non-adherent cell types, different reagents for each step, and the ability
to transition from one step to another with minimal loss of cells. Further, all
steps must be performed in a disposable single-use enclosure. In order to
achieve automation and integration of these steps, the proposed system will
leverage innovations in perfusion-based dendritic cell culture and novel and
cost-effective bioreactor design strategies. A combination of computational
modeling and rapid-prototyping techniques will be employed for rapid iteration
of prototypes and testing with potential users involved in therapeutic
development. Successful completion of this project will result in feasibility
demonstration of an integrated manufacturing system developed with significant
end user feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.