* 1819655
* Theoretical Advanced Study Institute
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Thomas DeGrand, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 681,000.00

This grant provides funding for the Theoretical Advanced Study Institute (TASI)
at the University of Colorado, Boulder CO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TASI is a one-
month long Summer Institute for advanced graduate students working in the field
of theoretical high-energy physics, held every June. The aim of TASI is to
expose advanced graduate students to a much broader range of ideas and topics
than they normally experience in their home institutions while working on their
dissertation topics. TASI has been held every summer since 1984, and has been
held on the Boulder campus since 1989. A nationally-distributed Scientific
Advisory Board selects a topic and recruits scientific organizers, who arrange
the program for that year. In a typical year about sixty junior participants
hear approximately sixty presentations from approximately twenty cutting-edge
established researchers. TASI is the most successful program of its kind in the
world, and past students of TASI are found at major research institutions (both
in and outside high-energy physics). As such, TASI advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science and the training of junior
scientists. Further broader impacts associated with TASI include the TASI
videos, lecture notes, and written proceedings, all of which provide the same
benefits more broadly to other members of the high-energy physics community and
beyond. A Public Lecture is also part of TASI's annual program, and attracts a
large audience from the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Thomas
DeGrand of the University of Colorado at Boulder is responsible for TASI's
infrastructure: he oversees annual TASI operations, maintains the web site,
makes and distributes the poster, collects applications, assists in the
admission process, organizes housing for junior and senior participants, takes
care of the lecture venue, records the presentations, and allocates participant
support costs. This five-year grant provides support for TASI operations during
the period 2018-2022, inclusive. During this period it is expected that
oversight of TASI local operations will increasingly shift towards the co-PI's
Oliver de Wolfe and Ethan Neil, each of whom is also a faculty member at the
University of Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.