* 1819345
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Metal-Organic Framework Materials to Increase Sustainability of Indoor Farming
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Sorin Grama, Transaera, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the ability to
sustainably produce more food with fewer water and energy resources. To feed
nine billion people on this planet by 2050 we need to develop new systems of
agriculture. Indoor agriculture has the potential to transform the way we grow
and source our food, enabling locally-sourced crops at higher yields. Food crops
can be grown sustainably year-round near all major urban centers if the energy
and water consumption of greenhouses could be reduced. This research will lead
to the creation of a suite of water management products and services for indoor
farming applications thereby making indoor agriculture environmentally
sustainable and economically viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will commercialize a novel metal organic
framework (MOF) material that enables a new class of compact, energy-efficient
cooling and dehumidification systems for greenhouses. Recent discoveries at MIT
have revealed a novel MOF material with unprecedented water adsorption capacity.
Moreover, the MOF material may be readily synthesized from low-cost, bulk
commodity chemicals. A dehumidifier operating with this material can harvest
waste heat to provide optimal temperature and humidity conditions for controlled
environment agriculture. To translate the MOF material from research lab into
large scale production, the material must demonstrate sufficient durability
under cycling conditions, be designed to afford low cost processing and be
integrated into a cost-efficient climate control system that takes advantage of
its unique properties. The goal of the proposed R&amp;D is to accelerate
durability testing, design a process chemistry to enable low-cost manufacturing
and develop system-level models to&lt;br/&gt;analyze lifecycle performance and
cost sensitivity in an indoor farming application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.