* 1819697
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Renewable Nanoparticle Platform for Green Energy Production and Storage Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Kristen Aramthanapon, Sylvatex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2019
* USD 224,063.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to use self-assembling nanoparticle systems made from
renewable, bio-based materials to replace manufacturing processes that
conventionally rely on high-energy reaction conditions and petroleum-based
chemicals. This innovation will enhance technical understanding of the property-
performance relationship between chemistry formulations, nanoparticle
morphology, and product performance. This project will enable US manufacturers
to reduce their production and disposal of toxic waste and utilize locally
produced feedstocks and inputs in manufacturing process that are lower in carbon
intensity, and will also create new markets for US produced feedstocks and
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to optimize
a green nanoparticle-forming solvent system that self-assamble to function as
"microreactor" vessels that can produce cathode materials which are used in
rechargeable battery systems for the growing energy storage market. Solution-
based synthesis methods have been used to prepare different cathode materials,
but control over product structure and quality requires detailed understanding
of the solution chemistry, which can be obscured by downstream variables that
are introduced during electrode formation. This screening process will be
streamlined by characterizing and quantifying the properties of intermediates
produced in order to determine optimal chemistry formulation, particle size, and
calcination conditions for battery performance. The approach will use rapid
characterization methods that require only microscale quantities of material in
order to develop a sensitivity matrix that relates the impact of renewable
composition inputs and reaction variables on cathode material size and
morphology, allowing prediction of overall battery
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.