* 1819390
* SBIR Phase I:  Truncated Icosahedrons Protect Pitchers from Line-Drive Baseball Strikes to the Head
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Mynor Castro, Harvest Moon Inventions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 177,084.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on finding a
practical and cost-effective protective cap for baseball pitchers susceptible to
serious head injuries from impacts of batted baseballs. The new cap design
satisfactorily addresses the shortcomings of previous commercialization efforts
that were unable to meet the prescribed protective requirements; failed to pass
both the players' fashion expectations and comfort evaluation; and carried a
hefty purchase price. The acceptance and use of the new cap by professional
baseball players will create widespread demand from collegiate, high school and
Little League players, a market that is estimated to generate annual revenues of
more than $18M. These market projections exclude consideration of the
technology's Broader Impact potential in other sports or vocational and military
applications, where there is a growing recognition of the need for improved head
protection for athletes, soldiers, law enforcement officials and construction
workers. Sports injuries are now highly scrutinized, especially those causing
long-term medical issues from brain injury, blunt force trauma and repetitive
concussive injury. The societal value of this innovation will be found in safer
sports and work environments. Such equipment represents a rapidly growing
segment of the apparel market and a unique commercial opportunity for the
company.

The intellectual merit of this project is based on the company's patented design
that provides head protection from the impact of a baseball. The novelty of the
protective cap headliner is its flexible outer hard shell made with highly rigid
interconnecting truncated icosahedron panels. This allows the headliner to
conform to the shape of the head while maintaining the stiffness needed to
diffuse impact loads. Since the impact of a baseball represents a short duration
point load, the energy-absorbing capacity of the layer beneath the outer shell
can be minimized. The objective is to identify the material characteristics
required to dissipate the impact load associated with a Severity Index of 1200
or greater when a head-form is struck by a baseball traveling at speeds up to
125 mph; and to identify the material combination(s) best suited to achieve this
goal. Traditional foam materials as well as state-of-the-art material
compositions will be used in unique configurations to produce solutions that are
not too heavy, not too bulky nor too hot to wear. The outcomes of this study
will determine the availability of materials that can be used within the
ergonomic and mechanical constraints of the patented design to protect the head.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.