* 1819843
* SBIR Phase I:  Flexible Printed OLED Displays for Automotive and Ride-Hailing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Whitney Gaynor, Sinovia Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the creation of flexible passenger
identification displays for ride-hailing and automotive applications. This is a
distinct pain point as many drivers choose the same model cars. Our first
application is to solve ride-hailing passenger identification, but this becomes
more critical with autonomous vehicles -- the only method of visual
communication between an autonomous car and its target passenger will be via
display. By helping to enable autonomous fleets of service vehicles, our
displays will impart significant societal benefits, including reduced emissions,
improved mobility for the elderly and disabled, and fewer traffic accidents.
Beyond automotive, researchers estimate that in 2017 there are 20 billion
devices connected to the Internet that are not computers, growing to 125 billion
by 2025. These will influence many areas, including health and wellness, factory
production, public safety, retail, agriculture, homes, and offices. They will
enable better resource allocation, predictive maintenance, operations
management, worker training, task automation, energy management, and safety. Not
all of these ?Internet of Things? devices need displays, but those that do use
them for input and information relay ? the exact uses for which our displays are
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop roll-to-roll
printed passive matrix OLED (PMOLED) display technology. PMOLED displays are
built upon a patterned transparent conductive anode that defines the pixels. To
date, the only method used in industry to create this anode is photolithography.
This is a slow and expensive batch process, but it is the only method that can
produce the required results. Our high-resolution printable anode replaces both
the incumbent material and the lithographic process to create a continuous roll
of plastic covered in OLED anodes that can be loaded into a printing press. This
lays the foundation for fully printed displays, fabricated using flexography,
the same technique used to print newspapers. Through this work, we will produce
fully printed PMOLED display prototypes. These thin, flexible displays will have
extremely high contrast while using only 20% of the power required by a backlit
LCD, with wide viewing angles for easy readability and flexibility to conform to
any surface. If successful, we will be able to print displays 1000 times faster
than the industry standard throughput while reducing materials waste by 80%.
Such cost savings will make our displays the obvious choice for information
display use, especially in design-driven applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.