* 1819574
* SBIR Phase I:  Generation of Dopaminergic Neurons from Fat
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Arshak Alexanian, Cell Reprogramming & Therapeutics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 294,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be functional neuronal cells derived from human
adult adipocytes that will have applications in regenerative medicine. The goal
is to develop dopaminergic (DA) neural progenitor cells (NPCs) from
transdifferentiated human adult adipocytes using a DA cell induction cocktail.
This will have application in cellular therapeutics and research tools for
Parkinson's Disease (PD), and other neuronal diseases. In addition, these
studies will impact the field of stem cell research and regenerative medicine,
since this will be the first demonstration that functional neuronal cells, the
main building blocks of brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous systems, can
be produced from mature fat cells that can be used as cellular therapeutics for
several neurological disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to develop new technology for generation of midbrain dopaminergic (DA)
neural progenitor cells (NPCs) from adult adipocytes (fat cells), which will
used as a platform to develop cellular therapeutics for Parkinson's Disease
(PD), and PD research tools. Recently, using a chemical genetics approach
(chemical approach or small molecule approach), engraftable midbrain DA neuronal
progenitor cells (DA NPCs) from human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells
(BM-hMSCs) have been generated. Additionally, DA neuronal progenitor-like cells
also had been produced from de-differentiated fat cells (DFAT cells) that have
several advantages over BM-hMSCs such as homogeneity of DFAT cell cultures, ease
of isolation and low immunogenicity. The goal of Phase I project is to validate
and optimize the DA induction protocol for generation of midbrain DA NPC from
DAFT cells. Phase II will focus on clinical grade manufacturing of these DA
cells and testing their therapeutic effect in several preclinical animal models
of PD. Commercial products emerging from Phase I/II work include cellular
therapeutics for PD and research tools for PD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.