* 1819794
* SBIR Phase I: A bacterial intracellular delivery platform for liver cancer
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Nele Van Dessel, Ernest Pharmaceuticals
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project develops a bacterial platform for intracellular drug
delivery to solid tumors, with a primary focus on liver cancer. Every year,
30,000 men and women are diagnosed with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), which has a 5-year survival rate of 17.6 %. The prognosis for these
patients is poor. Currently, there are no curative treatments for these
patients. The current standard-of-care only increases overall survival by months
and has toxic side effects, with a cost to the US healthcare system of $1.5B per
year. This technology is based on the inherent feature of bacteria to colonize
solid tumors throughout the body in ratios of 100,000 to 1 compared to healthy
tissue. Due to this specificity, the developed bacterial platform has the
potential to increase dosage specifically in tumors, while reducing toxic side
effects in healthy tissues. This platform will be a toolbox that can target
intracellular pathways that are currently considered undruggable and deliver
potent doses of biologicals directly into tumor cells. The affinity of bacteria
for solid tumors, independent of organ localization, enables the extension of
this delivery method to other hard-to-treat tumor types, such as pancreas,
ovarian and gastric cancer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic cancer therapies have
many obstacles, such as stability in the blood, traversing the cellular
membrane, internalization and endosomal release. These processes impede the use
of RNAi and peptides in humans and hamper the targeting of intracellular
pathways with monoclonal antibodies. The development of a bacterial drug
delivery platform can optimize drug potency in tumors and reduce side effects in
healthy tissue. In this SBIR phase I, efficacy of this platform will be measured
in HCC by targeting intracellular pathways essential for cell survival, for
which no systemic therapy exists. A bacterial strain will be created according
to FDA guidelines that can be manufactured reliably without loss of activity. An
optimized preservation protocol will be developed to ensure maximal bacterial
fitness and maximal delivery efficacy after administration. This bacterial
delivery system has the potential to accelerate the translation of fundamental
cancer research into clinical therapies. Discoveries could be genetically
translated directly into protein, antibody or shRNA therapies that regulate
mammalian gene expression and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.