* 1819593
* SBIR Phase I:  Biomass to Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Robert Meissner, CykloBurn Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is that it holds the promise of significantly reducing
the over fertilization of crop fields with poultry litter and at the same time
provide poultry farmers with greater profits. Currently poultry litter
(excrement, feathers, bedding and other waste) is used as fertilizer on crop
fields. The litter is excessively high in phosphorous which is not well adsorbed
by crops and ends up in waterways causing excessive algae growth resulting in
dead zones with no aquatic life. This project expects to prove the practicality
of a high efficiency burn system that is low enough in cost to be affordable by
individual farmers. The system will burn poultry litter and convert the
resulting heat energy to electricity and hot water for heating the farmer's
chicken houses. The energy savings will increase farmer's net profits (including
the amortized cost of the system) by, on average, 25%. Thus poultry farmers will
be incentivized to eliminate environmentally dangerous poultry litter by
converting their farm waste to energy.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to design, produce and test a scaled
prototype version of the lab test system. The lab test system is expected to
provide burn efficiencies as high as ~97% with particulate emissions well within
EPA standards. The scaled system will be designed to process ten times the
litter as the lab system. The primary question this SBIR project will answer is:
can the lab results be replicated in a full scale system capable of handling the
requirements of an average poultry farm. The patent pending technology upon
which the lab system was designed uses computer controlled fuel (poultry litter)
feed rates coupled with a multilevel air injection system to produce optimal
efficiency. There are several variables that will be tested to ensure upscaling
the size will be successful. These include combustion chamber size and design,
air injection locations, pressures and CFM, and fuel feed rates. Successful
commercialization will require optimization of these variables in a full scale
system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.