* 1819932
* SBIR Phase I:  A High Throughput Microfluidics Platform to Measure Secretion from Single Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Konstantinos Tsioris, ONECYTE BIOTECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop single cell analysis technology to provide
insight into cellular mechanisms, which has the potential to transform drug
development and manufacturing. Single-cell analysis, or the ability to decipher
cell-to-cell heterogeneity, is a limiting factor in biotechnology and clinical
applications. This project aims to further develop a transformative platform
technology for integrated single-cell analysis capable of addressing existing
challenges with the current state-of-the-art. The platform will potentially
shift the paradigm of drug development and manufacturing, enabling quick
iteration and evaluation of new therapeutic compounds. This approach could
significantly reduce the time and cost to bring new drugs to market and reduce
the overall cost of treating patients, which is a substantial benefit to
society. Beyond this initial application, this single-cell analysis platform
could become a readily implemented research tool, enhancing our basic
understanding of biology, facilitate engineering of cell function, as well as
evaluating safety and efficacy of new drugs and
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
robust and cost effective commercial prototype technology platform for
integrated single-cell analysis. A key feature of the platform technology is the
unprecedented sensitivity in measuring quantitatively secreted molecules from
single cells. This is achieved by incubating single cells in extremely small
volumes, and enabling analytics on an unprecedented scale in these microscopic
bioreactors. The proposed work will lead to the development of a consumable
prototype microfluidic chip, enabling quick and resource efficient adaptation of
the platform to the marketplace. The proposed prototype will be validated
through relevant studies, addressing a confirmed market need in cell line
development. Commercial adaptation of this prototype will potentially provide
deep insight into biological and physiological processes on a single-cell level,
and transform drug development and manufacturing, therapeutic treatment, as well
as clinical diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.