* 1819550
* Community Facility Support: The Arizona State University SIMS Laboratories
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Peter Williams, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,638,730.00

This award continues support of the Arizona State University Community Secondary
Ion Mass Spectrometer (SIMS) Facility that will provide NSF-researchers in Earth
Sciences access to two complex analytical instruments that allow them to analyze
very small areas in natural and synthetic materials. The NanoSIMS can detect and
quantify signals from a spot as small as 50 nanometers across. This is ~1000
times less than the width of a human hair. The 6f SIMS instrument analyzes
larger areas (a few micrometers across), but can achieve sub-micron resolution
in depth. Both instruments are expensive, require major efforts to maintain, and
can be challenging to use. The funds support ASU specialists who work with
visitors and help them design their experiments and select instrument protocols
to get the best possible analyses from their samples. Visitors are taught how to
operate the instruments for their particular problem, instructed in the basic
principles of SIMS, and encouraged to describe new questions so that the
facility specialists may develop appropriate, novel analysis techniques using
these instruments. The SIMS technique has multiple applications in Earth and
Space Sciences, nuclear non-proliferation, and the semiconductor/materials
science fields. Thus, the knowledge gained by visitors and Facility-supported
students in the past has helped them obtain employment in SIMS labs in industry,
academia, and national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past
funding cycle (September 2014 through May 2018), the facility helped a diverse
group of visitors obtain the best possible trace element and isotopic
microanalyses. In the new funding period the facility will continue this role in
the US geochemical community, and add functionality through development of new
analytical techniques, improving quantification and infrastructure (standards),
and enhancing educational approaches for new visitors (training). The existing
facility contains two Cameca instruments (IMS 6f and NanoSIMS). The IMS 6f has
excellent specifications for sample chamber vacuum (enabling trace H, and C
analyses and isotope measurements for trace H), transmission, mass resolution
and lateral and depth resolution. It is well-suited for precise isotope ratio
measurements and trace element analyses in small (several micrometer) areas and
for in-depth profiling of trace element distributions with few-nanometer
resolution. The NanoSIMS has extremely high lateral resolution coupled with high
secondary ion transmission at high mass resolving power. It is a good match for
a wide range of NSF EAR-supported research and is the only NanoSIMS in the US
that acts as an open facility. Arizona State University has been a leader in
SIMS research and development for over 30 years and is known for cross-
disciplinary collaborations. The renewal of this facility support will allow ASU
to continue sharing expertise with a broad spectrum of earth scientists while
continuing to improve existing and develop new analytical techniques. The ASU
SIMS labs participate in open houses for the general public, conduct a workshop
once a year (mostly for graduate students), and create training guides for those
interested in learning more details about this rich analysis
technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.