* 1819521
* SFS-Capacity: Collaborative: Validation of Concept Assessment Tools for Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Sherman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 309,967.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) and University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) propose to evaluate two cybersecurity educational
assessment tools: the Cybersecurity Concept Inventory (CCI) and the
Cybersecurity Curriculum Assessment (CCA). The CCI assesses the quality of
instruction of any first course in cybersecurity; the CCA assesses how well a
college curriculum prepares graduates for a career in cybersecurity. The
evaluation will consist of student interviews, expert reviews, and statistical
analyses to examine the efficacy of these tools. In addition, the project will
provide initial insights into the efficacy of educational approaches by
comparing student performance relative to their instructors' teaching practices.
At present, there is not a rigorous, research-based method for measuring the
quality of cybersecurity instruction. Validated assessment tools such as the
ones in development at UMBC are essential so that educators have trusted methods
for discerning whether efforts to improve student preparation are successful.
This validation study will complete an essential part of the broader
Cybersecurity Assessment Tools project, which will provide rigorous, evidence-
based instruments for assessing and evaluating educational practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop evidence for the validity of the CCI's and
CCA's measurement of student conceptual understanding of cybersecurity, the
project will complete six tasks for each assessment tool: (1) conduct at least
thirty cognitive interviews of students thinking aloud while answering the draft
questions, and use results to improve the validity of the questions; (2) collect
and use feedback on the draft questions from at least twenty experts in
cybersecurity or cybersecurity education; (3) administer the draft tool to at
least 200 students and use psychometric methods of analysis on the results; (4)
revise the draft questions in light of tasks 1-3; (5) administer the revised
tool to at least 1,000 students and use psychometric analysis on the results;
and (6) hold workshops at four cybersecurity education meetings to promote
awareness of, and to seek additional feedback on the tools. By following well-
established rigorous methods for developing CCIs, this project will help the
cybersecurity educational community to develop and improve curricula and
instructional methods and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.