* 1819893
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of low-cost micro birdbath resonant gyroscope
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Jae Yoong Cho, Enertia Microsystems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,903.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this project is to address the
need for a small, low-cost, and high-accuracy angular rate and angular
orientation sensor (also known as a gyroscope) for a wide range of applications.
Gyroscopes are desired by many emerging applications such as inertial
measurement units for small satellites such as CubeSats, autonomous vehicles,
drones, and high-end wearable electronics. These applications require a
gyroscope with a similar price (&lt; $10) but ~10,000 times better accuracy than
those currently used in smartphones. The birdbath resonator gyroscope (BRG) is a
novel micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) gyroscope with a strong potential
to satisfy the needs of these applications due to significantly better resonance
quality and mechanical symmetry than current silicon gyroscopes. The economic
impact of BRGs will be enormous since many industries can utilize high-
performance gyroscopes to monitor the dynamics of their systems, provide
positional awareness, and improve the performance of other parts of these
systems. Availability of low-cost and high-performance gyroscopes will enable
users to further understand their applications and explore their limits and
applicability across a broad range of societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a new
batch-level microfabrication technology to enable the commercialization of low-
cost, very high-performance MEMS gyroscope from fused-silica. Gyroscopes
available today are either accurate but large and expensive (example:
hemispherical resonator gyroscope), or small and cheap but inaccurate (example:
smartphone gyroscopes). High-accuracy silicon MEMS gyroscopes in research are
small and accurate but expensive. This is because silicon has fundamentally low
mechanical resonance quality factor (Q) so it is difficult to manufacture high-
accuracy gyroscopes with a high yield. The BRG is a gyroscope made from fused-
silica and capable of having low cost, small size, and high performance. Its
fused silica micro mechanical resonator can achieve significantly higher Q than
silicon, which allows the BRG to be manufactured with a high yield. The BRG
fabrication process uses a blowtorch to reflow-mold a fused silica substrate
into three-dimensional hollow shells with dimensions of several 10s of
micrometers to several millimeters with high geometrical accuracy. The proposed
research will significantly enhance our understanding of the relationships among
size, design, and process on the performance of the BRG as well as the
relationship among detailed process parameters, yield and reproducibility on
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.