* 1819652
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Immuno-Nutrition Properties of a Single Cell Protein to Abate Soy-Induced Enteritis in Aquafeeds
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Larry Feinberg, KnipBio Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a protein replacement for soy-based marine
animal diets to improve yield through effective nutrition and enhanced animal
welfare. Aquafeeds represent &gt;50% of the cost of production, and losses due
to mortality can be as high as 50% in certain commercial species. A novel feed
ingredient that contains immuno-nutritional properties to address these
inefficiencies could be considered a game-changer to the industry. Fish are the
most resource-efficient sources of animal protein, a healthy source of food for
people, and will be one of the ways to address food security. As the surface of
the planet is greater than two-thirds ocean, one estimate suggests, if managed
properly, just 2% of this vast resource could produce enough food for all of
mankind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to expand
previous studies that suggested a novel single cell protein (SCP) is a
significant candidate to serve as a fishmeal alternative. In addition, SCP also
may contain functional properties that improve growth performance and survival.
The SCP tested previously supported improved feed conversion ratios (FCR) as
compared to conventional diets, while at the same time, statistically relevant
improvements in survival of carnivorous fish and shrimp. It also was observed
that SCP relieved secondary disease complications associated with diets, such as
gastro-enteritis. With hundreds of marketable species in aquaculture, and an
industry that is just 50 years old, the collective understanding of aquatic
animal nutrition is in its infancy. In this project, a carnivorous Seriola
species will be used as a model organism to serve as an additional reference
point beyond salmon. Targeted components of the SCP will be enhanced (or
deleted) to determine the effect of leading immuno-nutritional candidates on the
animals' ability to digest more completely inputs like soy bean meal (SBM). The
effectiveness of SCPs in emerging commercial fish diets has yet to be fully
elucidated, and the results of this study may have implications towards lower-
cost feed formulations and optimized nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.