* 1819808
* SBIR Phase I: Automating Conversational Systems For Enterprise Customer Support
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Yanjia Yao, TOPBOTS Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,479.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of a scalable,
enterprise-ready conversational AI platform that enables businesses to automate
customer support requests, optimize call routing efforts to get customers to the
right human support agent, generate customer self-service resources like smart
FAQs, augment human staff with bot capabilities, and enable personalized
recommendations to support sales and purchasing decisions for customers. Such
technology is beneficial to any enterprise organization, B2C (business-to-
consumer) and B2B (business-to-business), who needs to communicate to customers,
employees, and the public. With rising customer service and communication costs,
automation is critical for businesses to maintain profitability and competitive
advantages. On a societal level, conversational interfaces democratize access to
information and resources worldwide. A significant portion of the world's
population lives in regions where internet access is poor and device ownership
is rare. Many also suffer from physical limitations, such as impaired vision or
limited motor control. Accelerating technology access through conversational
interfaces such as SMS and voice has already been shown to transform quality of
life for disadvantaged groups through applications in telemedicine, personal
finance, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to enable human-level conversational
ability in machines. Teaching computers to communicate like humans is a critical
step to achieving human-level machine intelligence (HLMI), also called
artificial general intelligence (AGI). Current state-of-the-art approaches to
automated dialog systems use a combination of supervised learning and
reinforcement learning implemented with deep neural network architectures. These
approaches have shown promise on toy problems in academic research, but have
mixed performance in enterprise settings. This Phase 1 project extends current
deep learning approaches by developing a repeatable methodology for annotating
and preparing enterprise data for use in dialog systems and a scalable, grounded
neural network architecture that can reference external knowledge sources with
minimal manual engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.