* 1819575
* Topics in Physics Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Marc Sher, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 870,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Christopher Carone,
Joshua Erlich, and Marc Sher at the College of William and Mary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of elementary particle physics is to
understand the spectrum of elementary particles as well as their fundamental
interactions. This is the central focus of the work of Professors Carone,
Erlich, and Sher, who construct and study theories that address some of the most
profound unsolved mysteries in particle physics. These theories often lead to
testable predictions in experiments like the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which
was built in order to search for undiscovered particles and to study their
properties. The LHC is best known for the discovery of the Higgs boson, a
particle whose existence is related to the origin of the masses of the other
known elementary particles. The LHC operates at the frontier of experimentally
accessible energies. The theoretical work of Professors Carone, Erlich, and Sher
is also relevant at lower-energy experiments, such as dark-matter searches,
designed to explore the possibility of new particles with very weak
interactions. Research in these areas advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new particles and new physical laws. In their
research, Professors Carone, Erlich, and Sher will explore several new theories
that are experimentally testable. These include theories in which the observed
Higgs boson is accompanied by additional Higgs bosons, theories in which new,
very weakly interacting particles are present in conjunction with dark matter,
and theories which provide a new description of the nature of gravity. The
project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts: Professors
Carone, Erlich, and Sher will provide critical training for both undergraduate
and graduate students beginning research in a technical field, giving them
skills that translate to the broader technical workforce. They will also
continue presenting public lectures on their research results, giving interviews
about new results to interested media, and promoting high-energy physics in the
southeastern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors
Carone, Erlich, and Sher will study models in which a warped extra dimension is
stabilized by two Higgs doublets. They will construct models in which a non-
Abelian flavor symmetry leads to familons that play a role in solving the strong
CP problem and allowing for successful multi-field inflation. They have recently
demonstrated the existence of a composite graviton in a class of scalar
theories, and they will extend this to similar theories with fermions and gauge
fields. This may lend support to a new approach to the problem of quantum
gravity. They will also study dark sectors, with exotic fields that have very
weak couplings to Standard-Model particles, analyze the renormalization-group
running of these couplings, consider how these sectors can be constrained by
theoretically well-motivated ultraviolet boundary conditions, and study the
phenomenological implications of the dark-sector
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.