* 1819239
* SBIR Phase I: 3D Printing of Bisphenol A-free Polycarbonates for Customizable Cell/Tissue Culture Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Wei Zhu, Allegro 3D, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
customizable cell/tissue culture platforms using a new class of 3D printable
bisphenol A-free polycarbonate (BFP) materials and a rapid 3D printing system.
The 3D cell culture market was valued at $683 million in 2017 with an
exponential projected growth in revenue valued at $1.7 billion by 2022. The
rapid growth in this sector is primarily driven by the demand for custom-made 3D
cell/tissue models that more accurately recapitulate the human in vivo biology
in comparison to conventional animal models and planar cell culture systems. 3D
cell/tissue models have the potential to provide more physiologically relevant
responses for the drug discovery industry which is estimated to reach $86
billion in 2022. The proposed strategy of using BFP and a fully integrated
benchtop 3D printing system will facilitate the production of different
cell/tissue culture platforms on demand and enable rapid iteration of different
designs to drive forward the development of more clinically relevant cell/tissue
models for a broad market in pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, and biological
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in:
(1) the development of novel 3D printable BFP materials with tunable material
properties using green chemistry, and (2) the rapid 3D printing of customizable
cell/tissue culture prototypes to support various 3D cell/tissue models. The
material development will include the establishment of a reagent library and
optimization of the green chemistry process. The relevant material properties
such as stiffness, elasticity, optical transparency, and small molecule
adsorption will be characterized and optimized. These materials will then be
printed using a rapid light-based 3D printer to prototype cell/tissue culture
platforms followed by evaluation of their performance. In particular, 3D
printing precision and resolution will be characterized and optimized by varying
a range of fabrication parameters such as light exposure time and intensity.
Next, the efficacy of the prototypes under cell culture conditions will be
assessed based on device integrity, material degradation, as well as changes in
mechanical and optical properties. Various cells/tissues will also be cultured
on these prototype devices to evaluate biocompatibility. These achievements will
provide customized culture platforms to facilitate the engineering of more
physiologically relevant in vitro models for accelerating drug discovery and
biological studies in both industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.