* 1819477
* SBIR Phase I:  A Controversy Detection Signal for Finance
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Shiri Dori-Hacohen, Automated Controversy Detection, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to use controversy detection to support
financial institutions' ability to reduce their risks and increase profits. This
is part of a growing trend towards "alternative data" products relying on
artificial intelligence and machine learning. Besides the financial industry,
there are numerous potential applications of controversy detection technology in
a variety of market verticals, such as crisis management, defense applications,
and advertising technology. Beyond commercial applications, there is scope for
social impact by opening analysis and explanatory power of controversies to
individual users. Controversies have a massive impact on civic society and the
so-called "filter bubble" exacerbates polarization, both political and
otherwise; fake news on both sides of the political spectrum has recently
captured public attention and generated political concern. Positive impact on
society from commercializing this technology includes helping users become
better informed and more capable of critically evaluating the often-overwhelming
stream of online content. Proving the feasibility of this innovation in a highly
quantifiable space such as finance could answer a customer need in that space
and create new jobs for the economy, while enabling social good applications
that can improve civic society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project relies on sophisticated machine
learning and information retrieval techniques to automatically detect
controversial topics. The initial data were collected at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, using NSF-supported research, which recognized
controversy by mapping the text of a webpage to algorithmically-identified
controversial topics. Research has demonstrated that controversy cannot be
detected using existing methods of sentiment analysis, a widely-adopted natural
language processing method. This project bridges the gap between the current
capabilities of this nascent technology and the clear user need in the financial
domain. It will evaluate the feasibility of controversy detection by applying a
real-time controversy detection signal to financial data to reduce risk and
increase returns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.