* 1819920
* SBIR Phase I:  SeeingBus: Improving Public Transportation Services for the Blind
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Yariv Glazer, ILANS, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I is the improvement of public transportation services for
people with disabilities, specifically people with visual impairments.
Individuals with visual impairments are heavily dependent on public transit as
an essential service for engaging in daily life and social activities. However,
they often face challenges with (1) determining which bus to board, especially
at busy bus stops when multiple buses approach, and (2) boarding the correct bus
in a timely fashion before they leave the stop. By developing an advanced
notification service for alerting bus drivers, SeeingBus will address the
societal and market needs to mitigate these challenges and thereby promote
independent use of public transportation among people with visual impairments.
Improving accessibility of public transportation to people with disabilities
along with enhancing perception of their service will boost ridership resulting
in increased revenue for agencies. The project will contribute to the scientific
community as well as society in general by advancing understanding of Smart City
services needed for independent travel of people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop and
commercialize a Smart City service to improve public transportation for people
with visual impairments. The service, SeeingBus, provides an advanced
notification to bus drivers about users waiting at their next stop. People with
visual impairments often miss buses due to challenges they face with boarding
the correct bus. SeeingBus aims to improve accessibility of public
transportation by engaging bus drivers even before the bus arrives at the stop
where riders with visual impairments are waiting. As part of the smart city
vision, SeeingBus will enhance connectivity of public transportation systems
through greater communication between riders, bus stops, and bus drivers by
means of smart sensors. Using big data, SeeingBus alerts bus drivers about users
with disabilities, so the drivers can assist individuals in boarding the bus
safely. The research objective of this project is to develop and test the
feasibility of the SeeingBus system. Advancing public transportation, essential
to promoting the travel and independence of individuals, aligns with the NSF
mission to advance prosperity and welfare through scientific
advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.