* 1819042
* Flexible Krylov Subspace Projection Methods for Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* James Nagy, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 306,589.00

In many scientific and engineering applications, it is necessary
to&lt;br/&gt;solve an inverse problem; that is, to determine quantities defining
an&lt;br/&gt;object or a system through indirect measurements. The
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;used to produce images in devices such as X-Ray Computed
Tomography&lt;br/&gt;(CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) are excellent
examples. The&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models describing an inverse problem are
often so&lt;br/&gt;complicated that it is not possible to find an exact
analytical&lt;br/&gt;solution, and it is necessary to use an approximation based
on a set&lt;br/&gt;of simpler equations. However, many equations may be needed;
in&lt;br/&gt;medical imaging, for example, it is not unusual to
compute&lt;br/&gt;approximations by solving millions of equations.
Additional&lt;br/&gt;complications arise because an inverse problem may have
infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many solutions, or the solutions may change dramatically if
there are&lt;br/&gt;small errors in the indirect measurements. Thus,
additional&lt;br/&gt;constraints and mathematical tools (often referred to
as&lt;br/&gt;regularization) are needed to narrow the search to a set
of&lt;br/&gt;appropriate feasible solutions, and to stabilize the
computations.&lt;br/&gt;The type and amount of regularization is problem
dependent, requiring&lt;br/&gt;the algorithms to be able to easily adapt to user
and/or problem&lt;br/&gt;specifications. The aim of this project is develop a
flexible and&lt;br/&gt;adaptable computational platform that can be used for
this important&lt;br/&gt;class of problems, which arise in many application
areas, including&lt;br/&gt;space object identification, geophysics, microscopy
and medical&lt;br/&gt;imaging. Thus advancements made from this project have the
potential to&lt;br/&gt;benefit national defense, energy exploration, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Efficient iterative methods to compute regularized
solutions of&lt;br/&gt;large-scale discrete ill-posed inverse problems will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;The approach will use flexible Krylov subspace iterative
methods, and&lt;br/&gt;will exploit low-rank structure of data, solutions and
operators. The&lt;br/&gt;approach will allow to incorporate a variety of
regularization&lt;br/&gt;techniques, including sparse and low-rank constraints
on the solution.&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in this project can be used as
tools to obtain&lt;br/&gt;approximate solutions of ill-posed inverse problems,
and optimized&lt;br/&gt;implementations will be included in a new MATLAB package
called IR&lt;br/&gt;Tools (Iterative Regularization
Tools).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.