* 1819577
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Manufacturing of Ultra High Molecular Weight Polyethylene and Metal Hybrid Structures for Bicycle Spokes
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Brad Guertin, BERD LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is for the development
of an automated manufacturing process for polymeric, ultra-lightweight, bicycle
spokes composed of an ultra high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) and
stainless steel hybrid structure. The use of an innovative polymer-to-metal
connection allows for the creation of a bicycle spoke that out-performs modern
stainless steel spokes. In comparison, steel spokes are heavier, do not
effectively damp road vibrations, and are more prone to fatigue related failure.
The target market for this innovation is the high-end bicycle spoke market,
which is valued at over $100M. The research of new polymeric materials at
universities is at an all-time high. Despite this, there exists a gap in the
commercialization of new materials because of the difficulty in interfacing
these materials to other common construction materials, such as stainless steel.
This work will contribute fundamental knowledge to and catalyze the development
of processes for new advanced polymer products. It will enable the use of UHMWPE
and other materials in new applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is the development of an advanced manufacturing process
capable of the complex manipulation necessary for the production of novel
polymer-to-metal connections and integral eye splices. These types of
connections are not practiced in high-volume textile manufacturing today due to
the novelty of the polymer-to-metal connection and the complexity of the eye
splice operation. The research objectives include validating the key steps for
process automation and optimization of the UHMWPE-metal connection. The
anticipated outcome of this Phase I project is a prototype automated spoke
manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.