* 1819953
* Dynamics of the Mokauea Fishpond
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Esther Widiasih, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 05/31/2023
* USD 116,381.00

Records of abundant fish production indicate Native Hawaiians' wealth of
knowledge about sustainable and effective fishpond management practice. The
Mokauea fishpond is located on Mokauea island of the Kalihi ahupua'a just off
the southern coastline of O'ahu. In the early 1900's, this region was the site
of over forty fishponds, producing nearly one ton of fish per year. Currently,
the Mokauea fishpond is not functional, even though the basic water quality
parameters are within acceptable ranges for fish production. This investigation
aims to understand the workings of the Mokauea fishpond and other Hawaiian
fishponds. The research will utilize tools from statistics and applied
mathematics, and, just as importantly, will integrate the ancient knowledge from
Native Hawaiian cultural and fishpond practitioners. The results of the study
will provide insights into traditional Native Hawaiian sustainable aquaculture
practices, viewed from the lenses of Western scientific and mathematical
language. Further, findings will contribute information valuable to addressing
the increasingly important issue of sustainable food production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals of this investigation, data relating
to the physical attributes of the Mokauea pond will be collected over a year-
long monitoring study. These data will be analyzed using mathematical modeling
software to develop models of the dynamic relationships between water
temperature and circulation patterns at play in the fishpond. The model for the
temperature profile will be drawn based on the energy balance principle, while
the water circulation model will be based on the shallow water circulation model
(Saint Venant equations). Data from the sustained observation along with
conversations with Native Hawaiian aquaculture practitioners will inform the
mathematical modeling process. Finally, the investigation aims to develop,
organize, and maintain an online hub for the data collected in the study as well
as other available data and studies on the Mokauea fishpond and surrounding
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.