* 1819751
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Solid State Lighting with Micromachines
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Jessica Morrison, Helux Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,247.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in improving the quality of general and task
lighting and reducing the amount of wasted light, thus reducing energy
consumption. Solid state lighting has caused a paradigm shift in the lighting
industry. However, the rapid growth of the LED has surpassed our understanding
of its effects on human health and productivity, as well as the environment.
Developing systems that put light only where it is needed can reduce energy
consumption and improve well-being by eliminating glare and wasted light. Full
control over where artificial lights shine may also reduce the disruption of
natural ecosystems and agriculture caused by light pollution.? Unfortunately, a
compact and low-cost solution to spatially controllable illumination is not
available. Should one be brought to market, the industry could be tailored to
meet the needs of each street lamp, each office worker and the entertainment
industry among others. The ubiquitous nature of artificial illumination provides
a unique commercial opportunity with multiple market segments for growth
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will focus on a
microsystems solution to steerable lighting using a low-power, low-cost,
silicon-based mirror less than 1 mm in diameter. The mirror is capable of real-
time adjustments that will steer incident light with significant angular range.
It is controlled using digital electronics and easily combined with traditional
smart home electronics. The objective of the research is to measure the optical
output of varying system setups and optical components to determine what optics
are necessary for proper light output shape, uniformity, and color temperature.
The project will rely heavily on a combination of test measurements and
simulations to cycle through experiments rapidly and efficiently in order to
converge on a manufacturing plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.