* 1819514
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost, High-Purity Biobased Glucaric Acid
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Darcy Prather, Kalion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer(STTR) project is to develop a bio-based manufacturing process for
glucaric acid and its intermediate, glucuronic acid. Microbial fermentation
represents an attractive option for production of fuels and valuable chemicals
from renewable resources, and glucaric acid can be produced from glucose, a
renewable biomass-derived resource. The glucaric acid market was estimated at
$550M in 2016, and has a plethora of uses ranging from detergents to food
ingredients, corrosion inhibitors, and de-icing applications. The proposed
project will engineer improved productivity of the microbe using C5/C6 sugars,
thus accelerating the production of low-cost, high-purity glucaric acid.
Achieving these bioprocess improvements will facilitate widespread adoption of
bio-based glucaric acid in a variety of markets, broadening opportunity for US
products. These applications include coatings, foams and foaming aids,
electrolytes, gels, polymers, and polymer additives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase I project proposes to perform multi-omics studies to characterize the
physiology of E. coli strains producing glucaric acid via fermentation, and
develop strain engineering strategies to enable high yield and productivity.
Most fermentation products are highly reduced compared to the starting sugar,
and care must be taken to maintain cells in a reduced state, meaning high
NADH/NAD ratio, to drive the NADH-consuming biosynthetic reactions. Products
that are derived from sugar oxidation, in contrast, pose a much different
challenge, and have been explored to a much lesser extent. Here, additional
oxygen is needed to accept the excess electrons generated during glucose
oxidation. It is well known that both S. cerevisiae and E. coli, two of the most
common organisms for industrial application, are limited in their electron
transport chain capacity, resulting in overflow products from high glucose
uptake rates. Regardless of the oxygen transfer ability of the fermentation
equipment, there is an inherent maximum production rate of these organisms. In
this project, the plan is to develop E. coli strains with increased respiration
capacity, thus increasing the maximum glucose oxidation rate. Glucaric acid,
which can be produced from glucose via 3 enzymatic reaction steps, is an
exemplary product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.