* 1819491
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a textile-based retrievable stent for stroke that can be personalized to a patient's clot burden and retrieve long clots using torsion.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Vallabh Janardhan, Insera Therapeutics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 221,700.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is significant as it offers a disruptive new mechanical
approach to stroke treatment. Each year, 795,000 strokes occur in the U.S., 1.7
million strokes in Europe, and nearly 20.5 million strokes worldwide. This
public-private partnership is expected to have an important positive societal
impact on the community by saving lives especially the elderly and decreasing
the economic burden of stroke on the taxpayer. This life-saving device has a
unique value proposition for health-systems with lower inventory costs from a
single size device, and for patients with better vessel re-opening rates,
thereby saving brain cells. This textile-based braided retrievable stent, also
known as an embolus retriever or thrombectomy-assist device is an innovation
that will enhance scientific and technological understanding of how personalized
medicine can transform the care of stroke patients in the U.S. and worldwide.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to bring to market the industry?s longest
blood clot or embolus retriever for removal of short and long clots that can be
customized by the operator based on each patient?s clot burden. In addition, it
is the first textile-based braided retrievable stent which works well in
conjunction with standard catheter-based aspiration systems for stroke treatment
developed in the U.S. that can be personalized to all clot lengths. Stroke is a
major problem causing 5.5 million deaths worldwide and currently there is no
cost-effective and efficacious treatments. The mean lifetime healthcare cost per
stroke patient is $140,048. This textile-based clot retrieval device (aka
thrombectomy-assist device) is a cost-effective medical device that can help
save a stroke patient?s life. The methods and approaches of this project is to
compare via pre-clinical tests the ability of a textile-based medical device to
re-open vessels blocked with clots compared with existing approved treatments.
The goals and scope of the research will focus on the ability to rapidly re-open
vessels that are blocked by clots. This paves the way for personalized medicine
with a customizable stroke treatment device that can be tailored to a patient?s
clot burden.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.