* 1819515
* Symposium on "Surface, Interface, and Coating Materials" Symposium, 256th American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; 19-23 August 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Shan Jiang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2018
* USD 6,120.00

Coatings of surfaces is a fundamental materials process which impacts all areas
of technology and is critical to many commercial products and manufacturing
processes in industry, including coating, construction, chemical, cosmetic and
drug formulation. As such it is key to all aspects of our national prosperity
and welfare. Surface and interface of materials also play important roles in
many research areas and is one of the most active cross-disciplinary topics.
This grant supports a symposium on the topic of "Surface, Interface, and Coating
Materials" at the 256th American Chemical Society (ACS) National Meeting. This
symposium covers the recent advances in chemistry, physics and engineering of
polymeric materials directly related to surface, interface and coating
applications. The symposium is truly interdisciplinary, encouraging crosstalk
and collaborations among different fields. Research discussed here will set the
tone for future directions in surface and interface research, together with the
next generation coating materials for industrial applications. It will also
provide a multidisciplinary platform for scientists, including graduate
students, postdocs and junior faculties, from both academia and industry to
exchange information from different areas, and identify the emerging trends in
fundamental research based on the needs of industry.

This symposium will focus on the development of new chemistry and materials that
enables tailoring physicochemical properties of surface and interface for
diverse applications. Particular attention will be given to functionalized
surfaces, such as super-hydrophobic surface, anti-fouling surface, anti-
corrosion surface and smart coating materials. The symposium will also include
the new analytical tools developed to characterize novel surface and interface,
as well as the theories and computer simulations developed to help
comprehensively understand the interfacial phenomena. The symposium is divided
into three specific focus areas: (1) new chemical synthesis, physics and
engineering related to surfaces; (2) study of interface in biomaterials and
composite materials; (3) coating materials research and applications. The
objectives are: (1) to highlight recent advances in the design, synthesis and
characterization of surface and interface; (2) to translation of technologies
generated in lab to industrial applications; (3) to promote dialogues and to
exchange ideas among scientists and researchers across different disciplines,
from both industry and academia; and (4) to provide opportunities for both
senior and young investigators to present their most updated research results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.