* 1819302
* SBIR Phase I:  Risk-Aware Motion Planning for Autonomous Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Peter Howard, Realtime Robotics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable autonomous
vehicles to make risk-aware decisions at high-speed, by reasoning about the
uncertain movements of the people and cars around them to anticipate risks and
react defensively. This technology will make new technical approaches to safety
and risk viable for the first time. It will enable autonomous cars to drive at
regular speeds in dense, highly populated urban environments while reducing the
likelihood of accidents - thereby resulting in faster, safer urban autonomous
driving. This will increase public trust in autonomous cars and accelerate the
development of a new industry which could reshape transportation, freeing people
from the need to drive their own cars and increasing their free time and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a specialized processor for risk-aware
motion planning for autonomous vehicles. Motion planning is a critical problem
for autonomous cars, which must decide how to move through space to reach a
designated goal without colliding with a static obstacle, another vehicle, or a
pedestrian. Existing approaches can only construct a few plans per second, and
assume that the other road-users will continue on their current trajectories.
This is acceptable for highways but not for urban driving, where distances are
short and other road-users can change behavior suddenly. This project aims to
develop a prototype of a specialized motion planning processor that plans in
milliseconds, enabling it to consider all likely future movements of other road-
users to anticipate risks and react defensively. This proposal aims to evaluate
the feasibility of the processor by designing a prototype, demonstrating that it
results in safer driving at normal speeds in urban environments, and quantifying
its performance improvements over existing solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.