* 1819274
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel microalgae for high yield hydrogen production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Svetlana Oard, BHO Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a microalgae-based commercial
hydrogen production process that will surpass current or developing
technologies. By 2022, the global hydrogen generation market by value is
projected to reach $154.7 billion. A technology for low-cost, high purity,
renewable, scalable hydrogen production will accelerate transition to a hydrogen
economy, thus facilitating domestic energy independence and creating new
economic opportunities. Many industries, such as the petro-chemical, chemical,
and electronics industries, would benefit from low cost industrial hydrogen.
Transportation and electric power generation industries also would benefit from
increased fuel efficiency. Environmental benefits include replacement of fossil
fuels, switching hydrogen production from natural gas to sunlight and water, and
substantial reduction of harmful emissions. The goal of this project is to
incorporate proprietary, metabolically engineered, photosynthetic algae in
combination with recent advances in bioprocessing and hardware engineering to
manufacture clean, renewable hydrogen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop microalgae strains that
generate high hydrogen yields using a novel metabolic engineering strategy. To
pursue this strategy, a suitable parental strain must be developed, combining
intact hydrogen production genes with improved stability of introduced genes
(transgenes). Despite the availability of genetic transformation methods,
transgene stability in wild type strains remains poor. This seriously limits
development of commercial strains. Two algal UV mutants with greatly improved
transgene stability are available, but both have impaired hydrogen production
genes. The proposed investigation will assess the feasibility of creating a
suitable parental strain. The objectives are: 1) determine differences between
genes of the best wild type hydrogen producing strain and the UV mutants; 2)
introduce candidate genes into the UV mutants to restore hydrogen production
metabolism; 3) knock out candidate genes involved in transgene inactivation in
the wild type strain; and 4) test the ability of the engineered strains to
generate hydrogen and retain transgenes. This project will produce the desired
parental strain and enable implementation of the innovative strategy for
developing production strains with greatly increased hydrogen rates in the
target commercial process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.