* 1819821
* SBIR Phase I:  A Compact Home Power Generator using a Free-Piston Engine
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Alberto Araujo, Alfadan Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2019
* USD 224,249.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to sell affordable backup generators that provide 23
kilowatts, for operating a home's lights and appliances. With power outages due
to natural disasters and an aging power grid becoming ever more frequent, and
with society increasingly reliant on electricity to power not only lights and
household appliances, but also computers, wireless routers, and medical devices,
back-up power is an increasingly critical need. This SBIR's portable generator
is expected to be more than an order of magnitude lower cubic size and weight,
all at a reduced cost compared to existing generators. The broader impact of
this project is its significant benefits to the environment by providing backup
power at high fuel efficiency (i.e. less consumption of non-renewable fossil
fuels) and low emissions of hydrocarbons, particulate matter, carbon monoxide,
and smoke.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to address the shortcomings of residential-
use backup generators currently on the market. Available backup generators are
either small and affordable but can only power a single appliance; or able to
power most of a home's needs but cumbersome and expensive. This project will
demonstrate the potential for implementing a free-piston internal combustion
engine that will maximize fuel efficiency; minimize size; decrease dependence on
lubricating oil; and incorporate an engine management system. The objective of
the current effort is the engine, while the functioning compact generator will
be developed in the next phase. In this free-piston engine design, the two
pistons oscillate with forces in balance and reduced side-loads to the pistons,
yielding a long-lasting high-speed engine. The pilot work included modification
of the cylinder intake ports; addition of a modified squish band and dome to the
cylinder head; and use of low-friction bearing materials yielding a successful
prototype that runs on regular gasoline. The engineers will continue
implementing, testing, and improving on these modifications. The successful
completion of this project will yield an efficient, compact, low-weight, and
low-emissions generator that produces 23 kilowatts of usable power that runs on
standard pump gasoline.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.