* 1819650
* SBIR Phase I:  Transformation360
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Sutia Alter, Virtue Ventures, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,753.00

This SBIR Phase I project will create a novel educational product by pairing
VR/360 video with impact measurement software and interactive social engagement
tools to simulate true-to-life experiences that enable users to gain personal
insight into pressing social issues and then take action to solve them.
Installed either as a multisensory 'empathy exhibition' or used in a classroom
setting, participants embark on a transformative learning journey which builds
empathy and critical understanding about a social issue and those affected by
it, then connects them to concrete opportunities to make social change. Users
begin as uniformed participants, and through the proposed process emerge as
changemakers engaged in solving social problems. Experiential learning has long
been an empathy building discipline outside the mediated experience, yet it is
encumbered by barriers of cost, safety, distance, time and access that limit
participation. Transformation360 will use technology to render experiential
learning programs virtually anywhere. The result will be a revolutionary new way
to move the public from apathy to action on a limitless number of social issues.
Transformation360 will provide nonprofits, governments, and institutions working
to solve social problems with a powerful social engagement tool that creates
actively engaged citizens, consumers, volunteers, supporters, and social
entrepreneurs to address the world's most pressing social
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop
a VR/360 video hybridization that will allow users interactive choices within a
conventional three-degree-of-freedom 360 Video experience. Currently only VR's
computer-generated imaging can provide a significant choice landscape for users.
By using 360/3D photography, unique game engine software and multi-scenario
video capture in the field the project will give users a new level of choice
options for a photo documentary experiences. The efficacy of this technology for
building empathy will be quantified through audience testing. Also, cinematic
techniques such as mise-en-cine and montage, not currently used in most 360
video projects, will also be tested against audience reactions. These video
production and consumption technologies and techniques will also be cross-tested
against experience learning processes such as the breaking down assumptions,
peer learning, debriefing, uncertainty, and risk. Potential adverse side effects
to VR/360 video will also be addressed. The project will rely heavily on the
engagement measurement and data visualization tool Harvis to test and analyze
audience reactions to these experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.