* 1819548
* SBIR Phase I:  Endoscopic injection device for submucosal esophageal injection of bulking agents in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Juliana Elstad, Impleo Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,980.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a minimally-invasive device that
can be used to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) by safely injecting
a proprietary substance into the base of the esophagus. GERD is the most common
gastrointestinal diagnosis in the US, afflicting ~26% of adult Americans (>60
million people), undermining their sleep, productivity, and quality of life, and
leading to other gastrointestinal diseases. Approximately one third of GERD
patients continue to suffer from symptoms despite currently available
medications treatment. Moreover, long-term use of currently prescribed drugs has
side effects and risks. Current surgical solutions are invasive, costly and
carry significant risk. The proposed injection system is expected to enable a
novel, less invasive and less costly treatment for GERD, leading to reduction of
overall healthcare costs and preventing or reducing the incidence of other
gastrointestinal diseases. Given the large market size for GERD and profound
clinical need, this project directly addresses a critical barrier to developing
such therapy for GERD patients. It has the potential to significantly improve
treatment of such a common disorder, to become a standard of care and generate
tax revenues and jobs.

The project seeks to develop an endoscopic injection system for consistent
multiple injections of bulking agent into the submucosal tissue plane in the
lower esophagus. At the heart of this technology will be a novel injection
system that utilizes a suction port to grasp the esophageal wall and direct a
needle tip to the desired submucosal depth of the affixed tissue. The design of
the needle and needle guidance system will be optimized for injection of viscous
solutions and will be used for injection of a bulking agent that creates
submucosal tissue bulging at the lower esophagus, ultimately preventing
gastroesophageal reflux. The proposed device will be unique in its ability to
accurately guide submucosal injections to the desired tissue plane. This will be
the first system to use vacuum assist for targeted injections into submucosal
space. Rapid iterative 3D-printing prototyping will be employed to optimize
needle guide geometry and design. Repeatability of the injections with the
system will be tested into multiple samples of cadaveric porcine esophagus
tissue and porcine cadavers. Impleo already owns an issued US method Patent to
inject bulking agent in the esophagus and plans to generate additional IP in
this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.