* 1819676
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct Write  Printing of Metals by In-Situ Plasma Jetting for Flexible Hybrid Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Ramprasad Gandhiraman, Space Foundry Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,830.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focussed on
developing a plasma jet printing technology to serve the printed electronics
industry. Printed electronic devices including flexible electronics and flexible
hybrid electronics (FHE) are next generation smart devices that have
applications in both consumer and industrial segments. These devices combine the
flexibility and low cost of printed substrates made of plastic with the
performance of semiconductor devices to create a new category of electronics.
The main challenge in FHE is integration of semiconductor die to the flexible
substrate and interconnects. Plasma jet printing has high potential to address
the problems associated with printed electronics manufacturing, in particular
the interconnects. The plasma process control allows printing metallic materials
with required electronic properties by in-situ treatment, thereby eliminating
the need for post processing. The global market for printed electronics
equipment is $1.5 billion in 2017 and is estimated to reach $4 billion globally
in 2020 and growing at a compound annual growth rate of 38%. Immediate
industrial application of our technology is in replacing wire bonding with
direct write printing of metallic interconnects for flexible hybrid electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is in
developing a plasma jet print head hardware for direct write printing of
conducting metallic interconnects with reduced process steps. The project focus
will be on technological de-risking of the print head hardware and process de-
risking for reliable and re-producible printing. Developing the plasma process
that can be used for pre-treatment of substrate, in-situ treatment of
nanoparticles, printing and post processing all in one tool and simultaneously
can reduce the process steps, number of equipments needed and time taken for
manufacturing. Oxidation of metal nanoparticle ink and its limited shelf life is
currently being addressed by polymer capping of the nanoparticles and
thermal/laser processing. Developing a plasma process that can be used to print
high quality conducting patterns using in-situ treatment can take the technology
closer to adoption by printed electronics industry. The anticipated outcome of
this project is a robust plasma jet print head and a process that can reliably
and reproducibly print conducting metal films with tailored oxidation state and
electronic structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.