* 1819996
* STTR Phase I:  Hemodynamic Effects Inform Design of an External Stent to Reduce Dialysis Access Failures
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Haoxiang Luo, VenoStent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,482.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop an external stent that can improve the
quality and length of life for dialysis patients. Dialysis is the primary
lifeline for End-Stage Renal Disease patients. Unfortunately, our current
standard of care, which provides no additional support or treatment to the
artery-vein connections surgically created in the arm to initiate dialysis (i.e.
access sites), results in 40-60% failure rates within the first year.
Consequences of these failures are dire: significant pain, suffering, and death
for dialysis patients, hospital readmission penalties, and more than $1B in
direct costs to Medicare. An external stent that wraps around the vein-
artery/-graft junction of dialysis patients at the time of access site creation
surgery has been developed to reduce these failures in a preventative fashion.
In order to maximize the impact that it can have on the lives of dialysis
patients by providing favorable flow conditions (i.e. hemodynamics) through the
access site, it is imperative to first optimize device design on the bench with
the aid of computational modeling. Findings from this grant will further
scientific understanding of external supports and the role that hemodynamics
play in access site failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to create a computational fluid dynamic (CFD) model that successfully
predicts flow and deformation conditions at the access site in the presence or
absence of an external stent, and to use this model to identify external stent
design parameters that promote the most favorable hemodynamic environment for
preventing access site failures. First, a 3D printing method of manufacture will
be optimized to enable the fabrication of external stents in a highly-repeatable
manner conducive to large-scale, FDA-compliant production. A CFD model will be
created from empirical results in which surgically-constructed anastomoses (e.g.
vein-graft junctions) are exposed to arteriovenous-mimetic pressure and flow
conditions in the absence or presence of external stent designs. Empirical ex
vivo data to validate the CFD model simulation results will be collected from
quantitative measurements of dynamic deformation (e.g. magnitude of expansion)
and flow patterns (i.e. velocity fields) in the presence or absence of various
external stent designs via 4D flow MRI, which provides spatial and temporal
information on 3D flow over the entire anastomosis. This work should result in
the identification of a few designs that assert hemodynamic effects conducive to
reducing neointimal hyperplasia, the primary culprit of access site
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.