* 1819046
* Tracing the Origins of the Chaperonin (CCT) Complex in Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Frank Robb, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Through recent metagenomic analysis, it has become clear that the root of
eukaryotes lies among microbes in the kingdom archaea. This project will explore
the origins of an ancient protein family that assists with protein folding and
stability, the chaperones (CPNs), to track their evolution into the eukaryotes.
Recent identification of CPN encoding genes within the genomes of the so-called
Asgard archaea will be utilized in order to gain structural insights into the
biochemical function of these proteins, which have previously not been available
due to the unculturability of the organisms. The project will utilize gene
synthesis and expression of protein from metagenomic assembled genomes (MAGs).
The main scientific benefit will be through the application of synthetic biology
to gain insights into their ancestral protein folding functions and the
development of eukaryotes from their prokaryotic ancestors. Proper protein
folding is essential to all life processes and has implications in health and
disease. Broader impacts will be through the training of a staff scientist and
and undergraduates, as well as through outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is the discovery of
quantitative biochemical insights into the functions of proteins in the newly
discovered deepest branch of the CPN60 phylogenetic tree. Rapidly accumulating
genome sequences and Single Amplified Genomes (SAGS) from the deepest branches
of the archaea reveal lineages with increases in genome complexity and gene
duplication. The investigators have identified divergent CPN60 genes in the
ASGARD archaea which appear to be ancestral to the CCT subunits of the proteins
found in extant eukarya. CPN60 from both the archaea and eukaryotes show
cooperative allosteric effects in response to an obligate folding substrate such
as tubulin. To explore the functional progression towards the eukaryotic CCT
complex, this work will assess the function of these ancient CPN genes and the
complex chaperones in terms of their ATP binding and ATPase activity and protein
folding ability. Because there are also tubulin homologs in the Asgard Archaea
Single Amplified Genomes, the project will address the exciting hypothesis that
archaeal proteostasis was the ancestral proving ground for the detailed
chaperone/client protein interaction networks found in eukaryotes, and will
trace the functional advances of the chaperone complex from a putative ancestor
with rudimentary biochemical features to the highly specialized and
differentiated eukaryotic CCT complex shared by modern
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.