* 1819209
* Collaborative Research: Formation, Stability, and Detection of Amorphous Ferric Sulfate Salts on Mars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Sklute, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2023
* USD 366,037.00

An accurate determination of the surface composition of planets is essential for
understanding the processes that have shaped our Solar System. Beyond Earth,
mineralogy is studied using observations from telescopes, orbiting satellites,
and in the case of Mars, landers and rovers. It is essential to have accurate
"libraries" of measurements showing how different minerals reflect light of
different colors. Without comparison samples, a match cannot be made. Materials
that are common on Earth have been well studied. However, the surface of Mars is
not yet well described in terms of materials that are common in terrestrial
studies. Non-crystalline materials ("amorphous") that are rich in water
("hydrated") are ubiquitous on Mars yet are not well studied on Earth. The
investigators propose to create a library of reflectance measurements for
hydrated amorphous materials that are likely to be found on Mars. They will
study how the light reflectance varies with temperature, and how weathering by
acids changes the reflectance of a sample. They will include undergraduate
students in the research and expect that at least six undergraduate thesis or
independent study projects will emerge from this project. As co-PI Dyar is a
faculty member at Mount Holyoke (a women's college) and the Five Colleges
Astronomy Consortium, many of the student participants are expected to be
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the work are to determine the
stability and transformation products of amorphous ferric sulfate salts and salt
mixtures, measure the spectra of possible regolith materials a) coated with
these materials and b) mixed with these materials; and to use the laboratory
spectra to search for and map spectral features of amorphouse ferric sulfates,
amorphous mixed salts, and amorphous salt coatings in Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) and Mars
Global Surveyor Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES)
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.