* 1819766
* STTR Phase I:  Dual-pH Water Splitting Device Comprising Earth-Abundant Electrocatalysts
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Kevin Leonard, Avium, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will assess the
commercial viability of using new non-precious metal catalysts to produce
hydrogen by splitting water. Electrolyzers made with these new catalysts have
the potential to deliver higher efficiencies and lower capital costs than
currently available systems. The market for hydrogen today is $115 billion per
year. Currently, hydrogen is primarily produced via steam reformation of
methane. Hydrogen production via steam reformation emits millions of tons of CO2
into the atmosphere annually. There is broad agreement that water electrolysis
can play a significant role in future hydrogen production if cost reductions can
be realized. In addition, hydrogen has the potential to store energy produced by
renewable energy systems like solar and wind and make it available on demand.
The initial market entry point for these new electrolyzers is to supply hydrogen
for fuel cell powered forklifts used in material handling. A life cycle cost
analysis by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) has shown that the
total life cycle costs of hydrogen fuel cell forklifts are 10% cheaper than
those using lead acid batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is focused on the ability of new earth-abundant non-precious metal
catalysts for both the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution
reaction (OER) to dramatically lower costs while improving efficiency in water
splitting. The HER electrocatalyst is composed of hyper-thin FeS2 nano-discs and
the OER electrocatalyst is nanoamorphous Ni0.8:Fe0.2 oxide. The preferred
operating pH for the catalysts are different (pH 7 for the hyper-thin FeS2 nano-
discs and pH 14 for the nanoamorphous Ni0.8:Fe0.2 oxide). Preliminary data shows
that these two catalysts with the dual-pH membrane can effectively split water
with a total overpotential of only 300 mV (1.53 V in a two electrode
configuration). This is more than 50 mV lower than the best-known precious metal
catalysts, Pt and IrOx, used in current commercial electrolyzers. The project
will continue the optimization of these catalysts in the dual-pH electrolyzer
stack and also determine if stability and lifetime meet commercial
requirements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.