* 1819033
* Programs at the Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Kumar Murty, University of Toronto
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This award supports the participation of U.S.-based mathematical scientists in
scientific activities held at the Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical
Sciences. The direct impact of NSF funding consists of contributing to the
training of a considerable number of junior U.S. researchers (early-career
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students), who are given the
opportunity to participate in activities at the Fields Institute. The primary
activities of the Fields Institute -- Thematic and Focus Programs -- are
extended periods of deep research concentration on topics of current research
interest in the mathematical sciences. These range from one to six months in
length and involve long- and short-term visitors, postdoctoral fellows, and
students; the programs include workshops and seminars, distinguished lectures,
and graduate courses. Program organizers strive to ensure strong participation
by women, minorities, and other groups traditionally underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences. The activities bring together world leaders, industrial
partners, and researchers for sustained periods of communication and
collaboration, leading to rapid progress on problems of great current
significance, enhanced global research networks, and increased interdisciplinary
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the participation of
U.S.-based mathematicians and statisticians in activities held at the Fields
Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences. Funded programs are assured to
be of the highest caliber, as rated by the Institute's Scientific Advisory
Panel. The Fields Institute's means of dissemination, including publications,
website, live online webcasting, and video archiving, contribute towards wide
communication of the scientific results arising from the
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.