* 1819399
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud-Based Electric Power Grid Simulation Software With Equivalent Circuit Methods
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* David Bromberg, Pearl Street Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,956.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable a safer, more reliable, and more
efficient electric power grid. The power grid is critical infrastructure on
which all of America's economic sectors depend, and so its reliability and
stability is of the utmost importance. The technology being developed is the
ideal modeling and simulation platform to analyze and predict grid abnormalities
and blackouts due to its unprecedented ability to simulate complex systems
accurately. Its physics-based simulation engine can incorporate more detailed
models of loads on the grid, thereby allowing system operators to better assess
grid state and stability. The proposed technology is also uniquely capable of
modeling distributed energy resources at the transmission and distribution
scale, an industry need that has been deemed critical to increase the
penetration of renewables on the grid. The technology has substantial potential
for commercial impact, as there are thousands of transmission, distribution,
generation, and consulting organizations that are potential customers. Combined,
these factors can help enable a more robust, secure grid that operates with
reduced cost and emissions. This Phase I project represents the first step in
making this technology a commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project represents a significant departure
from traditional methods that are used to model the electric power grid. The
team's foundational research has already shown that the technology can simulate
the U.S. Eastern Interconnection (half of the U.S. transmission grid) from any
initial condition to evaluate complex contingencies - capabilities that are not
possible with existing tools. The current- and voltage-based formulation used in
the model is more flexible than is used in traditional power systems simulation
software, enabling more realistic physics- and/or measurement-based models for
more accurate simulation results. The Phase I project includes developing a
secure and robust cloud platform for the technology that supports parallelized
grid analyses, with a full library of component models and an intuitive web-
based interface. This will enable system operators, utilities, and consultants
to improve their planning studies and operations by enabling more accurate
simulations at a higher throughput than is possible with today's software. The
work done in Phase I will serve as a foundation for future advancements in power
grid modeling and simulation, including integrated transmission and distribution
system analysis and statistical analysis to assess the impact of uncertainties
on the grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.