* 1819290
* SBIR Phase I:  Technical R&amp;D for cloud-based high-information mass spectrometry data extraction commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Robert Smith, Prime Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to establish faster, less expensive, more accurate
ways of determining the contents of biological samples leading to novel medical
diagnostics, new drugs, and other new products beyond the reach of the current
scientific methods that employ mass spectrometry. The project will develop
technology that enables better software for mass spectrometry, and will make
mass spectrometry-based sample analysis more accessible to a broader segment of
academic and industrial scientists, disrupting a $100M market. Advanced software
is required to transform raw experimental data into the lists of molecules and
quantities needed to create new drugs, discover diseases and increase food
production. The successful completion of the aims of this proposal will enable
the development of software built for the next generation of mass spectrometry,
providing user-friendly, fast cloud software built on advanced, high-information
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
novel, high-information software technology for mass spectrometry data
processing. The proposed work in Phase I will provide proof-of-concept for
prototype development and testing in Phase II. The research will address three
critical technical hurdles that are prerequisites to prototype development: 1) A
mass spectrometry data storage and retrieval architecture sufficient to handle
significantly more information from the hundreds of files in a typical study, 2)
cloud-optimized versions of mass spectrometry information extraction algorithms,
and 3) a cloud-based model-view controller framework that overcomes web-specific
challenges for mass spectrometry data processing. The goal is to allow more
experiments in the same amount of time without increasing costs, identifying
more molecules than existing methods from the same experiment, and detecting
molecules that are less abundant and go undetected by current
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.