* 1819287
* SBIR Phase I:  Natural Language Voice Controlled Science Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Clifton Roozeboom, Myriad Sensors
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop Natural Language Voice-Controlled Lab
Assistant technology that enables students to control and interact with hands-on
science lab equipment using natural language dialog. The lab assistant
technology will connect with science equipment hardware, a mobile or computer
app, and cloud-based software for speech recognition and data analysis. A
student can perform hands-on experiments, ask questions like "How high did my
rocket go?" or "What was the force of the cart collision?", and receive audible
responses based on their own experimental measurements. The lab assistant is
designed for students that encompass (1) students who are blind or low vision,
(2) students with disabilities affecting physical skills, (3) students that
would benefit from multi-sensory learning methods as required in Individualized
Education Plans (IEPs), and (4) generally students that would benefit from
increased engagement in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM). The broader impacts of the lab assistant technology will be to promote
teaching and learning through professional development of K-12 educators in
STEM, and enable broad participation of under-represented groups of people in
authentic science inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Lab
Assistant will be the first application of state-of-the-art voice recognition
technology for educational science experiments. The Lab Assistant will integrate
with sensor hardware and mobile apps to enable hands-on experiments in physics,
earth science, chemistry, and engineering. The intellectual merits of the Lab
Assistant are (1) the development of software that can respond to a wide
spectrum of natural language questions and (2) the systems integration of many
cutting-edge technologies (wireless sensors, mobile apps, voice recognition
software, cloud-based data analysis algorithms) into a simple user interface for
science education. The voice interactions will help students overcome
disabilities with traditional touch and visual technology, work more
independently due to the presence of auditory help, work more effectively in
groups, and gain confidence in their STEM abilities. For teachers, the Lab
Assistant will provide an "expert in the room" to help guide the hands-on
activities that they already do, and provide technical support. The Lab
Assistant will be especially useful to teachers without formal science training,
that nevertheless need to lead hands-on STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.