* 1819960
* Development of a Catalyst for Simultaneous Wet- and Dry- Reforming of Methane and Water-Gas Shift Activity
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Paul Pansegrau, United Tribes Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 10/31/2020
* USD 69,609.00

The goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase
the education and research capacities in the fields of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) at institutions of higher education that
serve the nation's Indigenous students. TCUP's funding of projects that address
these goals expands opportunities for Native people to pursue challenging
degrees and rewarding careers in STEM, to conduct research studies on culturally
significant topics, and fosters generational appreciation for STEM education. In
alignment with TCUP's goals, United Tribes Technical College has initiated a
research study focusing on renewable energy production. The project will work to
develop a more efficient method for reforming biogas into a renewable energy
source that can be generated from organic waste materials. The production of
renewable hydrogen offers many options for power generation, as well as
potential conversion of hydrogen to renewable ammonia for use as fuel or
fertilizer. Given the large number of farm and ranch operations in North Dakota
and the Northern Plains states in general, the project is highly relevant and
holds potential benefits for the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
examine reforming of methane to hydrogen and carbon dioxide via a combination of
steam-methane reforming (water-based) and dry reforming (carbon dioxide-based).
Additionally, water-gas shift activity will be designed into the catalysts. This
"mixed" reforming presents several technical challenges which include coking of
the catalyst, incomplete conversion of methane to hydrogen and carbon dioxide,
and catalyst longevity. The overall goal of the proposed project is to develop
catalysts which optimize hydrogen production from a renewable resource (biogas
or landfill gas) via development of catalysts which are rugged, robust,
reliable, and economically advantageous in long-term operation of a renewable
hydrogen production system. Additionally, the project will seek to develop
catalysts which display long term activity at moderate operating pressures and
temperatures, thereby enabling design of commercial/industrial systems which are
affordable to construct and operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.