* 1819119
* Building Quantitative Skills in Biology: An Equity-Sensitive Quantitative Biology Course via Multiple Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Scott Freeman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,340.00

Math anxiety is disproportionately felt by women and women disproportionately
report lower self-efficacy in math. Women are also less likely than men to
finish STEM-required calculus sequences, and surveys suggest this difference is
driven by lower confidence rather than lower preparation or ability. This
project seeks to create an exportable and equity-sensitive quantitative biology
course that minimizes math-associated inequities. This course will be taught and
informed by a diverse set of institutions. The institutions include a four-year
university (University of Washington), two-year colleges (North Seattle College
and Shoreline Community College), and a prison education program (University
Beyond Bars). This project will examine whether or not this new course decreases
math-associated inequities. The course will be freely shared with the broader
community so that it can be implemented or adapted by other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new equity-
sensitive quantitative biology course, implement the course at four
institutions, and assess the course for student achievement and equity in
performance and affect. Development of this quantitative biology course will be
guided by "Vision and Change" principles. The course structure and content will
be designed to promote equity by incorporating evidence-based techniques to
mitigate gender and cultural biases. The course development will be informed by
its implementation at the four institutions, which differ in student
demographics, type of institution, and resources. Pre- and post-course
performance and affect in applied quantitative skills will be collected and
analyzed. Data will also be gathered from life science students who have taken
the traditional quantitative skills requirements, typically through mathematics
departments. By comparing performance of students taking this new course to
students taking traditional courses, the project seeks to gather evidence on the
impact of incorporating quantitative skills into the life sciences. The project
will also investigate the impact on minimizing math-associated inequities among
students. The course materials, modules, and gap-mitigation techniques will be
freely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.