* 1819081
* SBIR Phase I:  Targeted Small Molecular Taxane Delivery for Triple Negative Breast Cancer Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Kaimin Cai, Iria Pharma, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel cancer targeting
technology, Active Tissue Targeting via Anchored ClicK Chemistry (ATTACK), for
targeted treatment of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). TNBC is a subtype of
breast cancer that occurs in 10-20% of diagnosed breast cancers and is more
likely to affect younger people, African Americans, Hispanics, and those with
BRCA1 gene mutation. Currently, TNBC patients are mainly treated with
chemotherapeutics and cannot benefit from existing targeting therapeutics due to
the lack of Estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or hormone
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2/neu). This project will develop the
first cell labeling based targeting technology (ATTACK) for TNBC treatment. A
novel unnatural sugar will be developed for cancer-specific labeling of TNBC
through metabolization to insert an artificial receptor onto TNBC and then
target the artificial receptor to deliver therapeutic taxanes through a specific
reaction between the receptor and the taxanes-drugs. The project involves
interdisciplinary combination of knowledge from chemistry, biology, materials
engineering, and pharmaceutical science. The successful development of the
project will afford an effective targeted therapeutic drug for TNBC patients
with improved quality of life in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to develop a novel cancer targeting technology, Active
Tissue Targeting via Anchored ClicK Chemistry (ATTACK), for targeted treatment
of triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ATTACK can treat untargetable cancers
that do not have established cell surface receptors through cancer-specific
artificial receptor insertion of de novo designed unnatural sugars and
subsequent azide-Click reaction mediated targeted delivery of therapeutic drugs.
Currently, TNBC patients are mainly treated with chemotherapeutics and cannot
benefit from existing targeting therapeutics due to the lack of Estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) or hormone epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (Her2/neu). This project will develop the first cell labeling based
targeting technology (ATTACK) for TNBC treatment. Unnatural sialic acid (a type
of sugar) precursors with azide will be first used for tumor-specific labeling
on cell surface and subsequent targeting. Multiple taxane candidates will be
synthesized and preliminary in vitro DMPK properties of the conjugates will be
studied including solubility, plasma stability, liver microsome metabolization,
and cytotoxic MTT assay. In vivo biodistribution and efficacy of the taxane
candidates in combination with unnatural sugar labeling will also be studied in
mice tumor models to validate the anti-TNBC efficacy of the drug candidates. The
accomplishment of the Phase I research will enable further translational
development of the novel cancer-targeting therapeutics into clinical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.