* 1819978
* SBIR Phase I:  The Transformation of X-ray Detectors for Medical Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Theodore Morse, NGS Detectors LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project focuses on the development and demonstration of a new
high resolution X-ray detector to be utilized (initially) in medical diagnosis.
The early work by NGS Detectors and collaborators has shown an improvement in
resolution by a factor of almost 10 over the X-ray detectors in current use. The
focus of this Phase I project is to now improve both the resolution and
efficiency of the detector (in order to reduce the x-ray dose received by
patients). The initial diagnostic application is for mammography, where the
improved resolution is expected to allow accurate diagnosis of suspicious
features in the breast at an early stage, while reducing the false diagnoses
(both positive and negative) that are recognized to be problematic. The
detectors have potential application in other medical diagnostics situations,
such as neonatal and cardiovascular fields, where the higher resolution is
expected to extend the application of X-ray diagnostics well beyond current
practice. Applications for industrial nondestructive evaluation in fields such
as semiconductor manufacturing are also envisaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project focuses on the development and demonstration of a new high
resolution X-ray scintillation detector. The indirect detector utilizes a new
polymeric scintillating polymer developed by Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratories for security applications, and incorporates the material into an
optical channel plate. The optical channel plate contains an ordered array of
high quality capillaries (e.g. 10 micron diameter). The scintillating polymer
absorbs X-rays, and emit photons that are channeled to pixels of an optical
detector with minimal scattering. A resolution of 10 micron has already been
demonstrated, an improvement of nearly an order of magnitude over both direct
and indirect detectors in current use in medical diagnostics. The focus of Phase
1 is to complete the detector characterization, with a special emphasis on
improving the detector efficiency in order to minimize X-ray dose rates for
patients. The successful completion of Phase I will lead to a Phase II that
demonstrates that the higher resolution indeed yields higher feature
discrimination in realistic diagnostic situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.