* 1819370
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Power, Wireless Crop Quality Sensors for Grain Quality Preservation and Storage Automation
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Lucas Frye, Amber Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase the returns of grain storage for
farmers and reduce overall postharvest loss due to toxin and insect damage. Ten
billion bushels, over half of US grains, are stored on-farm each year for 3-12
months. During this period, grain is susceptible to spoilage, infestation, and
moisture loss?all of which impacts the price a farmer receives at the time of
market delivery. There is no easy way to monitor grain quality changes
throughout the storage season to optimize for best times to run aeration
controls to preserve, condition or maintain the grain. This leaves farmers with
a ?gut check? system of driving to each grain bin site and climbing up and
inside units. Since grain is priced based on moisture baselines, farmers are
essentially selling water and weight, their final price outcome can vary
significantly based on how well they managed grain conditions throughout the
storage period. In the US, an annual $3 to $ 5 billion dollars (3 ? 5%) of crop
value is lost due to toxin, insect and moisture mismanagement that could be
prevented through the introduction of affordable and accessible monitoring
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project would advance internet of
things automation and wireless sensor applications as applied to production
agriculture and the postharvest supply chain. There are certain, manual
processes of farm production that are strenuous due to time burdens and the lack
of obtainable information to make decisions. Monitoring grain assets, the
product of farmers? toil and the safety net of global food supply, in farm bins,
commercial storage, and barges is one such process. Sensing for when loss and
spoilage risks occur, but more importantly connecting and turning the data into
automation opportunities before they exist is the aim of this proposal. Cable-
based monitoring solutions exist, but adoption is restricted due to physical
installation limitations, electricity/power constraints, and investment costs.
This project will validate the feasibility of a low-power, wireless sensor that
can detect grain conditions and last a full postharvest cycle (18 months). Such
a device will create opportunities to track grain qualities across the
agriculture value chain, beginning with its use to monitor and automate farm
grain storage. By characterizing, and testing against cable systems and within
grain science 3D models, this project will prove the wireless sensor?s direct
functionality within this first farm application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.