* 1819961
* SBIR Phase I:  Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing of Highly Crystalline Thin Film Semiconductor Substrates for Flexible Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Shane McMahon, Lux Semiconductors
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,949.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to further the development of a patent
pending technology aimed at producing flexible, lightweight, and low-cost
semiconductor substrates. These flexible semiconductor films represent the next
evolution of the silicon wafer, the foundation of over 90% of today's electronic
devices, including computer chips, solar panels, microelectronics, and a wide
range of sensors and similar 'internet of things' devices. The silicon wafer, in
its current form, is essentially unchanged since its inception over 60 years
ago. These wafers, although larger today, remain thick, rigid, fragile, and are
limited to circular forms no larger than 450 millimeters (18 inches) in
diameter. The ability to produce large-area, high-throughput quantities of this
material, in a flexible, more durable format would be truly disruptive, and help
to usher in the next generation of affordable, flexible, and pervasive
electronic devices. Accelerating the commercialization of this 'wafer 2.0' will
help to shape America's high-tech semiconductor manufacturing industry for the
21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will focus on the
development of this innovative technology at a simulated roll-to-roll
prototyping scale, to enhance film crystal quality, repeatability, and
electronic properties, while preparing the process for integration into large
scale manufacturing. To date, no techniques exist that can produce large-area,
highly crystalline silicon or other semiconductor films, that are suitable for
high-throughput manufacturing. The technique in this proposed work is a novel,
patent pending process, suitable for high-throughput roll-to-roll manufacturing
and has several technical advantages that favor high-uniformity crystallization.
Low-cost, flexible, wafer-like substrates will open the door for a wide range of
electronic devices and fully integrated system-on-chip designs, including
sensors, displays, lighting, processors, memory, microelectronics, and
photovoltaics. Specific research activities will include optimization of the
crystallization process via exploration of operating parameters; improvements
and refinements to the prototype chamber equipment; evaluation of intermediate
thin-film layers to provide ideal electronic properties and to promote more
favorable recrystallization; and, finally, characterization of the resulting
semiconductor films using state of the art semiconductor tools at the world's
largest nanotechnology focused institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.