* 1819388
* SBIR Phase I:  Determination of complex outcome measures using narrative clinical data to enable observational trials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Daniel Riskin, VMT, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,793.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable accurate electronic health record
(EHR)-based studies to support precision medicine. The country is embarking on a
journey of using real world evidence (RWE) to adjust the existing standard of
care. EHR-based subgroup analytics and comparative effectiveness studies will
increasingly be used to augment regulatory and reimbursement approval. These
efforts require accurately recognizing clinical outcomes in real world
scenarios. Studies attempting to identify real world outcomes, such as pain and
disease free survival, have shown low accuracy rates in claims and EHR discrete
data. This proposal aims to accurately detect challenging outcomes from EHR data
using advanced semantic technologies. The goal is to enable accurate RWE studies
to achieve safer and more effective use of RWE in clinical
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to create an
application to extract clinical outcomes from real world data to enable EHR-
based pragmatic clinical trials (PCTs). The approach uses natural language
processing (NLP) to dive deep into the health record for exposure, intervention,
and outcome data that do not exist or are inaccurate in claims and EHR discrete
data. Project objectives include extracting features from clinical data using
NLP and ontologic mapping, developing a knowledge database that reflects common
outcomes in observational and clinical trials, and inferring outcome from
extracted features using clinical data. The project will validate the outcome
detection engine using de-identified longitudinal clinical data to assess
accuracy of feature extraction and inferred outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.