* 1819189
* Coherence Power of Quantum Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paolo Zanardi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum systems can exist simultaneously in different physical states. This
fundamental property of nature, known as quantum coherence, or superposition, is
widely believed to represent an essential ingredient in a variety of fields
ranging from quantum information processing and quantum metrology to quantum
biology. This project aims to develop a powerful and general scientific
framework to assess and control the coherence generating power of quantum
processes, both natural and artificial. This is important because the ability to
efficiently generate quantum coherence lies at the very heart of all quantum
technologies, and underpins their potential for huge societal impact based on
unprecedented computational and communication power. This project thus aims to
promote the progress of fundamental science, and it will help to foster the
development of potentially disruptive quantum technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will introduce mathematical
measures to quantify the coherence generating power of various quantum
mechanical operations associated with physical processes. The mathematical
approach is based on probabilistic tools and completely positive maps. Rigorous
results that are amenable to direct experimental tests will be derived. This
approach introduces a formulation in terms of elegant geometrical structures,
both global and local. This team will also extend this conceptual and
mathematical framework in several directions including studies of open quantum
systems and quantum algorithms. This team will also explore the connection of
quantum coherence with some fundamental and fascinating problems in modern
condensed matter physics e.g., many-body localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.