* 1819086
* Collaborative Research: Emergent Hydrological Properties Associated with Multiple Channel-Spanning Logjams
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Audrey Sawyer, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 231,865.00

In this proposal we look to quantify relationships among river shapes, logjams,
and the movement of water around jams and through surrounding sediments. In
doing so, we will advance understanding of (i) how logjams affect water quality
and stream communities in forested watersheds, (ii) the effects of historical
and continuing human alteration of river corridors in forested regions, and
(iii) how to design artificial logjams in rivers to manage stream temperature,
nutrients, and aquatic communities. Our work will be shared with resource
managers and practitioners to help with issues associated with river management
and restoration. Student participation will include (i) K-12 students via course
materials that will be developed in collaboration with elementary school
teachers; (ii) undergraduate students involved in field data collection and
analysis, including students from diverse backgrounds; and (iii) graduate
students responsible for the primary data analysis and interpretation, who will
have the opportunity to work with and mentor the undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of large wood (LW) in river
corridors are numerous, including the potential to enhance hyporheic exchange
flow (HEF). Existing work has focused on HEF near single logs or single logjams.
However, natural channels in forested regions with minimal human alteration
commonly contain abundant dispersed LW pieces and multiple logjams spaced
irregularly along the channel. We have little indication of whether multiple
channel-spanning logjams produce an additive or nonlinear effect on HEF, but
these alternatives have important implications for understanding river ecosystem
function and for river management and restoration. Our primary objective is to
quantify how HEF changes with increasing channel heterogeneity associated with
channel-spanning logjams. We will use field measurements, physical experiments,
and numerical models to evaluate the characteristics of HEF associated with
different spatial densities of channel-spanning logjams. We expect nonlinear
relations between logjams and HEF to result from increased bedforms such as
pools that maximize flux rates, increased head gradients associated with
decreased downstream spacing between logjam-induced backwaters, and thicker
deposits of sand and gravel, which act together to create steep hydraulic head
gradients within thick, permeable bed sequences. We also expect a nonlinear
relation between logjams and HEF at the transition to anabranching as a result
of the enhanced HEF between divided channels. Implications of this work will be
with respect to engineered logjams, which are currently being added to rivers,
but with no systematic understanding of how the effects of LW addition scale
with river size, the volume and spatial distribution of wood addition, or the
characteristics of the wood and the channel, constraining our ability to design
LW-based river restoration to achieve a desired level of HEF. As part of our
research, we will develop curriculum for a local K-12
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.