* 1819613
* SBIR Phase I:  Culture-independent Rapid Bacterial Isolation and Identification
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Rajesh Krishnamurthy, 3I Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop and demonstrate the feasibility of a
system that can identify a broad range of bacteria in < 1 hour directly from
blood. Existing diagnostic systems require 2-6 days to identify the bacteria,
which delays treatment using appropriate antibiotics. Sepsis, which is often
caused by a bacterial infection, contributes to up to half of all hospital
deaths in the US largely due to complications arising from delays or
inappropriate treatment (which is mainly because of lack of information
regarding the infection-causing bacteria). It is the most expensive hospital-
treated condition in the United States ? representing $20.3 billion in
healthcare costs. The proposed system aims to sharply reduce the time to provide
information needed by physicians, enabling them to initiate treatment using the
appropriate antibiotic rapidly. This is expected to lead to significant
reductions in costs, complications, and mortality. Further, by eliminating the
need for culturing, new insights into bacterial behavior can be acquired
contributing to additional fundamental knowledge of bacteria. This knowledge
will aid antibiotic discovery efforts, improve understanding of mechanisms of
drug resistance, support new biomanufacturing processes through faster detection
of bacterial contamination of pharmaceutical products and foods, and
characterization of the microbiome.

The challenges of rapid bacterial identification are primarily in two areas ?
sample preparation, that eliminates the need for culturing, and multiplex
identification, to cover the diverse range of bacterial species capable of
causing infection. The proposed work is based on leveraging the differential
response between bacteria and the cells in a sample matrix to selectively break
down the sample matrix, but not bacteria, such that the largest lysis debris is
smaller than intact bacteria. The debris is subsequently separated from intact
bacteria using a size-based technique enabling rapid isolation of a broad range
of bacteria directly from the sample. A novel Fourier-transform infrared
microspectroscopy system is then used to identify the isolated bacteria at
clinically relevant concentrations. No bacteria-specific reagents are employed.
The proposed Phase I work addresses the highest risk technical hurdles in the
process. Isolating and detecting low concentration of bacteria directly from
blood is accomplished through the three objectives of this project that optimize
the purification and bacterial recovery from the sample, identification
accuracy, and performance of the integrated system relative to the traditional
culturing-based method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.