* 1819006
* International Congress on Mathematical Software (ICMS 2018)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Jonathan Hauenstein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The International Congress on Mathematical Software (ICMS) consists of a diverse
community in the broadly defined area of computational sciences including
researchers and practitioners in computational mathematics, algorithms and
complexity, and software engineering. This National Science Foundation award
provides support for the 2018 meeting of the International Congress on
Mathematical Software (ICMS 2018) to be held July 24-27, 2018 at the University
of Notre Dame in Indiana. ICMS 2018 is the 6th meeting of ICMS and the first to
be hosted in the United States. This conference, as with the 5 previous meetings
of ICMS, will bring together a wide range of computational scientists along with
practitioners to discuss recent progress and current challenges in software,
algorithms, complexity, and applications in computational mathematics and
computational science. This conference provides an opportunity for cross-
fertilization between the mathematical sciences and other areas of science and
engineering through software development and utilization. The plenary speakers
for this conference are Folkmar Bornemann (TU Munich), Thomas Hales (University
of Pittsburgh), and William Stein (SageMath, Inc.). This award will support
travel grants for graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, young faculty
members, members of under-represented groups, and researchers without federal
support to attend ICMS 2018 to meet with leaders in software development for
mathematics, science, and engineering applications, and interact with each other
who will be the next generation of leaders in this area.

ICMS 2018 is an international meeting for interaction between computational
mathematicians, scientists, engineers, and software developers. This creates a
unique atmosphere for sharing ideas and discussing new trends and challenges in
computational mathematics and software development. For example, plenary speaker
William Stein will provide attendees of ICMS 2018 insights into successes and
challenges of open-source mathematical software development. Apart from the
plenary speakers, all talks and posters at ICMS 2018 are selected from responses
to an open call for submissions which are organized into sessions. ICMS 2018
features 18 sessions such as machine learning for mathematical software,
software for mathematical reasoning, computational algebraic geometry, post-
quantum group-based cryptography, and management of mathematical software,
mathematical knowledge, and research data. ICMS 2018 also includes a poster
session which is scheduled for the first day of the conference. The conference
website is http://icms-conference.org/2018/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.