* 1819453
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Accuracy and Reducing Scan Time of Dynamic Brain PET
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Grant Gullberg, SolvingDynamics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 224,981.00

This SBIR Phase I Project will productize a quantitative data processing
technology in dynamic positron emission tomography (PET). Dynamic PET's
distinction from its static counterpart is in the fact that it collects time-
dependent tracer concentration data. It is a highly sensitive and accurate way
of functional and molecular imaging of protein targets such as biomarkers of
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, or brain trauma. Unfortunately,
dynamic PET is rarely used in clinic because of long imaging time and complex
processing. The technology to be developed in this proposal will shorten the
required imaging time and simplify the analysis, allowing for accurate and
reliable imaging of disease biomarkers for aiding drug development, clinical
diagnostics, and treatment monitoring. The proposed analytic workflow will be
offered as a cloud-based service that can be used by the customers to analyze
new or historical PET datasets. In order to overcome the established practice of
relying on less accurate and informative static PET imaging, the grant
recipients plan to conduct a thorough validation of the new technology using a
dedicated physical phantom and human subject images acquired in the past. The
largest impact of the new technology is expected in medical research and drug
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accepted practice of analyzing dynamic
PET datasets involves reconstruction of the parameters of implied compartment
model describing the tracer biochemistry, which involves several accuracy-
degrading approximations and requires lengthy acquisition. The alternative
approach proposed in this project relies on decomposing the dynamic PET image
sequences using a combination of several processing techniques that incorporate
the essential features of tracer pharmacokinetics without making explicit
assumptions about the model parameters or about the underlying anatomy. The key
part of the proposed methodology is factor analysis of dynamic structures, a
non-negative matrix decomposition technique with successful past applications in
radionuclide image analysis. The result of the workflow is a 3D concentration of
tissues that exhibit specific-binding of the radiotracer. In order to validate
the quantitative accuracy of the approach, the researchers will build and image
a dedicated physical phantom capable of producing overlapping distributions with
different tracer dynamics. In order to validate the scan-time reduction claims,
the new workflow will be used to analyze existing dynamic PET human subject
datasets using increasingly shorter input time
windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.