* 1819562
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Horseshoe Crab Device and Approach for a Sustainable Endotoxin Testing Resource
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Kristen Dellinger, Kepley Biosystems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a cost-effective, environmental
and economically sound Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) production facility based
on a finite number of horseshoe crabs (HSC) using minimally impactful and novel
bleeding procedures. The goal is to address the demands of an estimated $114
million LAL market and finished kit market in excess of $1 billion per annum.
Success of this project also anticipates exceeding current standards by ensuring
biomedical and pharmaceutical manufacturing compliance with fewer total
horseshoe crabs than the number that die annually from current practices. New
approaches to HSC bleeding developed in this project would also enable repeated,
controlled bleeding while maintaining optimal conditions for animal vitality and
for the adjacent communities. Assuming optimized, scalable HSC bleeding
operations could eventually expand current supplies, innovative applications
could be developed. For example, early detection of sepsis could help avert some
$30 billion in direct care every year in the US, notwithstanding the potential
to save countless lives with development of gram-negative screening tools for
hospital acquired septicemia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to develop an alternative method of bleeding horseshoe crabs (HSCs) for
Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) harvest. The overarching objective to demonstrate
the proof-of-concept of an implantable, and surgical-grade device engineered to
facilitate routine bleeding, without compromising the integrity and well-being
of the HSC. This will be achieved via a systematic study of HSC bleeding
outcomes to investigate whether such a device can meet the sterility and quality
standards of traditional approaches, while obviating the need for extraneous
transport to expensive, inland bleeding facilities. Furthermore, the commercial
opportunity and feasibility of the device paired with a habitat-based, enclosed
system to systematically monitor HSC wellbeing will be investigated. This SBIR
Phase I project would be the first to investigate an alternative approach to
bleeding HSCs, a technique that has not changed significantly since the late
1800's. At scale, the proposed approach would also be expected to improve
product quality and traceability, and ultimately the bottom line of companies
producing LAL kits, given a surplus of LAL in the supply
chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.