* 1819726
* SBIR Phase I:  SBIR Phase I:Autonomous Balance-Enhanced Insert for Footwear
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Alexander Landau, VeriFax Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will contribute to development of a novel Balance-
Enhancing Footwear Insert for preventing falls in the high risk elderly
population. Falls are the leading cause of fatal injuries and the most common
reason for trauma-related hospital admissions among older adults. One in every
four Americans over age of 65 falls each year, and the financial burden from the
falls in the elderly is expected to reach $67B by 2020. Therefore, introduction
of a smart insole might significantly reduce the financial burden for the
Medical Care System. It will also allow the elderly population to achieve
maximum independence in the activities of daily living. The proposed insole will
also address the critical needs of the athletic shoe industry to reduce the
incidents of ankle sprains. The development of the new smart balance?enhancing
insole, which improves balance without irritation and habituation effects will
likely lead to new fabrication techniques for manufacturing insoles. This SBIR
innovation has the potential to introduce to the market a safe, reliable and
cost-effective insole that could be easily manufactured and
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to develop a novel insole to facilitate proper and timely response to a person?s
movements in order to maintain good balance while walking or standing. The
plantar sole is a ?dynamometric map? of human balance control. The loss of
balance occurs when the body weight is shifted too close to the plantar sole
boundary. The timely information to the Central Nervous System (CNS) about such
movements is critical for balance control. The proposed insert, with a system of
microcells containing viscous fluid, triggers instantaneous rise of protrusions
around the insole perimeter area in response to the sudden increase of pressure
that excites the mechanoreceptors reporting to the CNS. Such a balance-enhancing
solution provides well-timed regional amplification of cutaneous mechanoreceptor
sensitivity but without the side effects of the existing textured insoles. The
shortcomings include permanent discomfort and irritation in the plantar sole,
which results in desensitization of the sole somatosensory system. The main
research objectives include: Engineering design of the insert; research of
materials to meet the performance goals; identification of the manufacturers for
future mass production; creating testing frameworks to insure performance
according to the required specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.