* 1819438
* SBIR Phase I:  Performance and Feasibility Evaluation of Electrochemical Advanced Oxidation Technology for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Julie Mullen, ACLARITY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this SBIR project is an
electrochemical water treatment technology which has the potential for
minimizing cost, requiring little to no maintenance, and comprehensively
treating harmful contaminants such as pathogens, toxic organics, and metals in
drinking water. About 80M U.S. homeowners are seeking a water purification
solution for fear of their water quality. They are unsatisfied with the high
maintenance, long-term costs, and lack of comprehensive treatment capabilities
of existing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
optimize, demonstrate, and scale an electrochemical water purification system
for residential point-of-entry application. Existing water purification systems
are largely ineffective in comprehensively treating contaminants such as
pathogens, toxic organics, and metals, and also require frequent maintenance
which contributes to high costs and waste generation. To address these concerns,
the treatment effectiveness, cost, and feasibility of treating water
contaminated with pathogens and toxic organic compounds by the proposed
electrochemical technology will be studied in laboratory and pilot scale
applications. Design parameters will be optimized for highest treatment
capability and lowest costs and maintenance needs. Prototypes will be scaled for
pilot evaluation at flow rates for residential point-of-entry application and
evaluated for robustness. The laboratory and pilot units will be evaluated for
perfluorinated compound (PFC) removal consistent with NSF/ANSI P473 and for
pathogen disinfection following EPA Purifier Standard Certification. PFC removal
and disinfection are keys to proving a comprehensive water purification solution
for decentralized treatment. The end result will be a small product automated by
sensors that connects directly in-line with a building's
plumbing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.