* 1819177
* STTR Phase I:  Directional minimally invasive microwave antenna for precise spatial control of thermal ablation
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Austin Pfannenstiel, Precision Microwave Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project include development of a commercial proof-of-concept
percutaneous directional microwave ablation (MWA) applicator which may provide
medical practitioners a new approach for treating cancer. In clinical use, a
directional MWA applicator will facilitate both procedural and technical
simplification of MWA treatments, saving time and critical resources in
hospitals, and ultimately improve quality of, and access to, cancer treatment
for a broad range of patients. The research and development proposed in this
project will enhance scientific and technological understanding of miniaturized
MWA antennas capable of radiating with directional patterns. Specifically,
special materials to reduce required antenna dimension and increase efficiency,
and advanced antenna designs to maximize the size of directional ablation zones
will be studied during this project. Commercial development of the proposed
technical advances could expand their use for the treatment of other medical
conditions or for applications in other industries such as wireless
communications. This STTR Phase I project will contribute to the creation of
technology jobs in Kansas, a region where there are few medical or technology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a
commercial proof-of-concept directional microwave ablation (MWA) applicator. MWA
procedures offer cost-effective, minimally-invasive treatment options for
localized tumors and other disease. These treatments are especially important to
the large population of cancer patients who are poor candidates for surgery or
other physically demanding therapies. However, currently available MWA systems
employ applicators with omni-directional radiation patterns, which if not placed
precisely may damage critical healthy tissues or result in disease recurrence. A
directional MWA applicator can facilitate technical and procedural
simplifications which to alleviate these current challenges. We will
investigate: (1) alternative materials to shrink antenna cross-section and (2)
novel antenna geometries to maximize the size of directional microwave ablation
zones. We will employ an approach integrating multiphysics computational models,
benchtop experimentation in ex vivo tissue, and experiments in animal models in
vivo to design, optimize, and validate our device. Our anticipated technical
results are the development of a MWA applicator that provides directional
control of radiation pattern that can ablate to depths of greater than 30 mm,
creating an ablation volume comparable to current clinical non-directional
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.