* 1819229
* RUI: Robust Feasibility and Robust Optimization using Algebraic Topology and Convex Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bala Krishnamoorthy, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Solving systems of equations and optimizing a function over such systems are
ubiquitous in computational mathematics. The functions or equations being
nonlinear and/or nonconvex often make these tasks challenging. Further,
uncertainty in problem parameters adds to the problem complexity. A crucial part
of modern society where such problems are prevalent is power systems. Two
central computations in power systems operations are power flow (PF) studies and
optimal power flow (OPF). PF studies ensure the power grid state (i.e., voltages
and flows across the network) will remain within acceptable limits in spite of
contingencies (e.g., loss of a generator or a transmission line) and other
uncertainties (e.g., shifting demand or renewable sources of power such as wind
and solar). OPF seeks further to choose values for controllable assets in the
system (e.g., generators whose rate of power production could be controlled) so
as to meet demand at minimum cost. These problems have inherent nonlinearities
and nonconvexities, making them hard to solve in their natural form. This
project uses ideas from algebraic topology and nonlinear analysis to develop
efficient algorithms for robust feasibility and robust optimization. In
particular, the investigator will develop a framework to derive mathematically
rigorous guarantees for robust feasibility and optimization in nonlinear systems
using scalable algorithms. The investigator will employ these algorithms to
characterize the effects of uncertainties in nonlinear models of power systems.
The investigator will also demonstrate the efficacy of the framework by testing
it on large scale OPF problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid adoption of
renewable energy sources such as wind and solar energy is creating increased
uncertainty in modern power systems. In this project, the investigator will take
a robust viewpoint of uncertainty: the worst-case impact of the uncertainty on
feasibility and optimization problems will be quantified. To this end, the
investigator will use ideas from algebraic topology and nonlinear analysis --
specifically Borsuk's theorem (a generalization of the intermediate value
theorem) and topological degree theory -- to develop efficient algorithms for
robust versions of the PF and OPF problems. On the computational side, the
investigator will develop efficient implementations of these algorithms capable
of scalably solving large instances of PF and OPF problems. The novel framework
will combine rigorous guarantees, efficient algorithms, and the ability to
handle nonlinearities. Such a framework is critical for operating modern power
systems with significant uncertainty. While power systems are used as the main
application area, the methods to be develop are fairly general, and could be
applied to problems in other domains as well, e.g., gas distribution networks.
More broadly, this project could have a direct impact on how complex and large
scale infrastructure systems are handled, especially under increasing
uncertainties created by the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.