* 1819145
* XI International Symposium on the Plant Hormone Ethylene; June 2-6, Crete, Greece
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Caren Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Ethylene is a plant hormone that has profound effects on growth and development.
The way that hormones act in an organism and in the cell is very complex, and we
are only beginning to understand the complex web of interacting molecules that
are unleashed by the action of a hormone such as ethylene. This meeting will
bring together a wide range of scientists, including early career scientists at
the level of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, to discuss the
cellular and molecular systems that cause the release of ethylene and the
systems that react to that release. The work that will be discussed at this
conference is directly relevant to US agriculture, to the US economy, and to the
US food supply and food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program for
the conference covers ethylene signaling across a range of scales, from
molecular to organismal, and will discuss ethylene signaling at the cell biology
level, integrating molecular and cell biological studies in a way that will help
develop the systems biology of ethylene signaling in the cell. There will also
be sessions on the computational modeling of ethylene signaling networks and
interdisciplinary studies using a combination of biology, biophysics and
computational approaches to model ethylene receptor structure. In addition, much
of the conference will discuss the current understanding of ethylene signaling
as it is developing in non-model (i.e. non-Arabidopsis) crop plants, microbes
and algae ? increasing our understanding of non-model organisms, an important
area as we try to apply lessons from model species studies to a more diverse
range of organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.