* 1819873
* STTR Phase I:  A Roll-to-Roll Process for Manufacturing Nanocellular Polymeric Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,02/29/2020
* VenkataKrishna Nadella, VESICUS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,965.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project aims at
developing a roll-to-roll, solid-state, continuous process for manufacturing
nanocellular thermoplastic films with open (interconnected) or closed (not
interconnected) cells of the order 10-100 nm and as much as 50% porosity. The
initial application of this proposed project is an improved Lithium-ion battery
separator comprising a nanoporous polyetherimide (PEI) film of 10-25-micron
thickness with uniformly distributed interconnected 10-50 nm size cells. The
nanoporous PEI separator, which has significantly higher heat resistance than
current polyolefin-based separators, addresses a very urgent safety issue, i.e.,
batteries exploding and causing fire due to thermal instability of the
separator. Moreover, compared to the current multi-step process for fabricating
battery separators, this continuous process will have higher productivity
thereby increasing the nation's global competitiveness in battery manufacturing.
The total addressable global market for separators used in both primary (single-
use) and secondary (rechargeable) lithium batteries is projected to be $1.65
billion by 2020 growing at 4.7%. This innovative research project will
contribute to new knowledge in the areas of gas diffusion and cell nucleation in
thermoplastic polymeric films and enable development, characterization and
application of a whole new class of solid-state nanocellular polymer
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project resides in
the development of a manufacturing process that brings together
interdisciplinary knowledge to synthesize and characterize nanostructures under
various process conditions. This new knowledge will advance the field of
nanomanufacturing and will be used to optimize processes towards
commercialization targets. There are two technical challenges: (i) the dynamic
seal concept, which has been proven in a 250-micron thick polymer film but not
for a film 10-20 times lower in thickness; and (ii) maintaining enough gas
concentration during the cell nucleation and growth to create nano-sized cells.
The goals of this project are to: (a) establish the feasibility of a roll-to-
roll process operating at a minimum speed of 1 meter/minute to produce
nanocellular thermoplastic films and (b) develop a 100-mm wide, 10-25 micron
thick nanoporous polyetherimide (PEI) film having the desired properties and
nanostructure profile for a Li-ion battery separator application. These two
goals will be achieved by implementing the dynamic seal technology to process a
100-mm wide film on a continuous basis and immediately heating the film to
create nanocells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.