* 1819943
* SBIR Phase I:  Refining a 3-month release buprenorphine, advancing a drug delivery platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Timothy Heath, Plumb Pharmaceuticals, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2020
* USD 224,850.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a very long-acting buprenorphine
formulation to increase patient compliance and address the opioid crisis. Poor
medication compliance is a significant driver of health care costs. The US would
save an estimated 290 billion dollars yearly or 13% of the total health care
budget if patients took their medications as directed. Patients with chronic
diseases are the least compliant with medication. There is an evolving consensus
that Opioid Misuse Disorder (OMD) is also a chronic disease, and its treatment
is also plagued by poor compliance. There are an estimated 2.5 million people in
the United States with OMD. Complete abstinence therapy fails about 80% of the
time. Medication-assisted therapy using methadone, naltrexone or buprenorphine
is far more successful. More opioid misuse patients are treated with
buprenorphine than methadone, and retention in treatment is up to 78% with
additional counseling. Still, 80% of all people who misuse opioids never obtain
any therapy for their disorder, risking overdose, other diseases, including HIV
and Hepatitis, and amyloidosis. Extended-release medications for opioid
maintenance therapy would open up more options to get people into therapy. A
3-month release formulation of buprenorphine would be a part of that strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Buprenorphine is a partial agonist opioid drug that is
used for treatment of pain in human and animal patients and for opioid addiction
maintenance. A platform technology has been developed that can be used to
formulate extended-release preparations of drugs that are weak bases and are
mildly lipophilic. Preparations of buprenorphine, naltrexone and doxycycline
have been developed using this method. The initial proposed product is an
injectable formulation of buprenorphine that releases over a period of 3 months.
This project will address the occurrence of a brief peak of early drug release
in the 3-month duration buprenorphine formulation. The experiments in the
current proposal will examine three different methods of decreasing the early
peak by manipulating the amount of lipid engulfed by macrophages at a given dose
of drug or by preventing macrophage engulfment of the lipid particles entirely
by coating the lipid particles with chemicals that make them unlikely to be
phagocytized. Preliminary results indicate that changing the drug to lipid ratio
as described in the current proposal will reduce the peak of early release.
Reducing the early peak will prevent sedative effects, improve the
pharmacokinetics of the preparation and make dose escalation studies easier and
more straight forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.