* 1819610
* SBIR Phase I:  Disruptive Semiconductor Software Tool for Recipe Optimization for Deposition and Etching Processes
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Meghali Chopra, SandBox Semiconductor Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2019
* USD 224,826.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will enable technologies on the
cutting-edge like Spin Torque Transfer-Random Access Memory (STT-RAM) and high
efficiency solar cells to permeate the marketplace. Currently, semiconductor
applications like these technologies face significant nanomanufacturing
challenges. In fact, fabricating semiconductor devices is so challenging that
55% of new semiconductor products fail to meet their original launch date and
over 40% of development projects exceed the planned budgets. With its proposed
virtual recipe development environment, this SBIR project will allow
semiconductor chip and equipment manufacturers to save up to 66% of process
development costs, gain market share through three times faster development
cycles, and enable the process development of next-generation of high
performance, energy efficient electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will use statistical self-learning inference algorithms,
sophisticated process models, and the vast amount of available fab data to make
high accuracy process predictions and enable high volume manufacturing of
innovative nanotechnologies. Three key components will be developed: (1) A
recipe analytics engine capable of performing process predictions and process
design for multiple process objectives, (2) A topography simulator for profile
prediction of nanofeatures, and (3) A commercial platform interface for real-
time process development decision making. The components will be devised to
accurately capture large process systems and multiple process objectives, reduce
computational expense, and facilitate commercial adoption. These innovations
will be accomplished by: (a) Using parallel computing to reduce computational
expense, (b) Developing reduced-order plasma and surface kinetic models, (c)
Employing adaptive algorithms to accelerate recipe optimization, and (d) Using
uncertainty analysis techniques for recipe co-
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.