* 1819964
* SBIR Phase I:  An Economic Optical Fiber Solution to the Last Mile Problem
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Phillip Turner, TRAXyL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2019
* USD 224,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide the capability to affordably and
reliably connect underserved or unserved Americans to high speed internet using
surface-mounted optical fiber, whether they live in a suburban neighborhood or
in a remote rural area. The lack of high speed internet access is largely due to
an inability to economically distribute broadband communications over the 'last
mile' to businesses, homes, schools, and medical or government entities. An
understanding of the installed durability of fiber using this technique will
usher in new developments to deploy surface-mounted fiber nationwide. More
accessible high-speed internet provides more information, opportunity, and
economic productivity regardless of the locale. The digital divide between urban
and rural Americans could be reduced or eliminated. Lower cost fiber deployments
will make it easier to deploy new technologies, like 5G antennas and connected
vehicles, and will shrink the cost to make cities smarter with ubiquitous
sensors and cameras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate
that optical fibers under protective coatings bonded to paved surfaces can
provide reliable high speed communications while subjected to weather and
traffic. It will allow estimation of the predicted life time of surface mounted
fiber on pavement. The testing will place asphalt samples in an environmental
test chamber to evaluate competing fiberoptic installations and to identify the
best performers for a series of follow-on field and lab tests. This will allow
the future targeting of financial resources on the most promising material and
profile combinations. Test samples will undergo wide ranging temperature and
humidity cycles and repetitive tire impacts under controlled conditions. This
testing will identify statistical life predictions in years after only a few
months of actual test time. The longer the predicted life, the larger the
customer pool, and the wider the potential market penetration. Understanding the
predicted lifetime of a fiber installation will open the door to more early
adopters, to more pilot program users, and eventually to fiberoptic installers
and long term customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.