* 1819248
* SBIR Phase I:  Analysis of Progress Photos for Indoor Construction Progress Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Derek Hoiem, RECONSTRUCT INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2018
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will save billions of dollars by
anticipating construction delays and streamlining coordination to prevent them.
Lower costs will help upgrade our nation's infrastructure, which is a critical
national priority. Many construction companies strongly want a solution to
indoor progress monitoring. Laser scanning is too expensive and slow, and
photography services can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars for large
projects and introduce logistical challenges. The proposed research would
simplify the workflow for progress monitoring of interiors by automatically
registering 360 degree photos and video and aligning them to building
information models (BIM), providing a cheap, quick, and effective solution for
daily progress monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to localize images, reconstruct 3D models,
align them to floorplans or 3D BIM, and use the aligned models to provide
actionable data to construction managers. A main challenge is to robustly solve
for camera pose using structure-from-motion in indoor scenes that are unfinished
and contain textureless and reflective surfaces. A second challenge is to
automatically or semi-automatically register the models to 2D or 3D plans, made
more difficult by the fact that the site is incomplete and constantly changing.
A third challenge is to create interfaces that project personnel can use to
perform visual inspection, progress monitoring, requests for information, and
other supervision and coordination tasks. The project will investigate the use
of tags (i.e., markers) to improve robustness of 3D reconstruction and to
perform registration without requiring the 3D positions of tags to be known in
advance. Thus, the project addresses major unsolved problems in computer vision,
robotics, and their application to construction
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.