* 1819203
* Computational Filtering Methods for Time-Varying Parameter Estimation in Nonlinear Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Andrea Arnold, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 220,458.00

Many applications in modern science involve unknown system parameters that must
be estimated using little to no prior information. In mathematical models to
analyze and predict the behavior of such systems, the problem of estimating and
quantifying uncertainty in model parameters remains a challenge. This is
particularly true for systems where knowledge of parameter values is critical in
obtaining trustworthy model output, as in patient-specific models for
personalized medicine, for example. A subset of these problems includes
parameters of the type that are known to vary with time but do not have known
evolution models. Examples include the seasonal transmission parameter in
modeling the spread of infectious diseases and the external voltage parameter in
modeling the spiking dynamics of neurons. In certain cases, the parameters may
have some known structural characteristics (such as periodicity) that can be
utilized in and maintained throughout the estimation process. However, the main
challenge in estimating time-varying parameters lies in accurately accounting
for their time evolution without detailed information regarding their temporal
dynamics. The goal of this project is to design and analyze novel computational
methods for estimating such time-varying parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of this study is to design and analyze novel computational methods for
estimating time-varying parameters through use of nonlinear filtering.
Leveraging the strengths of the Bayesian statistical filtering framework, where
prior beliefs are naturally incorporated, this work will involve developing
models for parameter evolution that take into account prior knowledge relating
to the structure or behavior of the parameter over time without defining
explicit functions to describe the dynamics. Methods will also be developed for
more difficult problems where there may not be any parameter structural
characteristics known a priori. The algorithms and computational tools developed
in this study will be applied to data for a variety of nonlinear systems, which
may further inspire new directions for methodological advancement. Specific
areas of application include engineering and the life sciences, with particular
application to surgical robotics involving tissue thermal response to laser-
based microsurgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.