* 1819321
* SBIR Phase I:  Actively Shielded Superconducting Generators for Large Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Andy Yoon, HINETICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2019
* USD 219,444.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is reduced levelized cost of electricity (LCOE)
of offshore wind from current levels that are about twice that of onshore wind.
Given the proximity of offshore wind resources to load centers along the coast,
it is an attractive renewable energy source for the nation, but high costs are
an impediment to widespread adoption. One way to address this is with larger
turbines that can lead to lower ?balance of plant? costs, which can be as high
as 65% of the total project costs of offshore wind. However, turbine rating is
currently limited due to the large size and weight of the generator and the
rotor, as well as infrastructure obstacles like manufacturing, transport, and
assembly. The lightweight superconducting (SC) generators being developed within
this project, coupled with advanced rotors already being developed by the OEM?s,
could open the door to significantly larger turbine ratings and lower costs. The
underlying high specific power machine technology can also help transform a
number of other weight-sensitive electrical systems like hybrid electric
airplanes and ship propulsion.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to disrupt the traditional risk
versus benefit trade of the low Technology Readiness Level (TRL) SC technology
by significantly increasing the benefits with a novel ?active magnetic
shielding? concept. This design concept enables a very high operating magnetic
field within the machine while eliminating the need for a yoke made of
ferromagnetic steel to contain the field. The higher internal fields increase
the electromagnetic torque significantly over other solutions, leading to very
high power density. Additionally, the elimination of heavy iron from the
magnetic circuit leads to further reduction in weight. The proposed generator
design can be about half the size of currently available wind direct-drives.
Efficiency is also expected to improve with the elimination of about a third of
copper coils while maintaining the same current density. Available cryogenic
cooling technology from the commercially successful magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) industry will be adapted and utilized in the machine to reduce many of the
cryogenics related risks while maintaining high specific
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.