* 1819594
* SBIR Phase I:  3D Tumor Model Microtechnology for High Throughput Drug Screening
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Stephanie Ham, OncoSolutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a drug discovery platform for preclinical
cancer drug testing using a 3D tumor model technology. The technology is
designed to reduce time and costs associated with the high failure rate (~95%)
of cancer drugs by increasing the likelihood that candidate drugs advancing to
animal studies will be effective. The robotic technology will provide a
biologically relevant tumor model to test libraries of cancer drugs in the
preclinical stage, and replace currently used 2D cancer cell models. This
project aims to scale up the 3D tumor model technology to accommodate large drug
libraries tested in the pharmaceutical industry, and verify that it meets
industry standards and customer needs. The technology will expedite the
introduction of effective cancer drugs into the market for patient use, and help
reduce the more than half a million of lives that cancer claims annually. The
proposed work will significantly facilitate the introduction of the technology
into the market as a preclinical cancer drug screening tool by demonstrating its
competitive advantages and capabilities to improve cancer drug discovery
efforts.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and validate a 3D tumor model
technology for high-throughput cancer drug screening in the pharmaceutical
industry. Despite widespread interest in 3D cancer cell cultures, existing
methods are not currently used in the industry due to their many disadvantages.
The proposed technology provides a robust, high-throughput, and cost-effective
approach to generate 3D cancer cell cultures for rapid drug screening, beyond
what is currently available. This work will evaluate quantitatively the
reliability and robustness of 3D cancer cell cultures and costs of cancer drug
testing while considering competitive techniques. A major goal is to adapt the
technology to a 1536-microwell plate format for highly efficient drug screening,
which is not currently available on the market, and validate the capabilities of
the technology to predict cancer drug responses in animal studies. This work
will involve robotic protocol optimization, imaging analysis of 3D cultures for
consistency, proof-of-concept cancer drug screening, and statistical evaluation
of robustness. It is anticipated that the work will demonstrate the advantageous
capacity and speed of the technology for drug testing, industry-level
robustness, compatibility with different cancer cell types, ability to predict
animal study drug responses, and low cost.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.