* 1819719
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Coherence Tomography(OCT)-Sensor Guided Sub-Retinal Injector
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Lok Chu, LIV Medical Technology Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,973.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address the most common causes of blindness
worldwide. Retinal diseases account for vision loss in over 25 million
Americans. Worldwide, the prevalence of blindness in children is determined
largely by socioeconomic development and availability preventative care. By
2020, the World Health Organization estimates that visual impairment among
children age 14 and under will reach almost 19 million, and adults will reach
almost 266 million. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes a
SMART surgical tool to enable safe and precise delivery of stem cells and genes
to help repair and restore the vision of patients with retinal degeneration.
Studies have shown cell transplant technology and injectable therapeutics
improve vision in afflicted patients. However, due to the delicate nature of
retinal tissue, this procedure is challenging to perform successfully. The
proposed tool addresses the unmet need for better visualization and targeted
delivery of therapeutic agents. Precise delivery of treatment is expected to
deliver benefits in preventing and correcting retinal
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.