* 1819144
* Novel Multiple-Shooting Algorithms for Optimization Governed by Time-Dependent Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 319,192.00

Mathematical optimization plays a crucial role in the optimal design of
engineering systems and in their efficient operation. For example, management of
oil reservoirs requires the injection of, e.g., water into wells to push oil
reserves through complex geological structures to production wells with the goal
to maximize revenue. Systems like this are modeled by time-dependent partial
differential equations (PDEs) and involve many design or decision variables,
such as injection rates that vary among wells and over time, that need to be
determined. This research develops new mathematical optimization algorithms for
such time-dependent problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research
aims to develop new algorithms for the efficient application of direct multiple
shooting (MS) formulations to optimal control and optimal design problems
governed by time dependent PDEs, and demonstrates the performance of these
algorithms to applications in flow control. Direct MS formulations decompose the
underlying PDEs into equations on shorter time subintervals and couple these at
the time interval boundaries. These coupling conditions must be satisfied at the
solution, but not during the iteration of an optimization algorithm. This is
exploited to achieve substantial improvements in the numerical solution of such
problems through superior stability properties of sub-problems, enhanced
convergence properties of solution algorithms, and introduction of parallelism.
However, MS formulations have a price: The auxiliary initial data at time
interval boundaries are additional optimization variables and the coupling
conditions are additional constraints. For problems governed by (discretized)
PDEs this leads to huge increases in the number of optimization variables and
constraints. Because of these increases, existing optimization approaches that
have been successfully applied to MS formulations of problems governed by
ordinary differential equations are practically infeasible in the PDE setting.
The goals of this research are to 1) inject MS formulations into first-order
gradient optimization algorithms to expand their applicability to problems where
the solution of the underlying PDE may be numerically unstable and 2) develop
new second-order iterative methods based on model reduction to substantially
reduce the computational cost of solving large quadratic-programs that arise in
conventional sequential quadratic programming approaches. Convergence analysis
of the new methods will be provided and these methods will be demonstrated on
applications in flow control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.