* 1819193
* Collaborative Research: Improved Boundary Element Methods for Electrostatics of Interacting Proteins in Solvent
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Weihua Geng, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 155,000.00

Protein molecules are basic components in all forms of life, and electrostatic
effects play a key role in &lt;br/&gt;determining protein structure and
function. However studying these effects experimentally is difficult,
&lt;br/&gt;and there is great interest in using computer simulations to advance
this area of biochemical research. &lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute by
developing new mathematical algorithms to improve the accuracy and
&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of these simulations. Potential biomedical applications
include (1) protein-ligand binding, &lt;br/&gt;which is important for synthetic
drug design, and (2) protein folding, which is important for
&lt;br/&gt;understanding how misfolding causes disease. The investigators will
collaborate with bioscientists, and &lt;br/&gt;the software developed in the
project will be made available in open source format for use by the
&lt;br/&gt;scientific community. The project results will be disseminated
through conference and seminar &lt;br/&gt;presentations, and publications in
scientific journals. The project will develop the national workforce in
&lt;br/&gt;computational mathematics by training junior personnel at the
postdoctoral, graduate student, and &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate student
levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Biochemical simulations of charged particle
systems are often limited by the cost of computing long-&lt;br/&gt;range
electrostatic interactions. To address this issue the PIs have developed a
treecode-accelerated &lt;br/&gt;boundary integral (TABI) method to solve the
Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation for the electrostatic &lt;br/&gt;potential of a
solvated protein. In this project the PIs will extend the TABI solver to the
challenging case &lt;br/&gt;of interacting proteins in solvent, focusing on
subtle dielectric and ionic structural effects. The work &lt;br/&gt;entails
advances in modeling, improvements in treecode and boundary element methods, and
&lt;br/&gt;applications in molecular biochemistry including the following
topics: (1) The TABI code will be &lt;br/&gt;extended to compute the binding
energy of a solvated protein-protein complex. (2) The treecode will
&lt;br/&gt;be adapted to accelerate computations of the total correlation
function in the Reference Interaction &lt;br/&gt;Site Model (RISM) which
provides a physically accurate description of the water structure near the
&lt;br/&gt;solute/solvent interface. (3) Explicit ion simulations will be
carried out to validate the PB and RISM &lt;br/&gt;simulations, and to
investigate the effect of finite ion size on the interfacial charge structure.
(4) The &lt;br/&gt;treecode will be improved by implementing a more effective
multipole acceptance criterion, and &lt;br/&gt;parallel CPU and GPU
implementations of the treecode will be developed. (5) A new method for
&lt;br/&gt;computing electrostatic PB forces will be tested for application in
molecular dynamics simulations of &lt;br/&gt;interacting proteins in solvent.
(6) Efficient computation of pH-dependent effects in solvated proteins
&lt;br/&gt;will be demonstrated using TABI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.