* 1819362
* SBIR Phase I:  SmartBot360: A Platform to Enable an Effective Chatbot Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Matthew Wiley, SmartBot360
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to enable smaller businesses to
participate to the chatbot revolution, by making it easier to design and deploy
chatbots. The initial focus of this project is healthcare, where there is great
opportunity to improve the quality and availability of patient services. The key
technological innovation is the facilitation of an ecosystem of chatbot
designers and agents, through the creation of novel chatbot design,
collaboration and deployment tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create the technology to allow
chatbot designers to incorporate human agents into the logical flow of chatbots.
Currently, chatbots are designed in an ad-hoc trial-and-error manner, which is
infeasible for small businesses who do not have the resources to constantly
refine and evaluate their chatbots. The project will also create techniques to
allow human agents to be productive when taking over chatbot sessions, and allow
designers to improve the logical flow of chatbots based on usage
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.