* 1819034
* Further Strengthening Approaches that Bring Mathematics Education Policy and Practice Together: The U.S. National Commission on Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2021
* USD 95,728.00

Global leadership in science and engineering is an important goal for the United
States. To sustain such global leadership, the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), through their Board on International
Scientific Organizations works with the International Scientific Unions to
oversee a network of US National Committees (USNCs) to facilitate US leadership,
collaboration, and representation in international scientific organizations and
institutions. The US National Commission on Mathematics Instruction (USNC/MI) is
the US-based body of the International Commission on Mathematics Instruction
(ICMI), a commission of the International Mathematical Union. This project will
fund the continued operations of the USNC/MI to ensure the US remains engaged in
important conversations about mathematics education across the lifespan across
the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USNC/MI will hold one face-to-face annual
meeting and one virtual meeting of the USNC/MI and participate in the upcoming
ICMI Studies. The USNC/MI chair also will attend the Conference Board of
Mathematical Sciences meeting to keep US mathematics organizations abreast of
international trends in mathematics education. USNC/MI staff will continue to
facilitate international collaborations to support the improvement of
mathematics education in the US and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.