* 1819757
* SBIR Phase I:  A handheld sensor for seafood identification
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Thomas Cohen, Nanopore Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop technology to prevent seafood fraud
through enabling wholesalers, restaurants, and consumers to rapidly identify
mislabeled fish product outside of controlled laboratory settings. U.S.
consumers are subjected to mislabeling errors one out of every three times they
consume seafood. Species that are cheaper and easier to source are commonly
swapped for higher value fish such as tuna, snapper, and grouper. This
substitution occurs at multiple points in the supply chain, from
producers/processors to wholesalers to restaurants. U.S. consumers pay
approximately $32 billion for mislabeled seafood on an annual basis.
Additionally, this seafood may pose a serious health concern or counteract
regulatory efforts focused on managing vulnerable fish populations and illegal
fishing. Current seafood identification efforts are insufficient to eradicate
mislabeling because they require controlled laboratory settings and highly
trained personnel. A few portable tests are becoming available but they lack the
ability to screen large numbers of samples cost-effectively. The platform
proposed here will enable more widespread seafood identification testing by
delivering identification within 45 minutes, on-site, and for a lower per sample
cost than existing technologies.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to address seafood mislabeling by developing
a fast and portable DNA-based screening platform to allow for accurate seafood
identification to address concerns from consumers, retailers, and regulators
regarding seafood mislabeling. The key component of the platform to be developed
is a nanopore-based sensor technology, which is an amplification-free method for
direct counting of target nucleic acids. It has been demonstrated in preliminary
results that the technology is able to distinguish grouper DNA from catfish with
single-nucleotide specificity. This technology also has achieved multiplexed
detection, distinguishing 36 sequences with one sensor. This project will
advance this detection assay towards a commercial-ready product by expanding the
multiplexing strategy to cover 200+ sequences, designing probes to distinguish
20+ fish species, and then completing a full commercial proof-of-principle by
identifying seafood species in blinded samples in work done on-site.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.