* 1819412
* RUI: Investigations of Lorentz Violation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Matthew Mewes, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew Mewes at
California Polytechnic State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lorentz invariance
is thought to be an exact symmetry of nature. It is the basis of special
relativity and implies that the laws of physics are the same for all observers.
However, attempts to unify our two most fundamental descriptions of nature, the
Standard Model of particle physics and general relativity, into a single all-
encompassing theory suggest that Lorentz invariance might be broken slightly.
The research of Professor Mewes focuses on violations of Lorentz invariance,
with the goal of extending the theoretical description of Lorentz-invariance
violations and identifying experimental signatures in an effort to aid the
search for new physics. This research advances the national interest by
promoting science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. Parts of this work will be accessible to
undergraduates and will provide research opportunities for physics majors at Cal
Poly, a primarily undergraduate institution. Students involved in this research
will also gain valuable exposure to theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
more technical terms, this project seeks to fill several major gaps in the
theoretical framework known as the Standard-Model-Extension (SME). The SME
provides a general description of Lorentz violation in any system. The
generality of this approach implies that the full SME contains an infinite
number of violations. To keep the problem tractable, early studies focused on
the minimal SME, which restricts attention to operators of renormalizable mass
dimension. However, there are reasons to suspect that nonrenormalizable
violations may dominate. This project will extend our understanding of Lorentz-
invariance violations by completing the extension for linearized gravity and by
exploring various consequences in that sector. It also seeks to fill gaps in the
Lorentz-violating extension of quantum electrodynamics by classifying violations
in fermion-photon interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.