* 1819493
* SBIR Phase I:  Fast Focus and Zoom in Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Sarah Lukes, Agile Focus Designs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will enable fast
focusing and zoom in microscopy with an optomechanical system consisting of
micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) mirrors. The microscope add-on will
enable fast 3D imaging in wide-field microscopes and increase focusing and zoom
speeds by 100x when compared with conventional methods in confocal and
multiphoton microscopy. The technology allows the sample stage and objective
lens turret to remain stationary during experiments. It will increase
throughput, preserve sensitive samples, enable observation of dynamic events,
and reduce training time. The innovation will spur significant discovery in
understanding dynamic reactions that occur in in vivo and in vitro microscopy.
The initial target market has an estimated gross revenue of $75M. The technology
also promises to benefit 3D imaging systems for manufacturing or machine vision,
optical coherence tomography, and endoscopic imaging systems by providing high
speed and agile focus control. While MEMS are ubiquitous in mobile platforms and
the automotive industry for motion sensing, they have not yet permeated other
markets or imaging systems to the same extent. With recent advances in
fabrication and performance of optical MEMS devices, bringing this type of
technology to other platforms can spark greater commercialization of the
technology in non-traditional areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is foremost the demonstration of a novel optomechanical
system with MEMS mirrors for independent control of focusing and zoom in
microscopy. MEMS mirrors are a type of varifocus element. They remain stationary
while their voltage-controlled, configurable surface shapes allow for fast
focusing and attendant correction of spherical aberration. Fast MEMS mirrors,
with sufficient diameters for 2x zoom and significant focusing capability, have
not previously been demonstrated in literature or commercially. By producing and
characterizing fast, large-diameter MEMS mirrors for this project, knowledge of
varifocus elements will be advanced. This project will also continue to define
standard optical design practices to best utilize varifocus elements, since
traditional optical analyses assume fixed focal length lenses or mirrors. The
project objectives are three-fold: 1) fabricate large-diameter MEMS mirrors with
greater than 40% yield, 2) characterize their focusing range and dynamic
behavior, and 3) demonstrate them in a focus and zoom system suitable as a
microscopy add-on component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.