* 1819110
* Efficient Algorithms for Optimal Control of Time-Periodic and Nonlinear Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Beattie, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 279,913.00

Fluids often exhibit cyclical motion, either due to external periodic forces
(e.g., lunar tides) or due to internal forces that naturally arise through
interaction with the environment (e.g., air buffeting through a slightly opened
car window or the eddies that develop from a river current interacting with a
bridge pillar). The control of such flows is of great interest since in many
cases small changes in a flow profile can produce either dramatic benefits or
catastrophic costs. Stabilizing and tuning cyclic flow patterns to a given
frequency can be useful in the design of wind farms and wave energy converters,
for example, while in other circumstances eliminating oscillatory motion
altogether may help reduce fatigue loads placed on critical support structures.
This project specifically addresses the modeling and control of oscillatory
phenomena through the development of new mathematical algorithms for simulation
and control that integrate underlying periodic system behavior into the core
modeling framework, thus promising both improved accuracy and reduced
computational costs. This research will result in improved understanding of
mathematical models of systems with periodic behavior as well as the development
of new simulation and modeling tools, which will have an immediate bearing on a
wide range of applications found in biology (e.g., circulatory and respiratory
systems) and energy (e.g., wind turbines and power grid
dynamics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulation and control of periodic flow
structures require methods specialized to the task. The Floquet transformation
has long been a theoretical tool for such problems, allowing for a change in
system representation that effectively shifts the periodic time dependence out
of the internal dynamics into the input/output ports. Only recently has it been
practical to use this approach for small to medium scale problems. The initial
focus of this research will be on the development of scalable, numerically
effective algorithms for large-scale Floquet transformations, enabling the high-
fidelity reduced models for time-varying periodic flow dynamics. By combining
operator splitting approaches with optimal model reduction methods for quadratic
systems, new capabilities for input-independent model reduction for nonlinear
dynamics will be developed and analyzed. The model reduction framework that is
proposed here offers improved numerical efficiency and greater accuracy at
modest cost. Fundamental to this approach will be the integration of an accurate
representation of dynamics into reduced-order models, better respecting the
properties of the underlying optimal control problem. Robust computational tools
aiding the simulation and modeling of large-scale oscillatory dynamics will be
developed and provided to the science and engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.