* 1819970
* SBIR Phase I:  A Rapid Portable Biosensor for Field Detection of Vibrio Cholerae in Environmental Water Sources
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Katherine Clayton, Omnivis LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is an inexpensive handheld smartphone device for rapid
detection of the toxigenic cholera pathogen in environmental water sources.
Contaminated water sources place populations at risk for contracting cholera.
Once contracting the disease, patients with cholera exhibit symptoms of
diarrhea, vomiting, and dehydration and, if left untreated, ultimately death.
Wide-scale cholera outbreaks devastated Haiti in 2010 and Yemen in 2017,
affecting over one million total individuals. Currently, methods used to detect
the cholera pathogen in water involves a 3 to 5-day water collection and cell
culture procedure. This project proposes a portable smartphone platform used to
detect the cholera pathogen, Vibrio cholerae, in under 30 minutes at the water
source. Smartphone connectivity, will also enable geomapped and time-stamped
detection results. This novel and proactive approach for detection can enable
organizations to remediate water sources prior to communities contracting and
spreading cholera. Downstream, this technology will save the time and costs
currently associated with cholera outbreaks and can be expanded to other
infectious diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a rapid, cost-effective, and robust smartphone platform to detect Vibrio
cholerae and automate the detection result at an environmental water source. The
device performs isothermal DNA amplification assay combined with the novel
sensing approach, particle diffusometry. This project proposes to characterize
the specificity, sensitivity, and lower limit of detection of Vibrio cholerae
detection on the smartphone platform. The detection results will be compared
against current gold-standard quantitative DNA amplification methods. Further, a
reagent storage method involving freeze drying will be used to eliminate the
need for cold-chain storage. We will assess the long-term stability of our assay
reagents through accelerated aging studies. Lastly, a low powered integrated
heating unit will be designed to perform the isothermal DNA amplification assays
in the handheld device. At the completion of this Phase I project, an integrated
smartphone platform will be ready for field testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.