* 1819427
* SBIR Phase I:  Tunable Lenses For Smart Eyeglasses with Low-Drift and Light-Weight
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Tridib Ghosh, SharpEyes, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project entails alleviation of a human eye condition that has
obscured the scientific community for almost a century. Refractive eye error is
the most pervasive condition affecting the ocular health of the U.S. population,
across all ethnicities. Presbyopia, a widespread form of such refractive error,
affects 125 million Americans, and over 1.8 billion people worldwide today. It
is caused by reduction of focusing and re-focusing ability of the human eye lens
with natural aging. The symptoms range from blurred vision, haziness, and eye
strain to headaches, which are sometimes severe enough to affect the quality of
life and work ability of subjects. Since the early 1900s, presbyopia has been
traditionally treated with fixed power multi-focal and progressive eyeglasses
that do not solve the core problem of age-related loss of accommodative ability.
The principal goal of this SBIR work is development of key high performance
tunable Smart Eyeglasses with good stability and restoration algorithms that
will help restore this lost ability. This 21st century device, the world?s first
smart auto-focus eyewear, will offer personalized full field normal vision
restoration to presbyopic subjects and generate jobs and revenues worth billions
of dollars.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to implement the feasibility of
commercialization of 21st Century variable power smart eyeglasses that will
restore the natural accommodation of human eye that is lost to presbyopia due to
aging. These adaptive glasses use a combination of fluidic lenses with variable
power, ultra-light actuators, distance sensors, and embedded control electronics
to continually produce full-field sharply focused view for objects at variable
distances. For this proposal, we focus on the research and development of two
important aspects of these devices which are key to a successful
commercialization. First, is improving the long-term stability of the
viscoelastic membranes of these adaptive glasses by using low drift materials
instead of PDMS, and secondly, incorporating a closed-loop feedback mechanism
using displacement sensors to account for the correction of drifts resulting
from the hysteresis and degradation of lens-driving piezo actuators. In the
first task, our goal is to achieve an optical power drift of less than 120
milli-Diopter/year, and in the second task, achieve a drift less than 83 milli-
Diopter/year. These milestones will result in a lens with drift that is less
than 0.25 Diopter over its expected 3 year lifetime, critical for a commercial
grade eyewear lens.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.