* 1819997
* SBIR Phase I:  Engaging the Mind and Body: Technology to Automate Physical Therapy Treatments for Patients with Parkinson's Disease (PD).
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Bennett Gatto, Active Therapy Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to maximize the
quality of life of patients currently suffering from Parkinson?s Disease (PD).
Over 1 million Americans have been diagnosed with PD and this number is expected
to double by 2040. PD is a neurodegenerative disorder without a cure ? once the
first Parkinsonian tremor has been detected, over 80% of the brain cells
associated with creating dopamine through natural processes have already died.
Dopamine is a chemical released by neurons to communicate with other nerve cells
and is essential to enable the basal ganglia network to control the body?s
movements. By engaging the PD patient with novel, highly-cognitive mobility
exercises designed by physical therapists (PTs), automaticity can be
reprogrammed to utilize different regions of the brain to control movement.
Ultimately, this rewiring will slow (neuroprotection) or possibly reverse the
degenerative process. Although the current technology development will focus on
this one disease (PD), the technology may be applicable to other sister diseases
(e.g., Alzheimer?s and Dementia) or even other conditions (traumatic brain
injury, stroke, concussions, and so on). This computer-adaptive platform may
eventually enable researchers to identify a biomarker that may lead to a cure
for this idiopathic condition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will produce a prototype for an
automated physical-therapy (PT) treatment for patients suffering from
Parkinson?s Disease (PD). This automated prototype will act as a virtual coach
encouraging patients to perform daily mobility exercises in the comfort and
privacy of their own homes. This unique, automated technology will help rewire
the brain of the PD patient by engaging both the mind and body which will slow
the neurodegeneration inherent to PD. The system will automatically adjust the
treatment protocol in terms of duration and difficulty based on the patient?s
unique situation including current medication levels. Objective, technology-
based outcome measures will be summarized for caregivers working with the PD
patient (primary care provider, physical therapists, neurologists, and so on).
In addition, this technology platform will be designed to enable community
interaction among PD patients as well as facilitate tele-health communications
between the PD patient and his/her healthcare provider. The overall objective is
to develop a PD-specific electronic system that directs PT treatment by
developing hardware/software to test the feasibility of the adaptive assessment
and the automated PT treatment system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.