* 1819705
* SBIR Phase I:  Magnetometer Based on Spin Wave Interferometer
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Aleksander Khitun, BEAM - CA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2018
* USD 149,603.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is through providing a
sensitive, robust, room temperature operating magnetometer. Magnetometers are
among the most widely used instruments in a variety of applications including
healthcare, transportation safety, food contamination monitoring, and homeland
security. In fact, the growing need for magnetic field sensors manifests itself
in the $1.6 billion global market with a fast-growing medical segment. As for
today, the maximum sensitivity is provided by the Superconducting Quantum
Interference Devices. The high sensitivity is critically important for medical
applications. However, this high sensitivity can be achieved in the
superconducting devices only at cryogenic temperatures. The proposed
magnetometer based on spin wave interferometer combines high sensitivity with
room temperature operation. This combination provides a great improvement in
healthcare by reducing the cost of equipment, in transportation safety
enhancement by providing more accurate traffic control, and in food safety
monitoring by detecting small concentrations of heavy metals. It will be of
great benefit to society to have a magnetometer combining the high sensitivity
of superconducting devices and room temperature
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the need for sensitive and room temperature operating
magnetic field sensors by providing a magnetometer based on spin wave
interferometer. There are different types of magnetic sensors available on the
market. As of today, the maximum sensitivity up to attoTesla is provided by the
Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices. However, this high sensitivity can
be achieved only at cryogenic temperatures. The latter makes superconducting
magnetometers expensive and limits its practical application. The proposed
magnetometer is based on spin wave interference and free of constraints inherent
in superconducting devices. The research objectives encompass the development
and demonstration of a compact, non-expensive magnetometer with up to attoTesla
sensitivity operating in a temperature range from cryogenic to 560 K. The
outcomes of the proposed research will have an impact on commercial, defense and
homeland security applications that need increasingly precise and robust
magnetic sensors. The development of compact and high-sensitive magnetometer
will be relevant to bio-sensing and bio-medical applications as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.