* 1819583
* SBIR Phase I:  Robust Bench-Top Oxygen Imager for Tissue Graft Viability Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Mrignayani Kotecha, O2M Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will address a problem of poor oxygen delivery to the
core of artificial tissues by providing reliable means of three-dimensional
oxygen mapping in vitro and in vivo. The field of tissue engineering
regenerative medicine combines the principles of the life sciences, cell
biology, and engineering to create functional tissues and organs that can be
used for replacing damaged tissues and organs. The public health benefit of
replacing damaged tissues and organs is at par with curing cancer. Almost every
part of the human body has been considered for replacement. Tissue engineering
strives to solve arthritis, Type I diabetes, stroke, vascular diseases, liver
and kidney damages, and many other medical problems by replacing or restoring
damaged tissues or organs with artificial functional tissues. This project will
address the problem of poor oxygen transport in artificial tissue grafts, which
is one of the major causes of tissue failure, by developing an oxygen imaging
instrument to generate three-dimensional in situ oxygen maps. This instrument
will allow scientists to assess oxygen environment over the time of graft
production and upon implantation and develop better artificial tissues. The
oxygen imager uses cutting-edge radiofrequency and magnet technology and will
help create high-tech jobs in the Midwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxygen
imager will be based on the innovative noninvasive electron paramagnetic
resonance oxygen imaging (EPROI) technology. EPROI uses an injectable water-
soluble, non-toxic contrast agent, trityl that has oxygen-dependent relaxation
rates. EPROI provides absolute partial oxygen pressure (pO2) maps with high
accuracy (~ 1 torr) within 1-10 minutes. The oxygen imager will be equipped with
a 25 mT magnet and ~720 MHz electronics suitable for in vitro and small animal
in vivo oxygen imaging. The instrument will have user-friendly software for
image acquisition, image registration, data processing and analysis. This
project will develop the magnet with the top loading of samples along with
temperature and gas controlled bioreactor sample chamber for in vitro oxygen
mapping of artificial tissues. The robustness and performance of the imager will
be tested by acquiring oxygen maps of cell-seeded biomaterials. It is expected
that the oxygen imager will become an essential tool in tissue engineering labs
of academic institutions and biotech companies and will have a major impact on
the successful development of regenerative medicine
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.