* 1820008
* SBIR Phase I:  Extended depth imaging with OCT
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2019
* William Brown, Lumedica, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop an extended depth imaging variation of
optical coherence tomography (OCT). OCT is an optical imaging method that can
visualize tissue structures up to 1mm deep with microscopic resolution. It has
been well adapted for retinal imaging but although available for skin imaging
application, the performance and price point are not sufficient to encourage
market adoption. Building on NSF supported research at Duke University, this
project will extend the depth range of OCT from the current 1-2 mm, which is
only the most superficial layer of skin, to 3-4 mm, enabling full imaging of
skin layers down to the dermal junction. This will enable dermatologists to
access OCT without a large financial outlay and provide a non-invasive imaging
modality in the office setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extended depth imaging is
also applicable to dental imaging and may allow dentists to reduce the need for
X-ray imaging by providing cross sectional images of teeth and gums. Since these
OCT instruments are highly portable, the deep imaging system can be widely used,
across lab benches, in the field or shared throughout a medical office. This
project will support the development of new products and the teams that design
and build them. Extended depth imaging OCT uses a novel design to dramatically
increase the depth penetration of OCT into skin, teeth and other samples. By
using distinct illumination and collection apertures, extended depth (or dual
axis) OCT can triangulate the signal to layers deep beneath the tissue surface.
Compared to previous OCT systems, this increases the imaging depth by a factor
of 2. This innovation will be combined with proprietary spectrometer design,
which was developed to take advantage of 3D printing methods, to develop a
disruptive new instrument for imaging with the performance and price necessary
for commercial success in clinical dermatology and dentistry. This proposal will
build a prototype system and test it on several types of animal
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.