* 1820395
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Thermophotovoltaic Generators for High-Value Remote Power
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Andrej Lenert, Antora Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to enable electrification of remote oil &amp;
gas processes to reduce methane emissions, improve on-site safety, and provide
leak-detection and monitoring capabilities. This will be achieved by developing
a robust, efficient, small-scale power generator capable of converting on-site
fuel to electricity. Beyond the entry opportunity in the oil &amp; gas sector,
this technology has other applications in large markets such as residential and
commercial power generation and heating, transportation, and military. For
example, our proposed generators would allow consumers in moderate/cold climates
to efficiently match their time-dependent heating and electrical demands using
natural gas (accessible to 70 million households). For a typical household in
those regions, we estimate a 45% reduction in primary energy use and CO2
emissions by deploying our generators. The energy reduction translates to an
annual savings of about $650 per household. Widespread deployment of our
technology would grow the domestic natural gas economy, strengthen the US
technological lead in semiconductor manufacturing, and facilitate renewables by
providing a dispatchable supply.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
investigate the fundamental heat-to-electric conversion process and address key
issues around the stability and robustness of the technology, through a
synergistic effort to develop generators capable of high performance and a
manufacturing process to reduce cost. The project will focus on device
optimization and durability, and process repeatability. This involves the
fabrication and integration of multiple frequency-selective components including
a thermal emitter, optical filter, photovoltaic cell, and back surface
reflector. Each component, as well as the integrated system, will undergo
rigorous thermal testing to prove both resistance to elevated temperatures and
temperature swings. Additionally, novel manufacturing techniques will be
developed to enable cost-competitive devices relative to conventional
generators. If the technical objectives are met, this project will demonstrate
record-breaking performance for thermophotovoltaics and accelerate the
commercialization of thermophotovoltaic devices in many different
markets.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.