* 1820135
* SBIR Phase I:  Directional Permeability Enhancement Using Electric Well Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Ildar Akhmadullin, EDEN GEOPOWER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a system that provides improved reservoir
productivity through a novel, inexpensive, and environmentally friendly method.
This method will use an electric impulse to increase reservoir permeability, and
decrease industry reliance on alternative methods like hydraulic fracturing,
which requires hazardous chemicals to be pumped into the subsurface. Residents
in regions where fracking techniques are utilized have commonly been impacted by
induced seismicity and landslides as a consequence of pumped in chemicals
lubricating faults, making earth ruptures more likely to occur. Additionally,
the material and operation time for reservoir stimulation techniques makes the
current process expensive. The ability to increase permeability with an electric
impulse will avoid the environmental concerns associated with current methods,
and will proved a cost competitive reservoir stimulation solution due to a short
operational time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel low-frequency impulse method (LFIM) that increases reservoir
permeability for petroleum and geothermal applications, without requiring
pumping of material into the subsurface. Fluid mobility is increased due to
viscosity reduction and reservoir permeability is increased in the direction of
interest from the vibrational removal of particles within sediment pores. This
program will 1) simulate the processes taking place in the reservoir using
computer simulation model, 2) perform experimental analysis of the effects of
the electric treatment on different core samples, and 3) determine applicability
of the method to different types of the reservoirs located in the United States.
Therefore, this project will identify the optimum sites, where LFIM can boost
geothermal performance and oil &amp; gas production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.