* 1820939
* Statistical Mechanics of Non-Local Disordered Models Associated with Quantum LDPC codes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Leonid Pryadko, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

Large-scale quantum computation is impossible without coherence. Quantum error
correction (QEC) is therefore an important technique to protect coherence. QEC
codes can enable quantum computers to tolerate occasional faults. Topological
QEC codes like Kitaev's surface code provide quantum error corrections with give
relatively high fault-tolerant thresholds for scalable quantum computation.
However, they require a large overhead in the number of ancilla qubits. The
research in this project aims to develop more general quantum low-density
parity-check (LDPC) QEC codes which may work with smaller overhead. This project
will also explore statistical mechanics of classical and quantum spin models
that are related to LDPC codes. Understanding the stability of various phases
and phase transitions in such physical models, both with and without disorder,
will lead to better coherence protection techniques. Another benefit will be
improved understanding of the properties of quantum and classical models in
curved spaces, e.g., due to background gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
technical terms, the PI will continue his studies of disordered spin models
associated with decoding transition, related gauge models associated with fault-
tolerant decoding, and quantum models with extensive ground state entropy,
including U(1) gauge models. The focus of the research will be on the relations
between differently defined transitions: the decoding transition, transitions
defined in terms of a divergent specific heat, correlation length, domain wall
tension, spin susceptibilities, area/perimeter law, etc, as well as transitions
defined in terms of entanglement entropy, topological entropy, fidelity, and
related information-theoretic quantities. These results will be incorporated in
a practical decoding algorithm for quantum LDPC codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.