* 1820862
* EAGER: An Interactive Learning Analytics Framework based on a Student Sequence Model for understanding students, retention, and time to graduation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Mary Lou Maher, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2021
* USD 298,486.00

This is a project to personalize academic advising with the goal of better
identification of student risk and success in retention and graduation in higher
education. The personalization is accomplished through the development of an
interactive system using a novel approach to data modeling. The advisor is given
the sequence of courses, labs, and sections that the student has taken, along
with grades and any other assessment data that is available. This information is
then fed to a data mining application that identifies the degree of success that
the student has had and a prediction of any additional assistance the student
may require in order to achieve academic success. The data mining application
uses machine learning technology and interactive input from faculty, advisors,
and academic leadership to accurately model student
achievements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the interactive framework
enables the discovery of actionable knowledge to improve student success by
including the domain experts in data-driven discovery and decision-making from
heterogeneous and longitudinal student data. The approach is to integrate and
iterate the feature extraction, analytics, and interpretation processes within a
single interactive user experience. Through the use of explorative interactive
visualization of data and data patterns, the target user communities, including
academic leadership, faculty, and advisors will be empowered to explore a
broader range of meaningful hypotheses and derive specific actionable insights
given the large and complex data that is being collected about students'
performance and campus life. This will transform the ability to create policy,
curriculum changes, and interventions that can address specific critical issues
in universities more proactively than traditional analyses can provide for
affecting retention, time to graduation, and student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.