* 1820818
* Precision Theory at the LHC: Strong Interaction Dynamics and New Physics Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Marco Guzzi, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 108,830.00

This award funds the research activity of Professor Marco Guzzi at Kennesaw
State University.

The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the world's biggest and most powerful
particle accelerator where high energy beams of protons, traveling at
approximately the speed of light, collide. Accurate measurements from the LHC
experiments brought high-energy physics to a new realm of precision that allows
us to deepen our knowledge of the structure of matter and its elementary
constituents and to shed light on possible new physics interactions. This field
of research is vibrant and its rapid progress is of high importance for the
national interest as it promotes advances of fundamental science that are
crucial for new discoveries. Theoretical and experimental analyses at the
unprecedented energies of the LHC demand precision. This is essential for
meaningful comparisons between theory and experiment and a correct
interpretation of the results. In his research, Professor Guzzi aims to
calculate precise theoretical predictions and use efficient methods for
phenomenology to improve our current knowledge of the structure of the proton
and set stringent tests on the Standard Model of the elementary particles, as
well as search for new particle signatures predicted by theories of new physics.
The proposed research also has significant broader impacts: Professor Guzzi will
involve students in his research, give public lectures on his research results,
and develop new course curricula based on the results of his research.

On the technical side, Professor Guzzi will use precise theory predictions for
kinematic distributions of top-quark pairs produced at the LHC to reduce the
uncertainties associated with parton distribution functions (PDF's). PDF's of
the proton map out the longitudinal momentum distribution of its constituent
quarks and gluons and they are a crucial limiting factor in the accuracy of
theoretical predictions for many important observables at the LHC. A second part
of the proposed project aims to improve the theory predictions for searches for
extra neutral vector bosons at the LHC, generically referred to as Z' bosons.
They differ from the Standard-Model Z boson by having different masses and
couplings. With the improvements of the proton PDF's discussed above and with
new precise measurements of dilepton pair production in Drell-Yan processes at
LHC Run-II energies and luminosities, Professor Guzzi will study the parameter
space of Z's of generic origin and will scrutinize a large number of new physics
models. Finally, Professor Guzzi will determine with high precision the
nonperturbative parameters of the transverse momentum dependent (TMD)
distributions of the proton by using high-order perturbation theory and recent
precise LHC measurements for Z-boson production in terms of a novel angular
variable that has the advantage of being very sensitive to nonperturbative
effects. TMD distributions represent the ultimate frontier of factorization
theorems in QCD and allow us to have a unified framework in which to describe
hadronic reactions in different energy regimes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.