* 1820364
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Thermal Plasma Source for Functional Metal-Oxide Nanoparticle Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Peter Firth, Swift Coat
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2019
* USD 223,837.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
process and platform for the aerosol synthesis of metal-oxide nanoparticles.
When coupled with an existing aerosol deposition technology, this aerosol
synthesis source will enable the production of the next generation of functional
coatings. These include antireflective and self-cleaning coatings for solar
modules, novel electrical contacts that reduce silver usage in solar cells, and
thermal barrier coatings for windows that increase thermal efficiency. Each of
these represents a large addressable market in need of coatings innovation: For
example, the coated flat glass market is expected to reach $43.2B in 2025 and
the metal-oxide nanoparticle coatings from this project are anticipated to
capture at least 10% of that market. Beyond the commercial and related societal
impacts of the project, this project will increase the scientific understanding
of the nucleation of nanomaterials in the gas phase and the subsequent
manipulation of nanoparticles in low-pressure flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in its development of a new method to
synthesize metal-oxide materials in the gas phase, resulting in an aerosol that
can be manipulated and deposited on a substrate with gas flows. Prior art for
the synthesis of metal-oxide nanoparticles and the subsequent formation of films
suffers from three challenges: (1) synthesis methods that utilize high-pressure
gas-phase processes tend to create large light-scattering agglomerates that
produce hazy films, (2) "wet" synthesis coating techniques can suffer from
stability challenges, optical non-uniformities, and processes that are not
easily scaled and (3) all methods have limited control of the optical properties
of the film, specifically the refractive index. Synthesis of metal-oxide
nanoparticles using the approach in this project is a promising, but under-
examined and under-utilized, technique. It will generate unagglomerated
nanoparticles of controllable size, overcoming the first challenge, and, with
suitable aerosol deposition techniques, enable large-area uniform films with
controllable refractive index, overcoming the second and third
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.