* 1820712
* On Holography, Causality and Spacetime
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Elena Caceres, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Elena Caceres at the
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Einstein's theory of general
relativity is one of the bedrocks of modern science. But general relativity is
not enough to describe the interior of black holes or the earliest stages of our
universe. In both cases the laws of physics become quantum-mechanical and we
therefore need a theory of gravity which is also consistent with the laws of
quantum mechanics. String theory has long been considered the best candidate for
such a theory. Approximately twenty years ago this led to the discovery of the
so-called "holographic principle". This remarkable principle allows us to relate
quantum-mechanical theories of gravity with other theories that do not involve
gravity at all. As a result, intractable problems in certain gravitational
theories are translated into non-gravitational problems --- problems which are
often far simpler to solve. In her research, Professor Caceres aims to develop a
further understanding of this correspondence. Progress in this direction will
ultimately provide insights into the physics of the early universe, the interior
of black holes, and ultimately the nature of spacetime itself. As such, this
research advances the national interest by fostering the development of basic
science within the United States. This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. Professor Caceres will involve graduate students
and postdocs in her research, thereby providing training for junior physicists.
Professor Caceres will also develop a mentorship program to help lower the high
attrition rate of underrepresented minorities studying physics at the
undergraduate level. Finally, Professor Caceres will also give talks at middle
schools and high schools with high percentages of minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, Professor Caceres will
investigate causal holographic constructs in higher-derivative theories and use
these constructs to constrain the space of higher-derivative theories that can
have a QFT dual. She will also study the consequences of the causal structure of
higher-derivative theories in the "complexity equals action" conjecture and in
the "subregion complexity - action" proposal. Concerning traversable wormholes
arising from a boundary deformation, Professor Caceres will study traversability
in charged wormholes, in wormholes in backgrounds dual to non-commutative
theories, and in solutions of higher-derivative theories. She will also
investigate the effects of couplings with a spatial profile at the boundary of
the opening of the traversable wormhole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.