* 1820041
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Technology to Promote a Dual-language Approach to Personalizing English-language Learners' Growth in Literacy Ability
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Carl Swartz, High Road Learning Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 211,741.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will create an educational technology that accelerates
the acquisition of foundational English language skills by children (4 to 10
years old), by melding English and Spanish language instruction, delivered via a
personalized digital learning platform. Using state-of-the-art text-to-speech
and speech-to-text engines, students that are English Language Learners (ELL)
will engage in deliberate literacy practice across the four modalities of
language (listening, speaking, reading, writing). Over the last decade, the
number of ELL students enrolling in public schools has steadily increased while
there remains a shortage of bilingual or certified ELL teachers. Technology can
help these teachers to personalize instruction and extend the school day which
in turn increases engaged learning time. Achieving college and career readiness
is an economic imperative for all students, especially ELL students given the
importance of English communication skills to career success. While developing
technologies for use in classrooms by young children can be a risky proposition
due to the nature of the modern classroom, the reward far outweighs the risk.
This project will produce a high-impact technology solution designed for young
children that integrates the latest text-to-speech and speech-to-text
technologies and is grounded in sound research about language skill acquisition
across the four modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation of this SBIR
Phase 1 project is a plurilinguistic (e.g., Spanish and English) approach to
literacy development across the four modalities of language (e.g., reading,
writing, speaking, listening) where young students (aged 4-10 years old) are
immersed in personalized learning experiences specifically tailored to support
and accelerate language development. The first research goal is to test the
feasibility for using and adapting proprietary English and Spanish language
text-to-speech and speech-to-text engines with young children. The second
research goal is to examine the impact of a dual-language personalized learning
platform on children?s acquisition of foundational listening, speaking, reading,
and writing skills. Participants will be ELL students whose first language is
Spanish. The research is based on a plurilinguistic framework for second
language acquisition; researchers hypothesize that a dual-language application
that leverages students' first language to learn English will score
significantly higher on independent measures of foundational literacy skills and
self-efficacy for learning compared to students who are using an English-only
personalized learning application. A mechanism of growth may be the amount of
time students are immersed in deliberate practice of literacy skills. A dual-
language personalized learning platform has the potential to extend teacher-led
literacy instruction and increase the amount of time students spend engaged in
learning English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.