* 1820903
* Collaborative Research: Institutional and Community Transformation for Teaching and Learning Quantitative Reasoning in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Patricia Turner, Howard Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Quantitative reasoning (QR) involves the use of mathematical skills, such as
algebra and statistical analysis, to understand and interpret data. The field of
biology has become increasingly reliant on the use of quantitative reasoning to
interpret large datasets, such as those gathered in genomic analysis and
population studies. This project is designed to improve quantitative reasoning
skills in students at community colleges preparing to transfer into biology
majors at four-year institutions. These students are often underprepared to
successfully complete biology majors and to continue to graduate education or to
enter the STEM workforce. To achieve long-term gains in students' abilities to
apply QR in biological contexts, this proposal seeks to leverage a
university/community college partnership to expand and deepen the QR content in
core biology courses across the major. The program aspires to provide a model
for how consortia of community colleges and universities can facilitate course
awareness and alignment to improve student gains in QR. This project will test
the hypothesis that this type of collaboration enhances pedagogy and transfer
student success at four-year institutions. Further, repeated interaction with QR
modules within the core biology curricula are hypothesized to positively impact
the success of all students in upper-level coursework. These efforts are
designed to strengthen the course performance measures of all students,
including both direct entry and transfer students. Improving student success and
retention in STEM majors such as biology supports the goal of improving access
of all students to scientific and technical careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of the project will be on enhancing the QR skills of undergraduates
through the creation of active learning modules focused on quantitative skill
development, verified with validated assessment instruments. Three scholarly
communities will be established: 1) a Curricular Alignment Team, which will
review curricula in four core courses (Introductory Biology: Cells and
Molecules, Introductory Biology: Ecology and Evolution, Genetics, and Cell
Biology) at the community colleges and the four-year institution in the
collaboration, and identify areas for action, with emphasis on the development
of QR abilities in biology majors; 2) the NEXUS Institute in Quantitative
Biology, which will involve teams of faculty from each institution developing,
piloting, and assessing QR modules for the core biology curricula and assessing
the impact on student performance and retention; and 3) a Faculty Development
Community, which will involve a series of shared faculty development workshops
on evidence-based teaching approaches, to include the use of the created QR
modules, and a common teaching certificate program. These three communities will
come together annually at a regional symposium, where the consortium products
(QR modules) and findings (student assessment data) will be disseminated. Taken
together, this work will shape intra- and inter-institutional perspectives and
practices relating to the importance of QR in the success of undergraduate
biology majors. By developing faculty collaborations through the scholarly
communities described above, this project will provide training in modern
pedagogical methods and module development for biology faculty at community
colleges and four-year institutions. The project will map the processes involved
and disseminate the project findings widely to ensure that it serves as a model
for other institutions that wish to take this approach to improve transfer
student success and better prepare all biology majors for the modern STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.