* 1820675
* Particle Theory, Gravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* John Donoghue, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,999.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors John Donoghue and Lorenzo
Sorbo at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most active areas in theoretical physics involves the interface between
general relativity, which is our theory of the gravitational interactions, and
the study of particle physics and cosmology. The union of gravity and quantum
mechanics has fundamental problems to be addressed, and the connection of
fundamental physics with cosmology will allow crucial tests of our present
ideas. Professors Donoghue and Sorbo have a research program which addresses
these new frontiers. As such, this research advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical laws. Professor Donoghue will use
the techniques of what is called "effective field theory" to study quantum-
gravity effects that are reliably calculated at low energy. Professor Sorbo's
primary research involves novel effects in the study of the universe, including
possible new ways of testing proposed new theories. Professors Donoghue and
Sorbo will also involve undergraduate and graduate students in their research,
and thereby provide training for junior physicists beginning research in this
field. They will also provide outreach to middle-school students and develop a
new book promoting the understanding of quantum field theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Donoghue will use effective
field theory to treat quantum problems in general relativity in the region where
the effective field theory is valid. He will also study more complete theories
of gravity as well as alternative ways to tackle the issue of naturalness of the
Standard Model. Professor Sorbo will explore various phenomenological aspects of
primordial inflation, with a special emphasis on how the effects of particle
creation during inflation could show up in future observations. He will also
investigate more theoretical aspects related to the creation of particles in
strong external electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.