* 1820773
* I-Corps: Machine Learning Algorithms and Tools for Analysis and Optimization of Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
algorithmic methods and computational systems that will provide new information,
cheaply, quickly, consistently, and at a large scale, to inform investments in
building, energy, and green infrastructure for engineering consultancies,
construction companies, power utilities, real-estate developers, and cities.
Currently, studies for built, energy, and green infrastructure investments are
typically made case-by-case and employ infrequent, manual, and expensive audits
performed by trained professionals. In addition, the ground-truth data (site
surveys and other urban asset databases) used to inform these decisions are
siloed across stakeholders and are often expensive and difficult to collect. The
ecosystem of simulation and analysis tools is fragmented into a variety of
highly complex software packages that require considerable effort and
customization. This results in much repeated effort, inconsistent results across
different projects, and high costs for surveys and
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will investigate
commercial applications of a machine learning system that ingests, aggregates,
processes and learns mappings between, remote-sensing, model simulation, and
local sensor and survey data on buildings and their environment. The data used
will be best-available open source and commercial satellite data, as well as
Internet of Things data from buildings and energy infrastructure. The project
further develops neural-network based generative machine learning models that
can emulate complex physical and engineering systems but are much cheaper and
faster to deploy and maintain in practice. This system would allow users to make
inferences (physical parameter recovery, forecasts) about built, green, and
energy infrastructure and their surroundings (micro-climates) where this data is
not available, in a low-cost, large-scale, automated way, removing the need for
certain expensive sensor deployments or manual surveys. The system develops a
top-down, machine-learning based simulation capability that would allow to
perform fast scenario and impact analysis of investments and interventions.