* 1820544
* Meeting:  Special Symposium:  Population Biology of Vector-borne Diseases, University of Georgia, February 24, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Michael Strand, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2018
* USD 7,129.00

This award will provide support for the special symposium, Population Biology of
Vector-borne Diseases, which will be held February 24th, 2018 in Athens, GA. In
recent years, the emergence of viruses such as West Nile virus, Chikungunya
virus, and Zika virus have led to public health crises in several countries
including the United States. The new problems introduced by these emerging
diseases, coupled with the continued devastation caused by diseases such as
malaria and dengue, have led to rapid development in the study of vector-borne
diseases. This symposium is expected to result in increased understanding of the
mechanisms in which vector-borne diseases spread, evolve and respond to host
conditions, as well as provide a catalyst for future collaborative research
across disciplines. This will in turn promote new strategies for vector-borne
disease prediction, management, and elimination. The majority of the requested
funds will be used in partial support of the travel costs for presenting
scientists and to provide travel scholarships to students who may otherwise face
barriers to participation. Efforts will be made to recruit participants of
under-represented groups. The work discussed in this symposium will be published
as Population Biology of Vector-borne Diseases, the second volume in the new
Oxford series Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases, and will serve as
the only comprehensive survey of this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vector-borne
pathogens of animals and plants are key areas of study across a variety of
disciplines and perspectives. From an applied perspective, many vector-borne
pathogens cause severe disease, which results in high economic and social costs,
while from a fundamental perspective the complex interactions that evolve
between vector organisms, pathogens, and terminal hosts have provided key
insights on how pathogens function and evolve. In the case of vector borne
diseases of humans, studies of malaria and dengue remain national priorities
while emerging viruses have introduced new scientific questions and practical
problems. While a diversity of applied therapeutic initiatives are in progress,
many important organismal and suborganismal questions remain unclear and hinder
understanding of disease transmission and evolution. Addressing these questions
requires expertise in multiple scientific disciplines and integrative approaches
to future research, thus presenting an imminent need for forums that bring
together scientists and students across disciplines to synthesize information
and plan for future research. The symposium, Population Biology of Vector-borne
Diseases, will bring together a group of leading scientists in the study of
vector-borne diseases, representing multiple countries and both industry and
academic sectors. Collectively, these speakers represent a multitude of
perspectives including biology, ecology, veterinary medicine, entomology,
epidemiology, biostatistics, computer science and geography. This symposium will
provide a forum for scientists and students to synthesize existing knowledge
across disciplines, develop a vision for future research, and initiate plans for
future collaborative studies from an integrative biology perspective.