* 1820098
* STTR Phase I:  AC-Supercapacitors for Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Zhaoyang Fan, BAONANO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is an innovative new
capacitor technology based on kilohertz high-frequency supercapacitor, called
AC-Supercap, aiming to replace conventional aluminum electrolytic capacitors
(AECs) for a vast range of electronic and power systems. Capacitors are an
essential component used in electronic devices, in power supplies driving
electrical machines, appliances and instruments, as well as in power conversion
and conditioning systems used for renewable energy generation. In the consumer
electronics sector, miniaturization and low-profile or even flexible packaging,
and higher power efficiency are some of the key demands. In the power system and
other power-demanding industry sectors, large capacitance, large ripple current
absorption, and high temperature rating are the key requirements. With the
emergence of distributed wireless sensors and Internet of Things (IoT), pulse
energy storage and generation will be necessary as well. AC-Supercap, with its
much better performance than current solutions, is anticipated to better serve
the needs of broad range of customers. Upon the success of this technology,
there will also be tremendous impact on the local ecosystem and regional
community of West Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will investigate the feasibility of producing
AC-Supercap as high-performance alternating current (AC) filtering capacitors
for power modules, on-board application, or as compact and efficient pulse power
storage. Conventional AECs, limited by their low capacitance density, bulky
size, poor lifetime, large equivalent series resistance, and polarity
sensitivity cannot meet technical needs well. To achieve AC-Supercaps with both
large capacitance density and high-frequency response, two contradictory
requirements, and nanostructured electrode engineering will be investigated. To
produce a compact capacitor with a large voltage rating and capacitance,
multicell integration will be optimally designed and demonstrated, which is
crucial considering the intrinsic low voltage rating of a single cell. The
proposed innovative solutions to these technical challenges will de-risk the AC-
Supercap product prototyping in the following project phases to make ready the
technology for commercialization. These research activities will advance the
scientific understanding and technological development of nanostructured
electrode process and property control, multicell integration design, and
particularly AC-Supercap technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.