* 1820920
* Conference: Learning to Build Authentic Partnerships Between Minority Serving Institutions and Predominately White Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,308.00

Equal access to scientific inquiry and STEM careers is an important goal for the
National Science Foundation and for the nation as a whole. However, minority
students are not participating in the scientific enterprise in proportion to
their representation within the general population. One barrier is the lack of
connections between scientists at minority-serving institutions (MSIs) and at
primarily white institutions (PWIs). This disconnect leads to a self-
perpetuating cycle of primarily PWI graduates entering the highest ranks of
academia and industry, relying on networks of trust that favor elite
institutions in areas such as research collaborations. One possible solution is
to build new faculty-based networks that thrive on mutual trust and exchange
between MSIs and PWIs. This workshop will convene a group of faculty from MSIs
and PWIs to begin a conversation about how to develop such a
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day workshop, to be held June 25-26, 2018
at the University of California, Irvine, will engage approximately 40 faculty
members (20 from MSIs and 20 from PWIs) in a series of exercises to facilitate
the development of partnerships across institutional types, and to begin the
planning stages for writing proposals to support the partnerships. Faculty will
meet each other, engage in discussion about model partnerships, and formulate
ideas that could be used for grant proposals to be submitted to private
foundations and national funding agencies. Workshop assessment will be conducted
using surveys to measure how social networks have changed because of the
meeting, and to follow up with partnerships established at the meeting to
determine if they led to the submission or awarding of grants. Workshop
discussions will be aggregated to develop a policy paper on best practices in
developing MSI-PWI networks, which will be circulated publicly via posting on
the University of California, Irvine website for the Division of Teaching and
Learning, and by public presentation at relevant conferences and regional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.