* 1820831
* Oceanographic Technical Support, University of Delaware, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 12/31/2023
* USD 529,392.00

University of Delaware proposes to support technical services on R/V Sharp, a
146? general purpose research vessel operated as part of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet. The proposal requests support
for basic services and utilization of the Tech Pool. They will provide one
shipboard technician on each cruise of R/V Sharp to support seagoing research
projects and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users items from
their pool of shared-use research instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Program received the proposal on 12/8/2017. As required, the report provided
information regarding 2017 operations as well as outlining plans and a proposed
budget for 2018. Research vessels in the Academic Fleet provide support for
researchers from a variety of federal and state agencies, as well as some
private sponsors. All users (or the appropriate funding agencies) share support
for basic technical services on the vessel equally, via a day-rate, with each
paying a share of the costs based on fractional usage of the vessel. The rates
are negotiated annually with the NSF Program Manager. The budget in this
proposal is for the first year of a five-year continuing grant. Out years are
provided as estimates and the awards will be negotiated upon receipt of the
annual report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.