* 1820861
* Initial Perturbations on Ultra-Small Scales and Primordial Black Holes in the Era of Gravitational-Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Yacine Ali-Haimoud, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Yacine Ali-Haimoud at New
York University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After decades of increasingly detailed
observations, it is well established that the Universe contains a large amount
of unknown matter that interacts little, if at all, with known forms of matter.
Understanding the nature of this "dark matter" is one of the major unsolved
problems in physics. Primordial black holes (PBH's) are fascinating dark-matter
candidates. PBH's could have formed in the infant Universe, before the first
stars even existed. Professor Ali-Haimoud aims to develop tests of PBH's by
predicting their effect on maps of the early Universe and examining the
gravitational waves they would emit, and by comparing these predictions with
observations. In addition, he will develop a novel way to study the initial
conditions of the Universe by quantifying their impact on certain cosmological
phase transitions. As such, this research serves the national interest by
promoting the progress of fundamental science in the United States. This
research will also have significant broader impacts. Professor Ali-Haimoud will
include the results of this research in his graduate and undergraduate physics
courses and will also directly engage students in these investigations. In
addition, he will develop a course for underserved New York City high-school
students on the physics of sailing in which he hopes to foster enthusiasm for
physics by drawing parallels between sailing and gravitational waves and black
holes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the first and main focus of this
research is to establish robust limits on the abundance of PBH's of about one to
one thousand solar masses through their impact on cosmic microwave background
(CMB) anisotropies, and especially their gravitational-wave signals for the
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO). Professor Ali-
Haimoud will extend his analytic calculations of the merger rate of PBH binaries
to realistic mass distributions, estimate the resulting stochastic
gravitational-wave background accounting for high eccentricities, and establish
through numerical simulation whether PBH binaries formed in the early Universe
are significantly affected by non-linear structures. He will also extend his
work on CMB limits by estimating the self-consistent luminosity of accreting
PBH's, and by studying the nature of accretion (spherical vs. disk-like). The
second project involves exploring an entirely new idea: the impact of small-
scale baryon perturbations on the global recombination history. This effect can
probe the currently unconstrained small-scale baryon isocurvature perturbation.
Professor Ali-Haimoud will explore this idea quantitatively by studying
perturbed radiative transfer in the Lyman-alpha line during
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.