* 1820754
* High-Latitude Ocean Change Laboratory: a Kasitsna Bay Laboratory Improvement Grant
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Katrin Iken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 258,237.00

The oceans are experiencing unprecedented changes, for example, in terms of
warming temperatures and an increase in the water's acidity, called ocean
acidification. Marine organisms are being physiologically challenged by these
environmental changes across their life stages, which then impacts their
performance and survival, and ultimately endangering overall ecosystem balance.
Such changes are particularly pronounced in very productive, high-latitude
marine systems where many organisms are often finely tuned to their specific
environment. Hence, there is a great need to better monitor and understand the
changes, the rates of changes, and how these changes affect the marine
organisms. This project specifically improves the ability to accurately
characterize the current physical and chemical ocean environment with state-of-
the-art oceanic sensors, and the ability to test the response of marine
organisms to future environmental changes with an innovative ocean change
experimental system (OCES). The location of this project is the Kasitsna Bay
Laboratory (https://www.uaf.edu/cfos/about-us/locations/kasitsna-bay/) and the
surrounding waters of Kachemak Bay, in south-central Alaska. The region is
valued for its diverse marine habitat types and rich marine life, which support
extensive marine fisheries and subsistence harvests. Results of this study are,
therefore, highly valuable for local stakeholders but results also are
transferable to stakeholders in other high-latitude systems. Through the
association with the University of Alaska Fairbanks, the environmental data
collection and the experiments that can be done with the OCES add to the
education of a new generation of scientists. The public and general research
community is informed of these data and research possibilities through outreach
activities and presentations at various scientific and public forums, on
websites, social media, and through workshops. These data are available for the
broader public through publicly available databases (e.g., the Alaska Ocean
Observing System, the Alaska Ocean Acidification
Network).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a series of instruments that are
deployed in the ocean along a glacial gradient to measure ocean acidity (pH),
temperature, salinity, and oxygen. These measurements are done at high
resolution, every few hours, to characterize the present environmental
conditions with the inherent short-term changes based on tidal cycles and daily
weather conditions. In addition, the project includes an OCES laboratory system,
where the current conditions can be manipulated into future ocean scenarios,
including altering ocean acidification, temperature, salinity, and oxygen. This
allows for the testing of the responses of individual organisms of interest,
such as in their development, growth rates, metabolic rates, etc., under
predicted future ocean conditions with comparison to measurements under current
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.