* 1820938
* Chiral Quantum Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ania Bleszynski Jayich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 741,999.00

This research program brings together scientists and engineers to work with
atomic spins and acoustic waves in materials that are important for quantum
information processing technologies. By understanding how topology can be
engineered and used in physical systems, this project will directly address a
grand challenge in applied physics and engineering, namely: how to control the
flow of quantum information in a system. The objective of this research is to
predict, realize, and optimize chiral and helical routing of quantum excitations
on a chip. The resulting ability to control the transport of phonons (quantum
mechanical excitations of vibrational modes in solids) in a nonreciprocal
manner, and the ability to control the propagation-direction-dependent
interaction between phonons and embedded qubits (quantum mechanical spins), will
aid in the development of quantum networks for quantum communications systems
and quantum computing. This project will also promote the education and training
of a new generation of scientists and engineers who will develop quantum
electronics and phononics technology for future applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on observing chiral and
topologically nontrivial propagation of acoustic waves in magnetic, time-domain
modulated, spin-coupled, and nonlinear media. This project will clarify
theoretically and experimentally the effects of disorder, dissipation, and
nonlinearity on the properties of chiral and topological electromagnetic and
mechanical excitations. Research on coupling the spin of a defect in a solid-
state system to 0D, 1D and 2D acoustic waves will advance the understanding of
how an emitter can interact with its environment. In particular, it will
demonstrate chiral emission of phonons by ground state spins, and this will
explore a variety of mechanical resonator and waveguide geometries in which to
realize strong spin-phonon interactions. The longer-term vision is to understand
how concepts of phononic chiral networks can help develop new regimes for
quantum control and sensing with coupled emitters. The engineering expertise
developed throughout this program will be instrumental in developing compact,
low-loss, ultra-low power, nonreciprocal amplifiers, converters and filters in
the quantum regime. By bringing together scientists from different fields, e.g.,
photonics, optomechanics, and diamond, this team will meet the fundamental
challenge of demonstrating novel wave propagation phenomena by using a hybrid
approach. This project features an extensive effort on education, training, and
broadening participation, in order to strengthen the workforce that can develop
quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.