* 1820891
* Improving the Understanding of New Physics, from Particle Physics to Cosmology, at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Peisi Huang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Peisi Huang at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large Hadron Collider
is a vast underground machine that scatters beams of protons against each other
in order to study the fundamental constituents of matter, known as elementary
particles. Given huge amounts of data from the LHC and generations of colliders
before it, we currently have a fairly robust understanding of the elementary
particles and the forces between them that is encapsulated within the so-called
Standard Model of particle physics. However, there is overwhelming evidence that
there is new physics beyond the Standard Model. Professor Huang's research aims
to substantially extend the discovery potential for new physics at the Large
Hadron Collider by using theoretical insights in both particle physics and
cosmology. As such, Professor Huang's research advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of new physical laws. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The proposed research will
provide training opportunities for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students. Professor Huang will also aim to increase participation in STEM by
making a special effort to involve women, other underrepresented minorities, and
first-generation college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, in
this research, three theoretical studies will be addressed to significantly
enhance the discovery potential of the Large Hadron Collider. First, to propose
novel searches, theoretical implications of the current LHC data will be
interpreted and developed. Second, to enable indirect searches, this research
will study the implications of precision Higgs measurements for new physics.
Third, to leverage LHC for cosmology studies, this research will establish
connections between the history of the universe and LHC physics by providing
theoretical motivations and calculations of important
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.