* 1820651
* Quantum Field Theory and String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Silviu Pufu, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Silviu Pufu at Princeton
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the important problems in theoretical
physics is that of finding universal patterns governing the behavior of systems
consisting of large numbers of constituents that interact very strongly.
Examples of such systems range from boiling water at high pressure to the plasma
that forms from the collision of heavy ions, or to new phases of quantum matter
that are currently only conjectured to exist. As a result, research in this area
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
laws. As part of his funded research, Professor Pufu will develop theoretical
tools for understanding how the short-distance physics affects and constrains
the long-distance physics in such systems. These tools are partly based on ideas
from string theory, whereby one can describe strongly-interacting quantum
systems by gravity in a higher-dimensional space. This project also has an
important educational and mentoring component that includes engaging
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs in research, and thereby
preparing them for successful scientific careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a
more technical level, this project seeks to enhance our understanding of how a
quantum system can be described by a higher-dimensional theory of gravity. This
will be done by constructing simpler examples of this correspondence. The
starting point for constructing such examples will involve various recent exact
results in strongly-interacting quantum field theories that possess
supersymmetry. Another goal of this project is to understand the roles that
boundary terms play in the gauge/gravity duality, and in particular in precision
tests thereof. Lastly, a third objective is to deepen our understanding of the
renormalization group by exploring the F-theorem and its connection with
entanglement entropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.