* 1820685
* Capacity Building: Integrating Data Science into Cybersecurity Curriculum
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dianxiang Xu, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,964.00

The project from Boise State University (BSU), a designated Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Education, proposes to increase the capacity of the
United States higher education enterprise to produce security data scientists
and cybersecurity professionals with analytic skills. This project seeks to
build a capacity in security data science education by integrating data science
into a cybersecurity curriculum. This project seeks to address the lack in
curriculum materials on security data analytics, and the shortage of faculty
that are sufficiently qualified to teach security data science. The materials
will blend processes in data sciences, security problems, perspectives of
adversaries, and principles of academic course design. Dissemination via an open
collaborative repository, faculty development workshops and webinars,
presentations and tutorials at professional conferences will open-up pathways
for educators around the nation to help them integrate data science topics into
their cybersecurity curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the
project is to develop innovative curriculum materials on security data science
by integrating data science workflow, security and privacy problems, the
adversary's perspective of security, and inquiry-based learning into hands-on
practices. Four self-contained course modules will be created, covering data
science for software vulnerability prediction, malicious user detection in
social networks, malware detection, and intrusion detection. These modules can
be used in existing cybersecurity courses, such as Software Security and Network
Security or combined to create a new standalone course on security data
analytics. The second objective is to develop an open collaborative repository
for the security data science community to host the proposed curriculum
materials (e.g., lecture notes, data sets, tools, and lab exercises), and serve
the community as a collaborative environment for educators to exchange ideas,
contribute new contents, and share resources. The third goal is to hold national
faculty development workshops on security data science. The workshops will bring
together various stakeholders, such as researchers, educators, industry
practitioners, and policy makers, to discuss most recent progresses and needs in
security data science and how to integrate data science into specific security
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.