* 1820658
* Investigating Geobiological Feedbacks During the Evolution of Acidophilic  Microorganisms
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Eric Boyd, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 371,714.00

Microbial communities drive global biogeochemical cycles and link critical
ecosystem processes influencing plant, animal, and environmental health.
Consequently, a central goal in the geosciences is to develop new understanding
of the interactions between the geosphere and the biosphere that have influenced
the evolution of geochemical cycles and the diversification of life. Perhaps the
most prominent of such interactions involves the emergence of oxygenic
phototrophs and the product of their metabolic activity, oxygen (O2).
Accumulating evidence indicates that the introduction of oxygen to an anaerobic
biosphere had a profound influence on geochemical cycles and the functional
diversification of microbial life. While the fingerprint of oxygen on the
cycling of elements in the geosphere and biosphere over geological time is
increasingly coming into focus, key questions remain on the nature of the
dynamic feedbacks between the coupled evolution of the geosphere and the
biosphere and on the timescales over which key events took place. New data
suggests that the co-evolution of organisms that characteristically inhabit
acidic hot springs (thermoacidophiles) and the acidic nature of the hot spring
habitats themselves was likely driven by a series of geobiological feedbacks
that have taken place over the past one billion years, near to the time when
atmospheric oxygen is thought have reached near present-day levels. These unique
low complexity acidic ecosystems provide an opportunity to test and further
develop integrated concepts in the geosciences, including identifying the
dynamics between the coupled evolution of geochemical habitats and the metabolic
potential of their microbial inhabitants. The new understanding and analytical
tools that are developed from the study of low complexity acidic ecosystems will
be applicable to more complex ecosystems and processes, including those that
have direct bearing on the geobiological feedbacks that sustain plant, animal,
and environmental health. Results from these studies will be disseminated by
students, postdocs, and the senior scientists supported by the project through
presentations at national and international conferences and through submission
of journal articles, thereby boosting professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is widespread recognition of the role of feedbacks
between biological and geological processes in the co-evolution of environmental
landscapes and the biodiversity they support. However, far less is known of the
nature of these feedbacks and the time scales over which they occur, especially
from the biological perspective. This is due, in part, to the complexity of most
contemporary ecosystems and the difficulty this presents in deconvoluting the
geobiological interactions that have shaped these habitats and their
inhabitants. This knowledge gap prevents the development of a more complete
understanding of the generation of biological diversity, both today and in the
geological past, and perhaps more importantly, limits our ability to link
geochemical and biological biomarkers in the rock record. New data suggests that
the evolution of thermoacidophilic microorganisms and the largescale generation
of acidic habitats was likely driven by a series of geobiological feedbacks that
have taken place over the past one billion years. More specifically, data
indicates that at least two divergent archaeal lineages converged evolutionarily
upon similar, oxygen-dependent metabolic strategies to survive acid conditions,
and we have hypothesized that, in doing so, they have constructed highly acidic
ecological niches. In this work we will address this hypothesis by combining
field- and laboratory-based analyses aimed at defining constraints on the
kinetics of abiotic and biotic sulfur oxidation, the physiology of
thermoacidophiles, and the coupled evolution of acidic habitats and their
thermoacidophilic inhabitants. Specifically, we will apply state of the art
molecular, physiological, evolutionary, geochemical, and modeling approaches to
test our primary hypothesis that taxonomic and functional diversity of
microorganisms in acidic hot spring environments evolved in concert with the
oxygen-dependent, biologically induced acidification of those environments. In
this work, we will evaluate the influence of oxygen on (i) the kinetics of
sulfur oxidation over a pH and temperature continuum, (ii) the adaptations that
facilitate habitation along this continuum and, (iii) the co-evolution of these
lineages and their acidic habitats. Completion of this project will culminate in
a more complete understanding of how interactions between microorganisms and
their environment can lead to biological diversification and geological change,
using thermoacidophiles and their acidic hot spring habitats as a model. New
understanding and bioinformatics tools that we develop from the study of these
low complexity ecosystems will be applicable to more complex ecosystems and
processes. Results will be disseminated by students, postdocs, and the PI
through presentations at national and international conferences and through
submission of journal articles, thereby boosting professional development.
Through this work, we will continue to recruit and offer research opportunities
to motivated undergraduate and graduate students, particularly underrepresented
Native Americans. To achieve this goal, we will continue the partnership that
has been forged with Salish Kootenai College to attract undergraduates to
complete a six-week summer research internship at Montana State University, with
the goal of recruiting students from this demographic to seek an advanced degree
in a STEM discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.