* 1820921
* M-theory, Superspace and Higher Spin Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ergin Sezgin, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 870,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Katrin Becker, Melanie
Becker, and Ergin Sezgin at Texas A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory provides a framework for
describing gravity in a way which is consistent with the laws of quantum
mechanics. However, string theories generally require that there exist extra
dimensions beyond those of width, length, and height. Such extra dimensions must
be rolled into very small spaces, and the shapes of these spaces determine which
elementary particles are predicted by string theory. For these reasons, it is
important to understand the detailed shapes of these extra dimensions. Likewise,
combining Einstein's theory of gravity with quantum mechanics involves a
hypothetical particle --- the so-called "graviton" --- which transmits
gravitational interactions and carries two units of spin. However, string theory
can also give rise to remarkable extensions of Einstein's theory which involve
higher-spin analogues of the graviton. For these reasons, string theory can have
profound consequences for early-universe physics. In their research, Professors
Becker, Becker, and Sezgin aim to investigate these and other fundamental
questions involving the connections between string theory, gravity, and higher-
spin theories. As such, this project advances the national interest by promoting
progress in fundamental science within the United States. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Not only will this research
further develop the interface between string theory and mathematics, but it will
also provide an arena for the critical training for postdocs and students.
Professors Becker, Becker, and Sezgin will also give public lectures on their
research results and organize scientific workshops to help advance the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Becker, Becker, and
Sezgin aim to construct the full spacetime effective action of different string
theory and M-theory compactifications to all orders in the slope parameter and
its formulation in superspace. Their goal is to use physical ideas and methods
to solve long-standing problems in mathematics. Further, Professors Becker,
Becker, and Sezgin will study the holographic description of higher-spin theory,
its coupling to matter, spontaneous symmetry breaking, cosmological solutions
and their consequences for early-universe physics. They will also study specific
aspects of a geometrical description of duality symmetries of strings and branes
within a framework known as exceptional field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.