* 1820758
* Collaborative Research:  Quantum Complexity, Chaos, and Implications for Analog Quantum Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ivan Deutsch, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

Quantum technology is the next frontier in the information revolution that
powers the nation's economic engine. Machines that process information using the
microscopic laws of quantum physics can solve critical problems that are
intractable with even the most powerful supercomputers, such as design of new
high tech materials and pharmaceuticals. A general purpose quantum computer is
still years in the future, but current quantum technology is now sufficiently
advanced for private companies and government agencies to pursue the development
of special purpose "quantum simulators" that can be applied to select problems.
Unfortunately, the operation of such machines can be very sensitive to noise and
imperfection, in a manner closely analogous to the "butterfly effect" whereby
even the smallest disturbance (metaphorically, the flap of a butterfly's wing)
can affect the predictive power of weather forecasts. This project seeks to
better understand the tradeoff between a quantum simulator's power to solve hard
computational problems, and the extreme fragility of its predictions when
subject to noise and imperfections. Such understanding will be essential for the
successful application of quantum technology to problems in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum simulation requires access to highly
entangled many body systems whose dynamics are complex. It has long been a
concern that such systems exhibit "quantum chaos" which will make any large
scale quantum simulation hypersensitive to imperfections. Yet, at the same time
it is argued that requirements for a special purpose quantum simulation are less
stringent than for universal digital quantum computing. This, then, is the
tension at the heart of quantum simulation: Can one have the complex dynamics
needed to access massively entangled states, and at the same time have a
reliable device that is not rendered inoperable by hypersensitivity? In short:
Can one trust the output of a non-trivial quantum simulator? The proposed
research will put those questions to the test in experiments with a quantum
simulator based on the spins of individual cesium atoms. This test bed provides
access to state-of-the-art control and diagnostics, and offers the ability to
drive and observe a nearly unlimited variety of complex dynamics, including many
of the paradigmatic models of analog quantum simulation currently explored
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.