* 1820258
* STTR Phase I:  An automated digital pathology lab for rapid on-site processing and imaging of tissue biopsies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jonathon Brown, Instapath Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase 1 project seeks to develop an automated system that would
significantly increase the speed and accuracy of biopsy assessments at the point
of care. The proposed technology eliminates extensive manual tissue processing
steps and generates digital images of fresh biopsies that look just like
standard pathology slides. The imaging can be performed in seconds, thus
improving the efficiency of biopsy assessments at the point of care. Rapid,
whole fresh biopsy imaging also improves evaluation accuracy while maximally
preserving tissue for further testing and facilitating remote pathology
consultation. With over five million patients in the United States undergoing
biopsy procedures each year, and one in five of those patients returning for
repeat procedures due to inaccuracies in biopsy assessments, an increase in
accuracy and procedure speed could have a profound impact. This could lead to
decreases in patient procedure time and decreases in repeat procedure rates,
preventing unnecessary, painful, and invasive repeat biopsy procedures. With an
estimated 1.6 billion USD spend on repeat procedures per year, this would also
represent a significant decrease in financial burden on patients. In addition,
due to the decrease in time per procedure, this could increase procedure
throughput for hospitals, thus increasing hospital revenue potential. Finally,
by producing remotely viewable images, this system could be utilized in a remote
pathology setting at underserved communities within the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project seeks to develop an automated
sample processing and tissue pathology imaging system that delivers biopsy-to-
image in a completely automated manner on fully-intact fresh tissues within five
minutes of tissue removal. Through integration with the previously developed
Video-Rate Structured Illumination Microscopy (VR-SIM) system as the integrated
optical sectioning modality, and using novel fluorescence dye combinations that
recapitulate gold-standard histology, the throughput, efficiency, and accuracy
of biopsy evaluation can be improved while maximally preserving tissue for
downstream processing and readily facilitating telepathology consultation.
Preliminary work in multiple fresh tissue preparations, including core-needle
biopsies and whole surgical resections, indicates that the technology and method
can deliver high image quality and diagnostic accuracy in short, clinically-
relevant timeframes. A prototype of an automated, disposable cartridge system
for biopsy staining and imaging for effortless integration with VR-SIM imaging
will be developed. Image quality will be optimized at the highest optical
sectioning power to be equivalent to physically-sectioned tissues, using
polarization-gated VR-SIM and novel immersion media. ADPL workflow testing,
validation of diagnostic image quality, and verification of compatibility with
downstream analysis in human biopsy samples will be
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.