* 1820389
* The effect of material properties and scaling on wetting of membranes used in membrane distillation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Amy Childress, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2023
* USD 480,000.00

Development of energy-efficient treatment methods to treat nonconventional water
sources will help to address global water scarcity. Membrane distillation can
treat high-salinity and/or highly contaminated waters, for which conventional
treatment processes are impractical. Membrane distillation uses low-grade
energy, supplied from waste heat and/or solar thermal energy, to vaporize
(rather than boil) non-potable water streams. The membrane allows water vapor to
pass, while restricting permeation of liquid water and its dissolved solutes.
Design of membrane distillation processes involves a number of simplifying
assumptions, in particular, that the membrane is impermeable to liquid water and
its dissolved solutes. However, with time, dissolved solutes form a scaling
layer on the membrane, compromising the ability of the membrane to exclude
liquid water and solutes. This project will develop a new model to address the
performance of membrane distillation processes that is consistent with long-term
operation of practical, heterogeneous membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new model for liquid entry pressure that incorporates
operating conditions, membrane chemistry, asymmetric membrane properties, and
the effect of a scaling layer. The model will incorporate experiments that probe
internal and distillate-side membrane properties on pore wetting, simple and
complex feed solution chemistries, and consider both single- and multi-component
scaling conditions. Both commercial membranes and novel polymer membranes that
vary hydrophobicity versus hydrophilicity will be considered. An extended
Washburn method will quantify the internal hydrophobicity of the porous
membranes. A techno-economic assessment will quantify the key impacts of high-
performance membranes for high-salinity applications. The project will support
graduate and postdoctoral training, while also expanding educational outreach to
underrepresented and low-income high school students on energy-efficient water
production. The project will enable better performance, prediction, and
identification of membrane design improvements for challenging, high-salinity
applications that approach zero liquid discharge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.