* 1820032
* SBIR Phase I: Marangoni Processing for the Stabilization of Biologically Active Surfaces
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Quinn Osgood, Otzi Bio LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes development and
optimization of a surface tension mediated lyoprocessing technique for long-term
storage of biologically active surfaces and other biological materials at
ambient or above cryogenic temperatures. Stabilization of temperature sensitive
biological materials at ambient temperatures can address significant bottlenecks
that prevents economic distribution of pharmaceutically relevant biomolecules
worldwide. In addition, the implementation of this technology has the potential
to greatly improve global health, particularly in developing regions where many
advanced treatments are unavailable as a result of their temperature
sensitivity. Overall, this project aims at offering an alternative technology
platform to stabilize temperature sensitive biological materials at non-
cryogenic temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies primarily in the approach used to achieve stable desiccated
storage. The project aims at translating a newly developed drystate
biopreservation processing methodology into a commercially viable, mechanized,
long-term biopreservation technique. The newly developed biopreservation
technology provides a way to efficiently process biologically active surfaces
containing bioactive components, assay reagents, cells and cellular components,
and other biomolecules for long-term stability at non-cryogenic
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.