* 1820076
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing the Performance of Scientific Applications Through Intelligent Advice
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Brandon Nesterenko, Crestone Computing LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to allow new hardware platforms to be
more quickly deployed and useful software products to be more readily made
available on a wide variety of hardware to satisfy the needs of their users.
Additionally, researchers in science and engineering can reduce the runtime of
their applications by hours or days on the machines inside high performance
computing or data centers, enabling more scientific modeling and simulations to
be completed within these centers, while allowing each individual scientist to
concentrate more on his/her research, which in turn may more quickly benefit
society. For example, in the defense industry, many contracting companies
develop Monte Carlo simulation software to predict outcomes from disasters.
Increasing the throughput of these simulations would allow for more simulation
results to be analyzed and tested, thereby resulting in better predictions and
handling of disastrous situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project is unique in its automated connection
between existing performance modeling and prediction tools, and pattern-driven
compiler optimization. Novel runtime monitoring and modeling techniques will be
developed to automatically map performance bottlenecks discovered by existing
performance analysis tools to potential opportunities of source code
optimizations. Such opportunities again will be used to guide pattern-driven
compiler optimizations, particularly to enhance the performance of finite
element methods on both GPGPUs and multi-core/many-core CPUs. Deep learning
neural networks will be used to automate the runtime behavior classification of
computations. The new pattern-driven specialization of compiler optimizations
will enable general-purpose compiler techniques to be aware of the higher-level
semantics of library abstractions (e.g., data structures and algorithm
abstractions) and allow them to be collectively customized and coordinated to
attain the best performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.