* 1820778
* Wetland facility for the University of Houston Coastal Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Steven Pennings, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 344,938.00

The project will construct a wetlands research facility, the University of
Houston (UH) Wetland Observatory for Wildlife/Water research (UH WOW), at the
University of Houston's existing field station, the University of Houston
Coastal Center (UHCC). No wetlands research facility currently exists in this
geographic area. Investigators are forced to work in tanks, which are too small
for many questions, or in natural ponds, which are limited in number, vary in
size and allow only a limited range of experimental manipulations. The proposed
facility will address this research need by allowing replicated experiments at a
large scale, and will expand the research capabilities of the UHCC in a wide
range of disciplines, including ecology, water quality and flood control. The
proposed facility will allow easy customization and control of the water level
in each wetland, enabling researchers to test hypotheses under controlled
conditions in open wetland environments, and spurring fundamental advances in
understanding ecology, hydrology, and water quality. The proposed experimental
wetlands will provide a unique facility that will benefit researchers from a
variety of institutions in the Houston area (including UH, UH Downtown, UH Clear
Lake, Rice University, Texas A&amp;M Galveston), within a 3 hour drive (Texas
A&amp;M, Baylor, UT Austin), and over a broader geographic area. The facility
will also improve undergraduate and graduate education at universities in the
Houston metropolitan area, including those that lack major research
infrastructure, such as UH Sugar Land and the University of St. Thomas. Graduate
and undergraduate students will have increased opportunities to participate in
research at the facility. Classes taking field trips to the UHCC will be able to
view the wetlands and discuss experimental science and the ecological importance
of wetlands. On occasions when some wetlands are not in use for research, they
will be available for sampling by student groups conducting field activities.
The benefits of improved undergraduate and graduate education at the UHCC will
be particularly important for under-represented minorities. UH is a Hispanic-
Serving Institution and the second most ethnically diverse major research
university in the United States, and UH Downtown also has a very diverse student
body. The facility will also improve public education by providing new
opportunities to discuss experimental research, flood control, and the value of
wetlands with K-12 and other public groups visiting the UH Coastal
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of an array of wetlands at
the University of Houston Coastal Center (http://www.uhcc.uh.edu/). The wetlands
will be excavated ~1.6 m below the soil surface at a site dominated by non-
native grass and trees. A membrane will line the bottom of the ponds, which will
be back filled with some of the excavated soil. The remaining excavated dirt
will be used to form berms around the wetland edges. The wetlands will be
individually plumbed and controlled with remotely-operated valves, allowing easy
filling, draining, and control of water level. Because the water level will be
adjustable, each wetland can be filled or drained to function as a pond, wetland
or wet grassland as needed for different research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.