* 1820882
* NSF-BSF: Squeezing the Optical Frequency Comb: Applications to Quantum Computing  and Quantum Measurement
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Olivier Pfister, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 486,000.00

Quantum computing is a powerful concept with revolutionary scientific discovery
potential. Computing with quantum bits, known as "qubits," as initially
envisioned by Richard Feynman, would allow physicists to solve problems
traditionally far out of reach, such as the ab initio design of new materials
(e.g. room-temperature superconductors), new chemical reactions (for fertilizer
production, or for carbon sequestration), and new drugs (for medicine) based on
the principles of quantum physics. Two fundamental requirements for building a
practical and useful quantum computer are: (i), access to a large number of
individually addressable qubits and, (ii), the ability to eschew qubit errors
and, if not, to correct them. This project will address both of these
requirements by exploring new ways to use quantum states of light to encode
information. This approach will train students to develop optics and photonics
technologies. It will also promote fundamental scientific collaborations via the
NSF-BSF program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is the
implementation of a quantum processor using a multitude of laser beams with
different frequencies called "qumodes" that are specifically engineered to
display the quantum correlations, or entanglement, needed to run quantum
algorithms. The quantum optics group at the University of Virginia has been
pioneering such an approach and has obtained a record number of entangled
qumodes. This project will promote a collaboration with Bar-Ilan University that
will expand the scope of this research by developing a novel detection method
for qumodes. This collaboration will also address quantum error correction by
using quantum optics to develop new detection techniques that are resilient to
optical losses and noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.