* 1820209
* STTR Phase I:  Implementation of a Biometric Data Software Platform to Augment Mental Health Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Adam Pardes, NeuroFlow, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,510.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR)&lt;br/&gt;project is to improve outcomes and decrease costs in
the mental health space by engaging&lt;br/&gt;patients starting with their first
therapy session through objective progress reporting and&lt;br/&gt;post-session
motivation. Patients and clinicians alike will be able to track and assess
treatment&lt;br/&gt;progress through self-reported and physiological measures.
This innovation builds upon the&lt;br/&gt;strong academic, government, and
industry partnerships that will advance research and&lt;br/&gt;innovation in the
field of biotechnology. By demonstrating improved outcomes and
decreased&lt;br/&gt;costs associated with the utilization of technology, this
will pave the way for insurance&lt;br/&gt;reimbursement (using existing CPT
codes) to accelerate market adoption. Additionally, as&lt;br/&gt;education of
patients and the public improves regarding mental health and PTSD in
particular,&lt;br/&gt;the negative stigma surrounding these conditions will
decrease and more people in need will&lt;br/&gt;seek help rather than resorting
to unhealthy behavior or even suicide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project proposes to represent an innovative approach that provides easy
to&lt;br/&gt;interpret results tailored to mental health providers, patients,
and other non-technical users.&lt;br/&gt;Current mental health treatment and
assessment has lacked qualitative, scientifically-based&lt;br/&gt;measurement.
The need for a scientific measurement is evident, as about 8 percent of
all&lt;br/&gt;adults - 1 of 13 people in this country will develop PTSD during
their lifetime. Currently, 60%&lt;br/&gt;of adults diagnosed with a mental
illness don't receive mental health treatment; using proven&lt;br/&gt;science
and physiologic measurements as the foundation for improving treatment
and&lt;br/&gt;monitoring progress for PTSD can help to alleviate some of the
stigma surrounding mental&lt;br/&gt;illnesses. This project aims to demonstrate
how implementing a web-based platform can&lt;br/&gt;improve PTSD treatment by
providing physiologically relevant feedback to the patient and
by&lt;br/&gt;providing a tool for the clinician to tailor the therapy to the
individual patient. Patients will have&lt;br/&gt;their subjective measures and
physiological data visualized throughout treatment on a
software&lt;br/&gt;platform, with progress being tracked through validated
assessment scales. Patients will be&lt;br/&gt;compared to others in treatment as
usual. Results should yield improved quality of life and&lt;br/&gt;decrease long
term healthcare costs for those that use the platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.