* 1820771
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Diversity in the Mathematics Graduate Applicant Pool
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Cristina Villalobos, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 239,713.00

The project establishes a partnership between the mathematical sciences units at
the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and the University of Texas Rio Grande
Valley (UTRGV). UTD, situated in a region that is undergoing vigorous economic
growth, is a diverse university with vibrant PhD programs in Mathematics and
Statistics. UTRGV is a Minority Serving Institution (MSI), with over 87%
Hispanic student body, located in a region experiencing population growth. UTRGV
does not currently have a PhD program in Mathematical Sciences. The challenges
faced by UTRGV undergraduate students vis-a-vis pursuing a doctoral program are
typical of an MSI, including students' lack of preparation in advanced courses
that are prerequisites for success in PhD programs and lack of awareness about
careers in the Mathematical Sciences and graduate school admission process. A
lack of professional internships in the Rio Grande Valley is a specific
challenge for students from that area. This proposal addresses these challenges
and develops a sustainable and scalable pipeline of well-prepared applicants,
most of whom are expected to be from underrepresented groups, for PhD programs
in the Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project amalgamates a
number of evidence-based techniques known to be effective in increasing
participation of underrepresented groups in doctoral programs into one coherent
program. It leverages the use of technology and experience at both universities
in active learning pedagogy to offer the most advanced undergraduate courses in
a synchronized, blended setting. Its activities will be continuously evaluated
via a rigorous and comprehensive assessment process. Its specific aims are: to
develop hybrid versions of five of the most advanced undergraduate Mathematical
Sciences courses; to conduct summer boot camps to cultivate research, problem-
solving, and communication skills; to facilitate connections between UTRGV and
UTD students and industries in the Dallas-Fort Worth area; and to help
participating faculty and students develop an understanding of implicit bias and
train them to overcome it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.