* 1820103
* Toward the molecular unpacking of the PaaC domain, a novel Plasmodesmata-association &amp; activation Cassette
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Li Liao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Many human diseases and developmental defects are associated with malfunction in
communication between cells. Similarly, plants also suffer from uncontrolled
spread of diseases, inappropriate seasonal or environmental responses, or
improper organ development when cell-to-cell communication goes unchecked. This
research, building on unique expertise in cell and molecular biology and
computational modeling and machine learning, aims to unravel how important
protein regulators are targeted to the channels that connect neighboring cells
and fine tune cell communications in plants. New concepts and discoveries made
by this research will be introduced to both graduate and undergraduate students
as integrated new bioinformatics courses as well as laboratory modules.
Furthermore, the software developed from this project will be made available
free online to the public together with the source code. In addition, the newly
produced data, results, and tools will be incorporated into an existing
webserver with user-friendly interface to better serve the research and
education community. The fundamental knowledge gained by this study has the
potential to be utilized in the long run to engineer genetically encoded
synthetic proteins to effectively control nutrient distribution, flow, and
fitness in agriculturally important crop plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
fundamental role that plasmodesmata play in the biology of plants as
intercellular communication channels, we know so little about the molecular
architecture and mechanisms underlying the plasmodesmal association and
regulation. Numerous plant viral proteins, both soluble and membrane-attached,
have been studied for a few decades in search for some clues about their
plasmodesmal targeting signals and mechanisms. However, no universal signal or
mechanism was identified. To address this gap in the current knowledge, the
research team aims to unveil molecular mechanisms underlying plasmodesmal-
targeting/retention using innate plasmodesmal regulators called the
Plasmodesmata-located Proteins (PDLPs). These protein families are found to
share an evolutionarily conserved feature which is required for their
plasmodesmal localization and function; this novel domain is here named the
Plasmodesmata-association &amp; activation Cassette (PaaC). The outcomes of in-
depth investigations of the PaaC domain, will provide unprecedented mechanistic
insights into how plasmodesmata-associated integral membrane proteins are
targeted and anchored at plasmodesmata, and how they may self-assemble to form
functional protein complexes. To achieve these goals, the research team will
take an integrative computational approach utilizing newly developed machine
learning tools and techniques in combination with the state-of-the-art
bioimaging techniques. It is anticipated that computational extraction and
identification of complex features underlying the PaaC and PaaC-like signals
will also serve as a valuable means to identify previously unrecognized
plasmodesmal proteins that are encoded by various plant
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.