* 1820238
* SBIR Phase I:  Immersive Augmented Reality Landscape Viewer for Public Space Deployment
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Ben Sax, Perceptoscope
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will explore the technical, commercial, and
educational potentials of bringing augmented reality binocular kiosks to public
locations and their ability to create lasting impact on the public's
understanding of a place. The proposed research and development phase will focus
on the deployment and field testing of a collection of prototypes with partner
locations, and examine their efficacy at engaging and informing visitors of
those sites. The broader significance of the project is the development of an
information device and ecosystem that gives the public a better understanding of
notable places and the greater physical world. Deployments will be able to
visualize a variety of site-specific data, from environmental conditions, to
geological formations and landmark navigation. Potential revenue can be
generated in partnership with locations, allowing for sustainable long-term
engagements between the project and a site. Direct economic impact is brought to
a location and its surroundings through increased foot traffic and the
encouragement of additional exploration of a
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation being proposed is
stereoscopic wide-field-of-view see-through augmented reality viewers in the
form of landscape binocular kiosks designed to give public spaces a way to
engage visitors with the natural, scientific, and historic features of that
location. In addition to displaying immersive media experiences optically
overlaid onto a view of the real world, this project creates a distributed media
network on that location to share data and content for remote viewing and
analysis. Goals and scope of research include durability testing of the devices
in prolonged public exposure, effectiveness of the user interface and software
tools, understanding the range and bandwidth of device-to-device communication,
and optimization of the optical, electromechanical, and sensor components.
Methods and approaches will include the field testing of prototype units with
partner locations, and using survey and analysis techniques to evaluate the
overall quantitative and qualitative efficacy of the intervention at those
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.