* 1820956
* Development of a Strategic Plan for the William C. Webb Coastal Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* James Gelsleichter, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 22,680.00

The goal of this project is to develop a 5-year strategic plan for the use of
the William C. Webb Coastal Research Station, a newly-established biological
field station operated by the University of North Florida (UNF) in Jacksonville,
FL. The Webb Station is a 1,050-acre parcel of undeveloped salt marsh habitat
located on the eastern side of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway between
Jacksonville and St. Augustine, FL. As much of the world observed while watching
cable news footage of Hurricane Irma in September 2017, Jacksonville, like many
U.S. coastal cities, faces significant threats from coastal flooding due to the
combined effects of extreme weather events, sea level rise, and other coastal
stressors. The intended purpose of the Webb Center is to use this "living
laboratory" as a location for testing new approaches for reducing coastal
flooding and making shoreline communities more "resilient" to its effects. This
will be accomplished by teaming UNF Coastal and Marine Biologists with Coastal
Engineers from the University's Taylor Engineering Research Institute to
establish a world-class research program in newly-growing field of Coastal
Resilience. In addition to spearheading new efforts to reduce coastal flooding,
the Webb Center will also be heavily involved in educating students at all grade
levels and members of the general public about its risks which, based on an
April 2017 report by the U.S. Geological Survey, are believed to threaten the
survival of nearly a quarter of the world?s population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this FSML planning grant is to support the development of a 5-year
strategic plan for the research and educational use of the station. To
accomplish the goal of this project, the University proposes to: conduct faculty
site visits to 4 currently operating coastal research stations to identify
potential desirable features for the Webb station and learn about "best
practices" for the operation of a successful biological field station; host
survey visits by 4 external scientists experienced in the management of
biological field stations to obtain their expert assistance in identifying
infrastructure needs and operational/management requirements, potential research
and educational programs, and unique features of the Webb Station that could
potentially set it apart from other coastal research stations; and establish an
Advisory Board consisting of UNF faculty and administrators and representatives
from other regional colleges and universities, local informal science education
facilities, community groups, K-12 schools, city/state/federal policymakers, and
other agencies involved in coastal research, engineering, and conservation to
guide the development of a 5-year strategic plan, making use of information
obtained from faculty site visits and visiting expert recommendations. Proposed
activities for the Webb Station will advance understanding and discovery in the
field of coastal biology and engineering while promoting the education and
career development of future coastal science professionals and the development
of a more Ocean-literate community. More about UNF Coastal and Marine Biology
Flagship Program, which oversees the development of the Webb Center, can be
viewed at: https://www.unf.edu/coas/biology/coastal_biology/about.aspx&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed
worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit
and broader impacts review criteria.