* 1820608
* Collaborative Research: CHEESE: Cyber Human Ecosystem of Engaged Security Education
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Christine Kirkpatrick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,917.00

This project from Purdue University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign proposes to develop a set of cybersecurity learning tools on a
dynamic, publicly available, web-based learning platform aimed at bringing
together a community of cybersecurity researchers, educators, practitioners and
students. By presenting these learning tools exclusively through a web
interface, this project aims to enable ease of use and access to security
education and hands-on activities. In addition to supplementing traditional
cybersecurity instruction, the broader goal is to create a cybersecurity
learning ecosystem that is continually updated with emerging trends in
cybersecurity research as well as recently discovered security attacks. The
researchers will seek contributions in both these areas from a broad community
of students and faculty at community colleges, minority-serving institutions and
organizations such as Women in Cybersecurity, while incorporating reward
mechanisms that encourage contribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Cyber
Human Ecosystem of Engaged Security Education (CHEESE) platform will employ the
National Data Service (NDS) Labs Workbench and container technology to host a
growing collection of user-contributed publicly accessible demonstrations of
diverse cybersecurity concepts. Container technology provides completely
independent work environments for each user and simplifies the subsequent
transfer to other platforms with minimal effort. The NDS Workbench provides a
user interface to container management, development and orchestration
capabilities that greatly simplify the process of contributing and launching
these containerized applications while automatically scaling resources in
response to increased usage. CHEESE will engage a broad community of users
ranging from faculty, high school teachers, students to researchers and
professionals to request, contribute and evaluate the hosted cybersecurity
demonstrations. The effectiveness of CHEESE in imparting practical cybersecurity
knowledge will be evaluated in several undergraduate and graduate cybersecurity
courses. Various organizations such as the IEEE, Big Data Hubs and Women in
Cybersecurity will be leveraged to conduct training and outreach events using
CHEESE to broaden community participation beyond the core user community. CHEESE
will help develop a cybersecurity literate workforce that can learn from prior
cybersecurity incidents and employ the latest tools and secure coding practices
to avoid common pitfalls associated with these
incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.