* 1820520
* ICLS 2018 Rethinking Learning in the Digital Age in ICLS Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support travel and registration for a Doctoral Consortium and
Early Career Workshop at the annual meeting of the International Society of the
Learning Sciences, which in 2018 will be held in conjunction with the Artificial
Intelligence in Education conference and the Association of Computing Machinery
conference on Learning at Scale. The three conferences will come together as a
Festival of Learning. These joint interdisciplinary conferences will offer a
rare professional opportunity for doctoral students and early career
professionals to converge and present cutting-edge research from the fields of
artificial intelligence, learning science, computer science, cognitive and
learning sciences, psychology, and educational technology. Results will
contribute to the new generation of researchers in the forward-looking technical
area of this interdisciplinary area, to include the learning sciences, data
analytics, and artificial intelligence in education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a travel stipend for 5 advanced graduate students to attend
the Doctoral Consortium and 5 early career faculty members to attend the Early
Career Workshop at the Festival of Learning. The project will also fund a shared
young researchers event where 250 young researchers from the three conferences
will have a poster session and panel discussion. The project will improve the
dissertations of the graduate students and the research agendas of the early
career, post-PhD scholars and advance the conference theme "Rethinking Learning
in the Digital Age". This project will build on the expertise of the learning
sciences community and the outcomes of previous workshops held with the
International Conference of the Learning Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.