* 1820414
* SBIR Phase I:  CryoPREP-EM: Time-Resolved Sample Preparation for Single-Particle Cryo-Electron Microscopy (Cryo-EM)
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Trevor McQueen, Neptune Fluid Flow Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will evaluate the
technical feasibility and commercial viability of a novel sample preparation
method for cryo-EM (cryogenic electron microscopy) studies. As a rapidly growing
technique in the structural biology field, the cryo-EM market as a whole is
estimated to be more than $5 billion a year, with &gt; $500 million attributed
to the sample preparation space. In spite of an overall revenue growth rate of
more than 70% per year, cryo-EM sample preparation remains an area that has yet
to see any major technological breakthroughs commercialized in the past decade.
In fact, the current industry solution is reported to have a failure rate of
&gt; 95%. By providing a sample preparation system that actually works, this
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will significantly
reshape the massive and rapidly expanding cryo-EM market and allow scientists to
more readily collect detailed protein structures in their native state. This new
knowledge on the molecular basis of cells and of life itself will be used to
facilitate as well as accelerate the development of new pharmaceuticals as well
as therapeutic treatments for diseases and thus greatly benefit human health in
the long run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
development of a cryo-EM sample preparation device built on the application of
state-of-the-art microfluidic jet systems to deposit and vitrify protein
solution on EM grids in milliseconds, which is at least 1000x faster than the
current methods. Furthermore, it offers scientists the novel ability to control
the thickness of the vitrified aqueous layer and, overall, more control over the
sample vitrification process. With this new sample preparation device, a larger
region of the cryo-EM grids will have intact protein molecules with the right
layer thickness for structural determination, allowing researchers to save time
and money in terms of both grid preparation and screening in a high-throughput
manner. Currently, the proposed technology has not been tested nor used
anywhere. Therefore, the first and foremost goal of this SBIR Phase I project is
to better understand and well characterize the technical capabilities and
limitations of this proposed innovation, with additional R&amp;D work needed
before product commercialization, which is expected in five years. The project
will focus on defining and optimizing both the geometric and experimental setup
in order to de-risk the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.