* 1820815
* New approaches to shear wave splitting tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2023
* USD 310,000.00

The speed at which seismic waves travel in the Earth's upper mantle depends on
the direction of wave propagation, a phenomenon known as seismic anisotropy.
Seismic anisotropy arises when a mantle rock is sheared or stretched by the
process of mantle convection; therefore, observations of anisotropy provide
seismologists with a method of inferring mantle convection patterns. While
measurements of seismic anisotropy from recordings of earthquake waves that have
passed through the mantle are relatively straightforward, it is a major
challenge to decipher the exact location or depth of the anisotropic structure.
One strategy for overcoming this challenge is to move towards an approach that
provides an image or picture of anisotropy in the upper mantle, using a
technique known as tomography. Much in the same way that medical tomography can
provide an image of the inside of a person's body, seismic tomography yields an
image of the structure of the Earth's deep interior. The PI will provide support
and mentoring for a PhD student. Codes being developed during the research will
be openly available via GitHub. The PI and graduate student will also provide
outreach in the form of presentations to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of shear wave splitting tomography
has been a long-standing goal in the study of upper mantle anisotropy, but there
are only a few examples of published studies that have successfully implemented
it. The challenges are many: the inverse problem is highly nonlinear and
sensitivity kernels for the inversion depend strongly on the starting model; a
large number of parameters are needed for a complete description of the
anisotropy; robust shear wave splitting measurements are often difficult to make
for noisy data. This project will meet those challenges by developing and
applying a framework for finite-frequency SKS splitting intensity tomography
that implements a model space search approach for probing parameter space. The
investigators propose three specific activities. Activity #1 comprises the
completion and implementation of a theoretical and computational framework for
our splitting intensity tomography approach. The team is extending existing
theory for finite-frequency sensitivity kernels to a new parameterization scheme
that takes advantage of constraints on olivine elasticity from mineral physics.
They will complete the implementation of a model space search algorithm, based
on a Markov chain Monte Carlo approach, for inverting splitting intensity
observations. Finally, the investigators will test their implementation with a
series of synthetic anisotropic models and splitting intensity datasets,
designed to understand the limitations, resolution, and parameter tradeoffs of
their imaging approach. Activity #2 will involve the implementation of the shear
wave splitting intensity tomography framework for several real-world data sets
from dense broadband seismic networks. Activity #3 will extend their model space
search approach to simultaneously include other types of observations that
constrain upper mantle anisotropy, including anisotropic receiver functions and
surface wave phase velocity measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.