* 1820775
* Probing Fundamental Physics on Cosmological Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Matias Zaldarriaga, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matias Zaldarriaga at the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, NJ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last
decades our understanding of the Universe has increased dramatically as a result
of a series of measurements by telescopes on the ground and in space that have
mapped the distribution of matter in a large fraction of our observable
Universe. We have a very detailed standard model of Cosmology that can explain
these observations, but to do so requires that the cosmos be filled with
additional components, such as the so-called dark matter and dark energy, that
have not been seen in the laboratory. To try to understand these findings, a new
set of telescopes are being constructed and dedicated observational programs are
being planned for the upcoming decade. In his research, Professor Zaldarriaga
aims to develop and expand the necessary tools to extract all the information
available in the upcoming surveys and experiments. The funded research also
involves a series of theoretical projects to improve our understanding of the
very early Universe, the properties of dark matter and dark energy, as well as
the effects of massive neutrinos on the evolution of structure in our Universe.
As such, this project is in the national interest by furthering the development
of basic science in the United States. This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. Professor Zaldarriaga will involve graduate
students and postdocs in this research, and thereby provide critical training
for junior physicists beginning research in this field. Professor Zaldarriaga
also intends to continue to give public lectures on his research results and run
his lecture course on modern Cosmology for seniors at the Evergreen Forum of the
Princeton Senior Resource center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professor Zaldarriaga will use the so-called Effective theory of Large-Scale
Structure to study the effects of neutrinos in the development of structure in
the Universe, and in general to try to understand what properties of the two-
point correlation function and higher-point statistics are robust against the
late-time non-linear evolution. Professor Zaldarriaga will develop new
techniques to search for primordial non-Gaussianity, one of the important
sources of information about the very early Universe, and will explore new
mechanisms to create gravitational waves in the early Universe and new probes to
try to find them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.