* 1820841
* Developing a Strategic Plan for Coastal Resilience and Sustainable Fisheries at the Gloucester Marine Station
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Brian Cheng, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2019
* USD 24,986.00

The University of Massachusetts Amherst is awarded a planning grant to develop
5- and 10-year strategic plans for the Gloucester Marine Station (GMS). GMS is
located on Cape Ann, northern coastal Massachusetts and is jointly operated by
the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the Massachusetts Division of Marine
Fisheries. GMS provides excellent access to the Gulf of Maine and a variety of
habitats for marine research and education, including: coastal marsh, rocky
intertidal/subtidal, and offshore banks. This access is important because the
Gulf of Maine is one of the most rapidly changing marine environments on the
planet. GMS will play a critical role in understanding how this change will
influence Gulf of Maine flora and fauna. At the same time, GMS is embedded
within a dynamic coastal community that is culturally tied to the ocean through
a long history of fishing and maritime tradition. GMS is ideally poised to serve
as a regional hub for marine research, education, and extension, specifically
focusing on coastal resilience and sustainable fisheries. These focal areas have
been identified through ongoing dialogue with community stakeholders and
academic partners. The planning grant will coordinate efforts to build GMS
capacity to conduct world-class research, education, and outreach in the Gulf of
Maine, greatly benefiting the coastal communities that work and reside within
this dynamic region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this planning
grant is to facilitate the development of GMS to become an established leader in
coastal marine science research, education, and outreach. The planning grant
will identify key stakeholders within the region, determine priority facility
needs, and culminate in the development of near- and long-term strategic plans.
To meet these goals, the planning activities will include: workshop interactions
with stakeholders and a needs assessment, visitation and meetings with already
established coastal research stations, and a two-day workshop at GMS with
national and regional marine laboratory leaders. Following this information
gathering, GMS faculty, staff, and administration will develop strategic plans
that will identify priority areas of research, education and extension, near-
term objectives, accountability metrics to assess project success, and a
timeline for guiding the development of GMS as a coastal research
leader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.