* 1820770
* RUI: Uncovering the Particle Nature of Hidden Sectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Brian Shuve, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Brian Shuve at Harvey
Mudd College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the dark matter comprising most
of the matter in the Universe, and the origin of the excess of matter over
antimatter, are two major outstanding problems in particle physics. These
phenomena can only be explained if there exist new particles and forces that
have so far evaded detection; this collection of hitherto-unknown particles is
known as the "hidden sector". Professor Shuve's research devises and
investigates theories of hidden sectors with the aim of understanding more
thoroughly how they can account for the unexplained questions of the Standard
Model. Professor Shuve also studies the experimental manifestations of hidden
sectors, proposing new empirical tests of hidden-sector particles as well as
examining how signals of new particles could be hiding in the data of existing
experiments. This research promotes progress in one of the most important
aspects of fundamental science, namely the discovery of new physical laws and an
improved understanding of the content and structure of the Universe, and thus
advances the national interest. This project also has significant broader
impacts: undergraduate student researchers are integral to the success of the
project, and the involvement and training of students from under-represented
groups will be prioritized. This research will lead to the development of tools
for particle-physics research that are accessible to undergraduate researchers
and made publicly available. Professor Shuve will also deliver public lectures
to broaden awareness and interest in particle physics and will undertake
outreach and recruitment activities for prospective first-generation college
students and students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more
technical level, Professor Shuve will perform detailed phenomenological studies
of well-motivated, multi-component hidden sectors and will devise new strategies
for experimental searches. One focus of the research will be on hidden sectors
including right-handed neutrinos, which can account for neutrino masses, the
baryon asymmetry, and dark matter. Professor Shuve's research will use simulated
data and analytic calculations to map out sensitivities of current experiments
as well as gaps in coverage. As a specific example, Professor Shuve will lead a
signature-driven study of the prospects of discovering new hidden-sector
particles at low-energy B-factory colliders and the Large Hadron Collider. This
will result in the development and proposal of comprehensive search strategies
for long-lived particles that enhance the prospects for experimental discoveries
of new particles. Finally, Professor Shuve will study the cosmologically
motivated parameter space of hidden sectors, particularly for freeze-in dark
matter and leptogenesis in multi-component hidden sectors, and this will
establish stronger connections between theoretical motivations of hidden sectors
and experimental searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.