* 1820785
* Developing a Strategic Plan for Santa Cruz Island Reserve
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Lyndal Laughrin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2021
* USD 24,944.00

The Santa Cruz Island Reserve (SCIR) is 1 of 39 field stations in the University
of California Natural Reserve System, and is located on the largest of
California's eight Channel Islands, roughly 25 miles south of Santa Barbara, CA.
SCIR attracts researchers from throughout the US to study many wide-ranging
issues, from anthropology, island ecology, conservation biology to ecological
responses to climate change. To best serve the growing SCIR constituency while
perpetuating SCIR as a resource, this project will develop a long-term (five to
ten year) strategic plan for SCIR research, education, outreach programs, and
facilities. The strategic plan will articulate a scientific vision for research
and educational use, and an evaluation of the programs, facility needs and
resources necessary to support that vision. The goal of the strategic plan is to
enhance research and education activities at SCIR as well as the regional
coordination of research, education and outreach activities across the Channel
Islands region through a network of regional agency, non-profit, academic and
field station partners.

The planning process involves engaging with key stakeholders through virtual and
in-person workshops to identify regional coordination opportunities. The
strategic plan will direct the prioritization of facilities and programs
enhancements, and access for researchers, students, educators and natural
resource managers in the California Channel Islands region. The involvement of
an Environmental Science Masters level student in this process will provide
graduate student level training in biological research, environmental management
and related fields. Engaging with regional coordinators at workshops supported
by the proposed planning process represents a formalized step in establishing a
regionally coordinated node representing the Channel Islands that can more
effectively participate in larger scale global observatory or climate change
research efforts. The strategic plan and planning process will contribute to
ongoing dialogue, and directly benefit several land and wildlife management
agencies with jurisdiction over the Channel Islands, whose need for information
to inform land management has increased markedly in recent years due to
persistent drought conditions and other environmental stressors. The URL for the
Santa Cruz Island Reserve is: http://santacruz.nrs.ucsb.edu/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.