* 1820325
* SBIR Phase I: Removing the Purification Bottleneck in Biopharmaceutical Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Bob Snyder, Proteios Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop protein purification technology that will
provide access to inexpensive, purified proteins for biological and life science
applications by removing the purification bottleneck in biopharmaceutical
production, and leveraging the innovative breakthroughs in protein engineering
and gene editing. Scale-up of this technology will transform the large-scale
purification of biopharmaceuticals and lower prescription drug costs - the most
important factor contributing to rising healthcare costs. The major factor
influencing the rising cost of healthcare is the skyrocketing costs of
pharmaceuticals - up to 40% of the medical plan cost will be drugs by 2025.
Prescription drug costs are the fastest rising component of healthcare and are
contributing to the dramatic increase in healthcare costs. The worldwide focus
of pharmacy and biotechnology is now on biopharmaceutical development and
production to address this issue. Direct benefits of this project include low-
cost, use of green reagents, and the absence of heavy metal impurities in the
purified protein. In addition, the development of immobilized enzymes using this
technology will open new frontiers in biocatalysis, biosensors, diagnostics and
protein delivery.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop protein purification kits for
small-scale and research-scale research. Bringing these kits to market will
enable researchers to further validate the technology on a broader range of
proteins in preparation for scale-up for biopharmaceutical production. Synthetic
biology has quickly begun to revolutionize drug discovery and design by
providing a better overall molecular understanding of disease. However, this
potential has yet to be fully realized due to the challenges associated with
purifying the target recombinant protein from the thousands of naturally-
occurring proteins produced by the expression system. The three specific aims of
the project are: 1) validation of protein tag performance for multiple protein
classes and expression systems, 2) development of low-cost methods for protein
tag removal from purified proteins, and 3) development of solutions for the
purification of low-expressing proteins and the parallel purification of small
amounts of proteins.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.