* 1820462
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost real-time perception system for self-driving consumer cars
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Koji Seto, Apollo AI Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the practical
deployment of a low-cost and low-power real-time perception system in self-
driving consumer cars. This edge computing functionality in sensors enables
higher reliability and lower cost of overall sensing and computing needed for
truly autonomous self-driving. Such innovation will contribute significantly to
the early and widespread availability of safety and convenience benefits to
consumers. Furthermore, the advanced perception system will have a potential
long-term impact on robotics in general, which can lead to creation of new
markets and new lifestyles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop efficient algorithms and
software implementation of a real-time perception system to enable the use of
low-cost computing systems for self-driving cars. The algorithms provide a novel
way of using image features to perform simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) with 100 times less computational costs than the existing algorithms.
They also include a truly novel neural network to fuse the image feature and
light detection and ranging (LiDAR) features and perform object detection, which
has 100 times less complexity compared to the state-of-the-art method. These
reduced-complexity algorithms can be implemented on low-power and low-cost SoC
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.