* 1820967
* Collaborative Research: Preparing to Teach Mathematics with Technology - Examining Student Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Charity Cayton, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 187,986.00

Preparing to Teach Mathematics with Technology - Examining Student Practice
(PTMT - ESP) is an IUSE Development and Implementation project. It will address
the documented need for undergraduate prospective secondary mathematics teachers
(PSMTs) to possess strong technological pedagogical content knowledge needed to
incorporate technology-based mathematics tasks in their future classrooms.
Engaging students in meaningful mathematical tasks and capitalizing on available
technological tools has been shown to improve attitudes towards mathematics and
increase learning. Whether or not the use of technology will enhance students'
learning depends on teachers' decisions when using technology tools to design
and implement meaningful tasks. These decisions are informed by teachers'
knowledge and application of mathematics, technology, and pedagogy. PTMT - ESP
will develop and research a set of video case materials to support PSMTs'
development of this knowledge. Furthermore, this project will grow and support a
community of technology-using mathematics teacher-educators at other
universities through professional learning workshops and the distribution of
materials on a free web-based portal. Strong preparation of secondary
mathematics teachers is needed to support future generations of students
prepared to enter STEM fields. Ensuring teachers are prepared to anticipate and
draw upon students' understanding in technological contexts by improving their
use of technology tools in mathematics classroom will better prepare students to
pursue STEM careers, in support of the national interest. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PTMT-ESP is a collaborative project across four institutions that
will build on the theoretical foundations of technological pedagogical content
knowledge, video case pedagogies, and professional noticing, along with the
success of previous PTMT projects (DUE &amp;#8203;0442319, 0817253,
1123001)&amp;#8203;. The PTMT-ESP project will utilize design-based research to
create, refine and study video-enhanced materials for PSMTs to examine secondary
students' authentic mathematical practices on technology-based algebraic tasks.
Three objectives provide a framework for the project's activities. First is the
design and refinement of seven curriculum modules for undergraduate mathematics
education students to examine secondary students' mathematical practices when
engaging with technology-based algebra tasks. Second is the execution of a
research study to examine PSMTs' development related to understandings of
secondary students' technology-based algebraic practices and their own algebraic
knowledge. Third is the expansion of support for existing teacher educator
communities through professional learning opportunities. The research that
corresponds with the creation of the project's learning materials aims to
advance knowledge about how examining authentic secondary students' mathematical
practices on technology-based algebraic tasks can support prospective secondary
mathematics teachers' development of technological pedagogical content
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.