* 1820871
* Quantum Resource Theories: General Structures and Fundamental Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Eric Chitambar, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 52,696.00

Quantum mechanics describes the subatomic world in ways that seem
counterintuitive to our everyday experience. Recently, researchers have
discovered innovative ways to harness these surprising features for use in
information processing technologies. Quantum systems are now understood as
possessing certain resources such as entanglement, coherence, and nonlocality,
which can be applied in next-generation devices. This research project will
study the general mathematical theory of quantum resources. It seeks to advance
the understanding of how non-classical features of quantum mechanics can be
measured and manipulated using physical processes that are conducive for
experimental implementation. Ultimately the results of this project will help
lay the theoretical foundation for future quantum-based technologies, which
include cryptographic, computational, and communication devices. In attaining
its results, this project will help prepare the next generation of scientists by
supporting a diverse student workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
study quantum resource theories from two complementary perspectives. First, it
will investigate general mathematical features that are present in many
different types of quantum resource theories. Specifically, it will identify and
study a general mathematical feature, known as full physical consistency, that
naturally arises in resource theories strongly compatible with realistic
experimental implementations. In addition, it will investigate structural
properties and resource measures in non-convex theories. As a second research
thrust, this project will examine the specific resource theories of quantum
nonlocality and generalized quantum measurements. Rigorous frameworks for these
resource theories will be developed that focus on their operational natures.
Furthermore, nonlocality and measurement incompatibility, two fundamental
features of quantum mechanics, will be unified as equivalent resources in semi-
quantum nonlocal games. As a practical application, a novel method for
constructing measurement device-independent dimensionality witnesses will be
introduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.