* 1820848
* Collaborative Research: Geotechnical Investigation of Bivalve-Sediment Interaction with regard to Bivalve Farms as a Self-sustained Scour Mitigation Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 195,852.00

Scour is a serious problem throughout the world where structural foundations are
in or adjacent to running water. For example, the most common cause for bridge
failures in the U.S. is scour around bridge piers. Previous studies have
suggested that bivalve colonies reduce local erosion through different
processes, and that bivalves feature a high resistivity to strong flow. However,
there exists a current gap in knowledge regarding the impact of bivalve colonies
on geotechnical seabed parameters. This hampers the assessment and development
of bivalve farms as a potentially self-sustained scour mitigation method. This
fundamental study will address this gap in knowledge by use of field and
laboratory testing. In this way, the study will represent a crucial step towards
the use of bivalve farms as a scour mitigation strategy, as well as advance the
field of bio-geo-engineering in coastal environments. In the framework of this
project, new interdisciplinary, domestic and international collaborations will
be initiated, and multiple graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from
participation in this creative, interdisciplinary and international project. The
project will also seek to increase diversity in the field of geotechnical
engineering by emphasizing the recruitment of female students and students from
diverse socioeconomic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test
the following working hypotheses: H1) The presence of bivalve colonies reduces
local scour and erosion. H2) Bivalve colonies form morphologies applicable to
scour protection design. H3) Bivalve adhesive protein increases sediment
strength and decreases erodibility. H4) Bivalve dislodgement from soil surfaces
occurs as ?block failure? for single bivalves, but becomes irrelevant for
erosion issues in the case of bivalve groups. These hypotheses will be tested
through an interdisciplinary and multi-method approach featuring: (i) field
investigations at two bivalve colony locations in Virginia and North Carolina,
(ii) an analytic comparison of bivalve colony morphology and flow resistivity to
modern scour protection designs, and laboratory tests investigating (iii) the
change of sediment strength and erodibility resulting from mixing bivalve
adhesive protein with sediment and (iv) soil failure behavior during bivalve
dislodgement. The study may pave the way for a new direction in bio-inspired
geotechnical engineering in submerged environments, and scour protection. In a
narrower focus, the project will deliver information, and address knowledge gaps
relevant for multiple disciplines and research communities (geotechnical
engineering, biology, ecology, environmental engineering, aquaculture
developers). It will complement existing efforts of characterizing bivalve
habitats and their role in coastal protection during storm events by providing a
novel geotechnical perspective. It will also enable new insights into the
process of bivalve dislodgement. To the best knowledge of the PIs, mussel
adhesive proteins will be tested for the first time to evaluate their impact on
soil mechanical properties. The results may offer a new direction in temporary
soil improvement in a sustainable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.