* 1820790
* Coherent Control of Single Neodymium Ion Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andrei Faraon, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Controlling the properties of single atoms at the quantum mechanical level
promises to enable revolutionary quantum technologies with application in
computing, secure communication and precision measurements. From the prospect of
developing a scalable technology, it is very appealing to work with atoms
trapped in solids. Rare-earth atoms in crystals are a very promising system to
study because their quantum properties are not significantly degraded by the
interaction with the other atoms in the solid. This project will be focused on
controlling the quantum states of single neodymium atoms using optical laser
pulses and microwave pulses. These studies will determine whether neodymium
atoms are well suited for developing quantum technologies, especially quantum
communications. This project will allow for training the future generation of
scientists and engineers with expertise in quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying and controlling single quantum bits in
solids is at the current frontier of quantum information science. To advance
this frontier, optical spectroscopy and spin control of single neodymium ions
coupled to nano-photonic resonators will be performed, and the prospects for
using them as reliable quantum bits will be assessed. The reason for using rare-
earth-ions, specifically neodymium, is that they have 4f electronic levels
exhibiting some of the best optical and spin quantum coherence in the solid
state, similar to trapped atoms and ions. This study will lead to a better
understanding of the interactions between single ions and their nano-scale
environment, such as nearby surfaces, hyperfine coupling between nuclei, and
ion-ion dipole interaction that have not been studied before at the single
quantum level. New optical techniques combining high-frequency-resolution laser
spectroscopy, nano-photonics, low temperature, microwave spin control will be
developed. Nano-fabrication techniques for new crystalline materials will be
further advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.