* 1820700
* RUI:  Scattering Approach to Quantum Fluctuations: Casimir Forces, Curved Spacetime, and Solitons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Noah Graham, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 143,026.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Noah Graham at
Middlebury College in Middlebury, Vermont. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We learn about
our world via the reflection, transmission, and absorption of waves, from the
light scattered by a blue sky to the rumble of seismic waves through the earth.
As a result, the mathematical and computational tools for analyzing wave
scattering play an essential role in our scientific and technological
infrastructure. This research will develop and extend techniques of scattering
theory and apply them both to answer questions about fundamental laws of physics
and to analyze and design experiments studying microelectromechanical systems in
nanotechnology. Because of the fundamental role scattering theory plays across
science and engineering, this research is accessible to and provides valuable
training for undergraduate students planning careers in a wide range of Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The project will thus
promote key national priorities through both advances in fundamental and applied
research and in building the core technical capabilities of the next generation
of scientists and engineers. Through education and outreach, the impact of this
project will extend beyond the students directly involved to the broader college
and local community as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this
research will develop extensions of the variable phase method in analytic
scattering theory and then use these techniques to address subtle questions in
quantum field theory. These applications include computations of quantum
corrections to the energies and charges of magnetic monopoles in models of
particle physics, analysis of the effects of quantum fluctuations in curved
spacetime and their consequences for general relativity and quantum gravity, and
precise determination of Casimir forces in systems relevant to nanotechnology.
Because it reduces problems in quantum field theory to the simpler and more
familiar properties of wave scattering, this approach offers significant
opportunities for undergraduate students working on this research to build
broadly applicable scientific and technical skills, as well as opportunities for
pedagogical integration of this research with the physics
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.