* 1820609
* Developing and Evaluating Fraud Informatics Curriculum among Institutions in the Appalachian Region
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,594.00

As computer systems and information technologies rapidly advance, various
abusive and fraudulent activities ("frauds") proliferate in the cyber world.
This proliferation undermines the ecosystem of information systems and the cyber
world, making it critically important for the general public, and in particular
cybersecurity students, to be aware of popular online frauds, their implications
to businesses and societies, and possible methods of prevention and solutions.
However, curricula dedicated to online fraud, including new types of fraud, are
lacking from existing cybersecurity curricula. To help address the threats of
cyberspace and the knowledge gaps in cybersecurity curricula, this collaborative
project between Penn State University (PSU) and Oak Ridge Associated
Universities (ORAU) proposes to: (1) develop a fraud informatics curriculum with
three delivery options (15-week-long offline, 5-week-long online, and 1-day
offline), and (2) validate the effectiveness of this curriculum and learning
materials by assessing changes in participants' knowledge, skills, and
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate research-based
pedagogical methods (i.e., group-based learning, context-based learning, and
hands-on learning) to develop learning materials in three delivery options. The
curriculum will be uniquely cohesive in its emphasis on recent online fraud and
phenomena such as spam emails, social engineering attacks, astroturfing,
misinformation, disinformation and data-driven solutions for detecting and
preventing such frauds. The curriculum will be delivered by approximately 10
instructors to 400 undergraduate students in the Appalachian region and beyond.
The goal is for the curriculum to strengthen the workforce development pipeline,
and to ultimately contribute to an unrivaled, diverse cybersecurity workforce
and citizenry. Pedagogical findings and course materials will benefit general
computing education, specifically students focusing on cybersecurity in broader
scientific and engineering communities throughout the nation. Materials
developed through this project will be freely available from a project web site:
http://fraudinformatics.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.