* 1820870
* Identifying and Correcting Quantum Systems with Initial System-Environment Correlations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mark Byrd, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

Quantum information processing holds promise for more secure communication, for
solving computing problems that can't be solved in a timely manner on classical
machines, and for simulating a variety of quantum many-body systems using
quantum systems. However, to realize these advances, one needs to understand how
quantum systems interact with various environments. This project will aid in the
development of quantum technologies by adding to the theoretical approaches that
can be used to plan optimum control of quantum systems. In particular, this
project will investigate how to avoid errors in quantum computation that arise
because of prior correlations between quantum systems and their environment.
This is important because understanding how quantum systems behave in various
environments will lead to new knowledge in several fields ranging from
biological systems, to materials science, fundamental physics, and molecular
scale machines. This work could thus enable better health care, better materials
for use in industry as well as everyday life, and a variety of technologies that
operate on the molecular scale. This project will train students to use quantum
physics techniques and to understand the physical concepts. Outreach activities
intended to reach a broader audience will also be undertaken as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve reliable quantum information
processing we must develop methods for controlling quantum systems. This
includes modeling quantum systems that are noisy due to interactions with their
environment. A standard method for describing the evolution of open quantum
systems is to assume the environment and the system in question are initially
decoupled, evolve under some joint evolution, and then average over the
environmental degrees of freedom to obtain an effective noisy evolution. This
method of modeling the evolution is inadequate under some conditions such as
strong coupling and quantum systems that are initially coupled to their
environment. The objective of this work is to aid in the development of quantum
technologies by helping understand and describe requirements for practical
modeling and error prevention strategies in these circumstances by understanding
the limitations of previous work and finding ways to describe systems that do
not satisfy the standard assumptions. Both theoretical and numerical work will
be employed to achieve the results and describe specific examples that are
relevant to experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.