* 1820852
* CDS&amp;E:Noise Reduction Methods for Particle Simulations of Intense Beams in Cyclotrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Antoine Cerfon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 283,348.00

A growing number of technologies rely on the production of energetic beams of
charged particles in accelerators for their operation. Proton therapy for cancer
treatment and food irradiation to eliminate pathogens are among the most
remarkable applications. These successes are paving the way for new applications
for particle accelerators, such as materials science experiments and nuclear
waste transmutation, which would require much more intense beams than are
currently available. A difficulty is that at such high beam intensities, beam
induced damages on the accelerator structures cannot be tolerated. Achieving a
high beam quality throughout the acceleration process thus becomes a critical
issue. The dynamics of beams in accelerators is described by equations which can
only be accurately solved with long and expensive simulations run on
supercomputers. Accelerator design studies therefore involve time consuming,
computer intensive simulations, limiting the range of design options which can
be investigated. This project addresses this limitation by developing a
numerical method that will significantly reduce the run times of existing
numerical codes while maintaining a high level of accuracy. By accelerating beam
dynamics simulations in accelerators, the new solver will help improve design
optimization for the next generation of high intensity
accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop new
methods to predict the dynamics of high intensity beams in cyclotrons. The beam
dynamics is described by the Vlasov equation, a six-dimensional nonlinear
partial differential equation, and quantitative results can only be obtained
through numerical simulation. Particle codes based on the Particle-In-Cell (PIC)
algorithm have been successfully used for this purpose. Still, a limitation of
these codes is that a large number of particles need to be followed to limit
statistical error, which leads to long run times. To reduce run times, the PI
and graduate students will develop a novel noise reduction technique for the
standard PIC algorithm, based on the use of sparse grids. In order to maximize
the leverage from this new technique, they will implement high performance
algorithms in their sparse-PIC solver, and optimize the sparse grids using model
reduction techniques tailored for cyclotron simulations. At every stage of the
development of the solver, they will compare the performance of the new code
with the state-of-the-art code OPAL. The code will be available to collaborators
at major cyclotron facilities to answer unresolved questions regarding the
stability of high intensity beams in cyclotrons and to design new
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.