* 1820707
* Undergraduate Research Experience At Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mary Darrow, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,988.00

Community and tribal colleges are a critical source of future STEM workers from
groups that are now underrepresented in STEM disciplines. To interest students
at these institutions in STEM careers and to encourage persistence in STEM
majors, it is important that they have authentic research experiences in the
first few years of college. In this project, Eastern Iowa Community College will
determine the effectiveness of undergraduate research courses as an avenue to
give community college students authentic research experiences. The project will
also develop a workshop for faculty from partner community and tribal colleges,
to help them effectively develop and teach these research courses. Each of the
six colleges in this partnership will develop a research course and associated
case studies. The research topics will be centered in the local communities and
involve the students in both gathering and analyzing data. As a result, the
students will be authentically involved in doing research and the research topic
will link to issues that are important to the students and their local
communities. The courses will be designed in conjunction with articulation
agreements between two- and four-year partner institutions. It is expected that
the dissemination of the resulting courses and their evaluation will increase
the entrance and persistence of students, including underrepresented minority
students, in STEM fields. In addition, the project may help colleges to
institutionalize new approaches to broadening the participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. The findings of this project will be
shared with other community colleges across the country through the project
website, potentially contributing to national insights about inclusive pedagogy
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational research component of this
grant will study the student experiences in these research courses to answer
four questions: 1) How well does participating in research courses increase
community college students' knowledge in the STEM disciplines? 2) How well does
participating in research courses increase these students' interest in and
engagement with STEM learning. 3) To what extent does participating in research
courses increase community college students' motivation to complete a STEM
degree? 4) How successful were the project's activities in reaching the targeted
underrepresented minority students? Both the course materials and the research
results will be disseminated broadly, particularly targeting other community
colleges around the nation. Since community colleges have demographics that are
usually more representative of the surrounding communities than four-year
colleges, implementing these ideas should improve the fraction of
underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines around the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.