* 1820912
* Particles and Strings in the Gravitating and Evolving Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Mina Aganagic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award funds the research of Professors Mina Aganagic, Raphael Bousso, and
Petr Horava at the University of California, Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the first two decades of the 21st century, we have witnessed an unprecedented
convergence of discoveries that are bringing into focus fundamental questions
about the origin, structure, and evolution of the Universe. The new experimental
data in particle physics and cosmology are being confronted with theoretical
questions: What is the Universe made of? How are the puzzles of gravity resolved
when gravity is unified with quantum mechanics? What are the nature and origins
of the fundamental constituents of matter, their interactions, and the observed
patterns of cosmological structure in the Universe? Together, experimental
discoveries and new theoretical ideas are leading to an effective synthesis of
previously disconnected areas of research. This unprecedented convergence of
experimental and theoretical results, which aims to formulate the fundamental
laws of nature in one coherent framework, is of utmost importance for the
advancement of the national interest because it promotes and advances progress
in the natural sciences and in our understanding of the laws of the Universe at
scales ranging from the microscopic and subatomic to the cosmological. In their
research, Professors Aganagic, Bousso, and Horava will perform fundamental
theoretical research at the crossroads of particle physics, quantum gravity,
cosmology, and string theory. In addition to addressing some of the deepest
puzzles about the laws of the Universe, this research is envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. By involving postdocs and students in cutting-edge
theoretical research, this research will significantly contribute to the
critical training of the next generation of scientists. This research will also
enrich the public domain, with Professors Aganagic, Bousso, and Horava
delivering public lectures on the results of this research. This research will
also improve the academic curriculum at UC Berkeley, with new findings being
directly integrated into new and existing courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, Professor Aganagic will pursue the study of the refined
topological string and gauge theories, the Langlands correspondence, and little
string theory. Professor Bousso will study the interplay between geometry,
entropy, gravity, and quantum information, specifically on the quantum-focusing
conjecture and the quantum null-energy condition, new area theorems and the
cosmological second law, and asymptotic symmetries in relation to the
information problem. Professor Horava will study non-relativistic quantum field
theory and quantum gravity and their applications to the puzzles of naturalness
in particle phenomenology and cosmology, as well as the connection to the Causal
Dynamical Triangulations approach to quantizing gravity. He also intends to
apply methods of non-equilibrium field theory to string and
M-theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.