* 1820063
* SBIR Phase I:  Quad Element Technology for Precision Machining Glass Optics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Deepak Ravindra, MICRO-LAM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
challenges, inefficiencies and need associated with a rapidly growing precision
glass optics market. Glass optics are currently used in a wide range of
applications such as medical devices (scopes, diagnostics, imaging, etc.),
defense (ballistic windows, missile domes, etc.), consumer electronics (cell
phone lenses, smart device screens, etc.) and more. The challenge associated
with this market is the constant need to prototype optical glass lenses during
the development phase. Today, these glass lenses are prototyped using a
combination of grinding and polishing processes that are costly and time
consuming. The proposed (QET) Quad Element Technology could disrupt the glass
optics industry, primarily the prototyping market estimated at about $300M with
a rapid growth of 50% per year. The end result would be the much quicker
availability of cutting edge technology that utilizes glass optics. An example
would be significantly improving the arthroscopic or endoscopic surgical tools
that drastically minimizes patient trauma and recovery time during a surgical
procedure or even enabling remote surgery for patients especially in third world
countries. Other societal benefits will be directly realized through economic
growth, providing a competitive edge, and improving product quality and
profitability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
to enable an innovative high productivity approach to manufacturing optical
quality glass. The objective of this proposal is to demonstrate proof of concept
and determine the feasibility of combining four (4) distinct elements in a
single machining process: mechanical, chemical, photonic and thermal. The
proposed technology, termed QET (Quad Element Technology), is the first of its
kind in machining processes to exploit the advantages of the four elements
specifically for material removal. Till date, these four elements have been used
consecutively in status quo machining processes but never concurrently. The
ability of extracting and optimizing only the advantages of these four elements
will enable a faster (6-8x) and cheaper (3-5x) precision manufacturing process
to produce glass optics. The primary goal of the Phase I R&amp;D is to
successfully select and optimize individual components for each of the four
elements proposed and demonstrate a precision turning process on optical
glass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.