* 1820147
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-Advantaged Monomers for the Production of Function-Tailorable Polyamides
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Nacu Hernandez, Sumatra Biorenewables LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project scales the production of
renewable monomers that give access to performance nylon polyamides with
tailorable functional properties for applications in the automotive, food &
beverage packaging, textiles, and other industries. The revolutionary technology
will be a disruptive force to the $40 billion nylon polyamide industry by
addressing nylon?s weaknesses such as undesired moisture adsorption, which
results in loss of dimensional stability and tensile strength. These
shortcomings lead industries to make compromises in selecting their materials;
for instance, longer chain polyamides are used for moisture resistance but at
the expense of desired viscoelastic properties. The proposed bio-advantaged
monomers will 1) help ease reliance on petroleum-based chemicals resulting in
greener production processes and a cleaner environment, 2) present new
opportunities for innovation and use of performance plastics due to the platform
that bio-advantaged monomers offer. This is expected to generate new jobs at
multiple points in the value chain. Demand for agricultural goods by
fermentation facilities will increase. Sumatra Biorenewables and its partners
will create jobs to meet demand for monomer production and purification.
Finally, polymer producers and the manufacturing industry will produce superior
products, increasing the competitiveness of the U.S. chemical industry.

The intellectual merit of this project is to combine fermentation and chemical
conversion for the production of bio-advantaged monomers and their corresponding
performance-enhanced polyamides. The inexpensive, robust, and efficient monomer
production process in conjunction with the customizable nature of bio-advantaged
monomers to yield nylon derivatives that are hydrophobic, flame retardant, anti-
static, or otherwise tailorable, afford opportunities to meet a number of needs
in the manufacturing sector. The innovation?s success hinges on a monomer
production process that utilizes an inexpensive electrochemical conversion that
operates near 100% efficiency and that only uses water as a reactant and
electricity as an energy source. In addition, the monomer production process is
insensitive to the feedstock source and the impurities present in fermentation
broths. Therefore, separation and purification is only required after monomer
production, resulting in huge cost savings. Laboratory-tested samples of
hydrophobic nylon perform equally well as dry nylon, but without the
disadvantage of moisture sensitivity. This project will enable Sumatra
Biorenewables to transition to a continuous flow, kilogram-scale, production
process and supply potential customers with samples for performance testing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.