* 1820784
* Geometrizing Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Ibrahima Bah, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ibrahima Bah at Johns
Hopkins University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the years many fundamental
principles about nature have been discovered and understood. The grandest of
such principles are enshrined within quantum mechanics, quantum field theory,
and the general theory of relativity. These frameworks have led to many
technological breakthroughs. For example, because of quantum mechanics,
physicists were able to build computers and study and discover new materials;
similarly, because of general relativity, physicists were able to calculate the
necessary precision in timing needed by communication satellites and global-
positioning satellites. However, such frameworks have also allowed physicists to
develop a complete picture of the basic laws of nature and to understand the
dynamics of objects stretching from the elementary particles of nature and the
forces between them to entire galaxies and the universe at large. Research that
attempts to extend these frontiers therefore serves the national interest by
furthering the development of fundamental scientific knowledge in the United
States. Professor Bah's research involves studying and classifying the general
and fundamental phenomena that can emerge from these theoretical frameworks and
the interplay between them. This has broad impact in the study of physics in the
very early universe, the study of the basic constituents of black holes, and the
study of the initial singularity that led to the Big Bang. Through his research
activities Professor Bah will also train graduate students and postdocs in
various branches of physics and mathematics. Likewise, through his outreach
activities, Professor Bah will aim to excite a scientific interest in young
people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Bah will study various
methods used to geometrically define quantum field theories. This is achieved by
studying higher-dimensional quantum field theories in five and six dimensions on
various curved manifolds. Such geometrization can be naturally imported in
gravity through holography and AdS/CFT. This allows for Professor Bah to use
gravity to explicitly study and construct many classes of quantum field theories
which generically do not admit a Lagrangian description. The main objective of
this research is to provide alternative tools for studying strong dynamics in
quantum field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.