* 1820435
* SBIR Phase I: Efficient Narrow-Band Communication via Geosynchronous Satellites
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Michael Parr, eSAT Global, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 158,852.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to transform 2-way, mobile satellite
communications from a niche service (affordable to less than 0.1% of the world?s
people), to a broadly accessible mass market product (at costs well under
$1/month). Communications devices (that could be as small as vehicle key fobs)
will communicate modest volumes of data to and from virtually anywhere on Earth.
The number of potential applications is large, with the following being a few
examples: every lifejacket on every commercial aircraft and cruise ship could
transmit its location and status (in the event of a mishap); children and the
elderly could be tracked globally; and drivers could be assured of assistance
wherever they travel. Secondary impacts would include an increase in average
fuel efficiency when, for example, more vehicles are sold without spare tires
(as drivers have more peace-of-mind regarding the possibility of being
stranded). The United States will benefit in terms of improved safety, conserved
resources, stimulus to the satellite and related industries, and increased
export revenues.

The proposed project centers around a combination of innovations that exploit
inherent (but previously unutilized) capabilities of existing satellites.
Currently operational Mobile Satellite Systems have communications architectures
that do not lend themselves to low-cost transmission of small volumes of data.
By starting with a blank sheet of paper and rethinking the architecture, costs
can be reduced by orders of magnitude (for both the communications devices and
the data service). The cost reduction of the terminal devices is primarily
driven by lower data rates (with associated lower power and size). While most
technical aspects of communications links improve with lower data rates, one
characteristic emerges as a constraint on the extent to which data rate can be
reduced. The purpose of this research is to study this characteristic, called
phase noise, and its impact on the communications performance at low data rates
when using real satellite links. The results of this research will be
quantitative conclusions regarding the trades between data rates, the cost
impact of lowering phase noise in the communication elements, transmission
performance, and the modem architectural options. This study will enable
optimization of this trade when developing the follow-on commercial products.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.