* 1820972
* Improvements in Facilities, Communication and Equipment at Osa Conservation Osa Verde Biological Station, Costa Rica
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Andrew Whitworth, Friends of the Osa
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2020
* USD 201,070.00

The Osa Peninsula in Costa Rica contains one of the largest intact forest
landscapes in Central America, the largest mangrove system on the Pacific slope,
and one of only four tropical fjords on the planet. The nonprofit Osa
Conservation has been dedicated to protecting this unique ecosystem for over 14
years. With a new research facility and capabilities, the Osa Verde Biological
Station (OVBS), which is owned and operated by Osa Conservation, will
dramatically increase the number and type of researchers, while improving the
quality and integration of research projects to advance scientific knowledge
about the region's ecosystems and tropical habitat conservation. Clientele at
the OVBS over the past ten years has included university and high school groups
(largely from the US), international researchers, volunteer citizen scientists,
and serious naturalists from across the globe. Station usage by education groups
has increased steadily over the past 5 years and is expected to continue
growing. The new lab will meet the needs of both the increasing number of US
education groups and the high-level US researchers from a diversity of
subdisciplines that will ultimately produce higher quality projects. By becoming
a premier field station in Costa Rica, OVBS will not only advance scientific
knowledge about tropical ecology and expand scientific literacy, but also expand
collaboration between international researchers, education groups, stakeholders,
and decision makers. Applied conservation impact from the OVBS strategic
research agenda are vital to conserving this important biodiverse region in
perpetuity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from NSF will transform the ability of
OVBS to successfully draw in a cadre of committed researchers and educators who
will become career-long users for their investigation and teaching needs, all
while contributing to the body of scientific knowledge that will inform
conservation. With greater research capabilities for both scientists and
education groups, OVBS will significantly further its five main research areas
of: 1) Wildlife Population Monitoring; 2) Tropical Reforestation and restoration
techniques; 3) Rewilding and enhancement techniques; 4) Ecological and
behavioral studies; and 5) Ecosystem process and function studies. To advance
this research agenda, funding from NSF will 1) create a dedicated laboratory
building, with both a wet and dry lab; 2) improve electrical power and
communications for the laboratory; and 3) purchase and install basic lab
equipment that is expected of visiting researchers and student groups. A
dedicated lab space will facilitate planning, storage, analysis and training
space for innovative research, much of which uses modern technologies and
scientific equipment that requires careful controlled storage. These additions
will allow for better processing of region-wide remote sensing data, provide
better management and storage facilities of the collected data, as well as offer
space for regular training courses. The success of research-led conservation
efforts at OVBS will become a model for how emerging scientists, established
researchers and conservation practitioners can collaboratively bridge field and
laboratory research to advance science-driven conservation outcomes. For more
information on Osa Conservation Field Station, please visit:
www.osaconservation.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.