* 1820118
* SBIR Phase I:  Semantic Information Extraction From Text
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jiang Zhou, AI STRIKE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,991.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project can be summarized as follows. (1) Businesses
will benefit from the proposed product because companies are increasingly using
data-driven predictive models to improve their bottom line. In many areas where
structured data are readily available, such as credit scoring, these models have
produced impressive returns on investment. One of the main obstacles hindering
the application of these models in other areas is the lack of structured data.
By extracting information from sources such as web pages, blogs and social media
messages, and storing it as structured data, companies will be able to take
advantage of the vast amount of unstructured data that are generated daily and
thereby improve their bottom line. (2) As the Chinese economy expands and
becomes more deeply intertwined with the US economy, many US businesses will
need high-quality and timely information about Chinese markets. However,
information extraction from Chinese text is an underserved area. The proposed
product can fill this void and thereby meet a significant commercial
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a new information extraction (IE) method. Currently
IE focuses on information extraction from short text snippets consisting of a
few words in order to derive structured factual information from unstructured
text. But its performance is often deteriorated by the shortage of features -
the sparse feature problem. A major benefit of the approach developed in this
project is that it takes advantage of the important role of specific linguistic
units even when the number of words in a sentence is limited. These linguistic
units give a sentence its structure. Depending on structural characteristics or
functional principles of sentences, the features around them are grouped. The
grouped features satisfy certain properties and can be used to capture
structural and semantic information, which is helpful for minimizing the sparse
feature problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.