* 1820738
* Black Holes as a Window into our Universe: Theory and Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Dejan Stojkovic, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 60,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Dejan Stojkovic at SUNY at
Buffalo.

The goal of the research of Professor Stojkovic is to address open questions at
the frontiers of particle physics, cosmology, and gravity. In particular, this
research will be oriented toward understanding important aspects of the
interplay between the properties of the recently-discovered Higgs particle and
conditions in the early universe. Professor Stojkovic also aims to investigate
the properties of certain rotating black holes which might have existed in the
early universe, and thereby make important progress in our understanding of
gravity at its most fundamental level. As such, this project advances the
national interest by fostering the development of basic science within the
United States. This project will also provide excellent training for the next
generation of scientists and will further the development of innovative new
ideas with manifold applications across many scientific disciplines.

More technically, this research will focus on the following topics. First,
Professor Stojkovic will constrain the abundance of primordial black holes
including the effects of rotation, which involves (i) calculating the emission
spectra for primordial black holes of various masses and angular momenta,
including hadronization of quarks and gluons and subsequent hadron decay into
photons, (ii) contrasting the results with well-established astrophysical
observations, and (iii) applying the newly established limits in order to
improve the predictions for the production of gravitational waves through black-
hole mergers or by direct Hawking radiation. Professor Stojkovic will also
connect precision Higgs physics with gravity and cosmology by (i) refining and
extending the original analysis of the false Higgs vacuum decay in the presence
of gravity, (ii) relating the two-loop Higgs effective potential and primordial
black-hole masses, and (iii) constraining physics beyond the Standard Model.
Improved theoretical calculations and computational tools which are needed to
perform this analysis will also be developed. In order to extract precise
information, theoretical predictions for astrophysical observations and lab
experiments will be made. This research will also be integrated with education
and outreach. The tools developed will be made publicly available for the
benefit of the larger research community. This project will also provide an
excellent training ground for students at the high-school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, preparing them for possible future career in science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.