* 1820185
* Collaborative Research: Sulfur Isotope Systematics and Oxygen Fugacity Evolution in the 1257 Samalas Magma Reservoir, Indonesia
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Marc-Antoine Longpre, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 183,140.00

Sulfur is the third most abundant volatile element in volcanic systems following
water and CO2. Release of sulfur to the atmosphere during volcanic eruptions can
perturb climate on a global scale and cause acid rain, resulting in significant
environmental impact. The eruption of Mt. Samalas on Lombok Island, Indonesia,
in 1257 generated the largest volcanic sulfur emission event of the last 2000
years. This event is coincident with a multi-year global cooling event around
the beginning of the "Little Ice Age." The central research question of this
project is: how did this volcano build up so much eruptible sulfur? The
scientist participants will test hypotheses of sulfur enrichment mechanisms by
probing deep into sulfur's properties and behavior within sulfides, apatites,
and volcanic glasses (rapidly cooled melts) from pumice samples from this
eruption. The project will utilize the most advanced analytical techniques to
investigate sulfur chemistry, many of which were developed recently by
participants on the research team. This project will yield new insights into the
capability of magmatic systems beneath volcanoes to accumulate reservoirs of
eruptible sulfur large enough to create significant global environmental
impacts. This work will support several early-career researchers, and will
engage a diverse group of undergraduate students to participate at City
University of New York (CUNY) and the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits the complex geochemical behavior of
sulfur to track its movement from the liquid phase (silicate melt) into solid
(mineral) and gas phases in magmatic systems. Sulfur is a polyvalent element
that can change its valence state from S2- to S6+ over a narrow redox range
relevant for terrestrial magmatic systems. This makes sulfur an excellent tracer
for changes in magma redox conditions that may have played a critical role in
the transport, enrichment, and release of sulfur during the 1257 Mt. Samalas
eruption. The involved magmatic processes (e.g., degassing) should lead to
predictable fractionations of sulfur isotopes in glasses and minerals, which
will further constrain the dynamics of sulfur build-up at Samalas. The valence
states of sulfur in minerals and glasses will be determined via X-ray absorption
near-edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy, whereas sulfur isotope ratios will be
measured by secondary ionization mass spectrometry (SIMS). This dovetailing of
redox and isotope studies is a powerful new approach to addressing sulfur-
related science questions. This project will serve as a blueprint for future
studies of other volcanic systems and will have implications for magmatic
sulfide ore-forming processes and crustal magma evolution of interest to the
broader Earth science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.