* 1820786
* The Sevilleta Meteorological Network:  Enhancing and expanding technological infrastructure to assess climate variability in dryland ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Donald Natvig, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 204,025.00

This project will improve weather monitoring in the Sevilleta National Wildlife
Refuge (SevNWR) through the enhancement and expansion of the Sevilleta
Meteorological Network (SevMET). Established in 1988 and operated by the
University of New Mexico's Sevilleta Field Station (SevFS;
http://sevfs.unm.edu/), SevMET is a spatially-distributed network of
meteorological stations that spans multiple dryland ecosystems representative of
the southwestern US. Climate governs many aspects of dryland ecosystems. Thus, a
network of spatially representative, high resolution, comprehensive
meteorological stations is essential to supporting drylands research. SevFS
provides logistical support to a variety of researchers and educators, ranging
from K-12 students and teachers to undergraduate and graduate students to senior
scientists from around the world. Improvements to SevMET will promote
understanding of dryland ecosystems by providing important supporting data
needed for research projects conducted in the SevNWR, such as the Sevilleta Long
Term Ecological Research program. All data will be made freely available via the
SevFS website, as well as through the New Mexico Climate Center and MesoWest,
both of which provide climate and weather data to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dryland ecosystems occupy ~45% of the terrestrial land
surface and account for ~40% of global net primary production. Ecosystem
processes in drylands are strongly regulated by climatic drivers that are highly
variable in space and time, both within and among years. Therefore, accurate
measurement of weather and climate is fundamental to understanding how dryland
ecosystems respond to seasonal and annual changes in rainfall and temperature.
The enhanced and expanded SevMET will consist of fifteen comprehensive weather
stations distributed across the SevNWR. These data will serve as important
variables for long-term observational and experimental studies to help explain
how and why dryland ecosystems differ in space and change over time. Ongoing and
new research in the SevNWR will be significantly improved by these enhancements
that will more accurately quantify climate variability in these ecologically
important dryland ecosystems. These improvements will also strengthen existing
training and educational opportunities supported by SevFS, including the
Sevilleta Research Experience for Undergraduates Program, which has a strong
record of training minority undergraduate students. Also, enhancing research
infrastructure will benefit the Methods in Environmental Data Acquisition summer
course, which attracts an international cohort of technicians, students, post-
doctoral fellows, and early career faculty, through a unique field-based
training opportunity in the design, deployment, and maintenance of environmental
sensor networks. Finally, weather data generated by these meteorological
stations will also be used to develop classroom exercises for K-12 students and
teachers associated with the Schoolyard Long-term Ecological Research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.