* 1820028
* SBIR Phase I: Refinement of the Floating Silicon Method to Produce Drop-In Silicon Wafers for High Efficiency Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Alison Greenlee, Leading Edge Crystal Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a 25% cost reduction in solar panel
manufacturing and the elimination of up to 2.1 Gigatons of annual CO2
generation. As silicon wafers are the most expensive component in the $50BN
solar panel industry, our low-cost wafer manufacturing technology presents the
strongest opportunity to reduce global solar panel production costs. This cost
reduction drives the compelling economics needed for increasing solar market
penetration. As context, the solar market has historically doubled for every 20%
cost reduction created by the industry. Our single crystal wafers are further
significantly higher quality, and therefore can enable up to 10% higher
effective efficiency using existing commercial solar panel manufacturing lines.
Further, as the incumbent silicon wafer production process is extremely energy-
and material-intensive and thus constitutes 80% of the solar industry?s carbon
footprint, our direct and high efficiency technology has the potential to reduce
the solar industry's 2026 carbon footprint by over 50%.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops the systems needed for our
process to produce silicon wafers with commercial dimensions and demonstrates to
solar manufacturers (our customers) that our wafers can be processed by
commercial solar cell lines. As our process produces a continuous ribbon of
silicon, this work will develop a cutting system that laser cuts discrete wafers
with the edges and dimensions needed for commercial solar cell processing. This
involves developing the laser cutting recipes, the wafer handling systems, and
verifying with a third party that the edge quality does not interfere with cell
processing. Our project then investigates and optimizes our wafers' performance
during each critical step of commercial solar cell processing, including
chemical etching and screen printing. A successful demonstration that our low-
cost wafer can 'drop-in' to an existing cell line to deliver equivalent (or
better) performance compared to the incumbent technology would gate our working
with industry partners to commercialize this process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.