* 1820906
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: REAL Leafy - A Sustainable, Viral Infrastructure-as-a-Service Edge Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Justin Cappos, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2019
* USD 107,344.00

Experimental distributed computing services are becoming vital to support
emerging cyberphysical systems. But the capital investment and operational
expenses required to sustain experimental research testbeds to host these vital
services can grow large. In this project the Leafy edge compute cloud explores a
new model for computing research infrastructure -- a software-only,
geographically decentralized cloud testbed that expands in size through
voluntary contributions of available computing hardware, on a part- or full-time
basis. The LEAFY Cloud offers the prospect of a virtuous cycle: as more sites
join the LEAFY edge cloud, more software developers and experimenters are
attracted to the infrastructure, resulting in the deployment of more
applications and services, increasing the value of new contributors offering to
host a compute resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
prototype a viral, sustainable, software-only distributed testbed for Cloud-in-
the-Loop Systems, and to explore the issues involved in supporting distributed
computing experiments and services. It will incorporate modern orchestration,
management, and tenancy technologies, and rely heavily on open source
virtualization and cloud management software technologies such as Docker and
Kubernetes. LEAFY will be the first multi-tenant wide-area distributed system to
deploy systems and experiments using a state-of-the-art micro-services
architecture. Two experiments will be hosted and analyzed to evaluate the
system: a Distributed Collaborative Visualization System and the Global Data
Plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.