* 1820089
* STTR Phase I:  Self-resonant Structures for Long-Range High-Efficiency Wireless Power Transfer
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Charles Sullivan, Resonant Link LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes increased
range, increased efficiency, and decreased size of wireless charging systems,
which will provide value to consumer devices (e.g., mobile phones and tablets),
transportation, and medical industries. In consumer devices, improved and widely
adopted wireless power transfer can lead to more rugged designs of the devices
by eliminating charging ports, which are a common mode of device failure. Widely
adopted wireless charging can improve convenience for consumers, and, with a
unified charging solution across a number of devices, eliminate the need for
dedicated, device-specific chargers. Increased charging range will increase the
number of use cases in all three industries, leading to greater commercial
opportunities for this this technology and wireless power transfer in general.
In transportation, high-efficiency wireless charging allows for fast charging
that is adaptable to varying vehicle heights, which makes electric vehicles more
convenient, increases their rate of adoption, and allows charging that is
integrated into infrastructure. Increased efficiency reduces the energy costs
associated with charging across all three industries. Furthermore, this project
will enhance the scientific understanding of the power handling capabilities of
the multilayer self-resonant structure, and the resonant frequencies achievable
with various manufacturing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses the technical challenges
keeping a new wireless power transfer coil technology, called the multilayer
self-resonant structure (MSRS), from the market. In order to commercialize the
MSRS, the technology must advance beyond a proof-of-concept, and interface with
commercial wireless power transfer systems, specifically those that adhere to
existing device standards. The technical hurdles that need to be addressed
include 1) reducing the resonant frequency to meet current standards, 2)
understanding the power handling limits, and 3) developing electronic
interfaces. These challenges will be overcome by, respectively, 1) building on
existing manufacturing techniques used to handle thin layers of material in
other industries and adapting them to develop a scalable manufacturing approach
to construct MSRSs with resonant frequencies in the range needed. 2) Analyzing,
measuring, and modeling the power handling capabilities of the MSRS. Finally, 3)
Developing impedance matching circuitry required to interface the MSRS with
commercial systems. Successful completion of these task will results in a low
cost, high-Q wireless power transfer coil, which can be integrated into
commercial systems to increase the capable range, efficiency, and power handling
of wireless charging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.