* 1820091
* STTR Phase I:  Protecting Livestock from Airborne Disease Transmission Using Non-thermal Plasma Airstream Disinfection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Herek Clack, Taza Aya LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,982.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project stems from the
costs to U.S. food producers of outbreaks of animal diseases. Producers of
poultry, pork, and other food proteins lose more than $1B each year to
infectious diseases, including some that are transmitted through the air. For
diseases having an airborne transmission route, protective technologies that are
available are few and can be costly to implement and operate. This project
furthers the development of a new alternative technology, non-thermal plasmas,
for the simultaneous removal and inactivation in air of the organisms
responsible for the transmission of disease to livestock. This project evaluates
how conditions in the environment typically found near livestock affect the
performance of non-thermal plasmas. This project also pursues a technique for
accelerating the process of improving non-thermal plasma performance, upon the
completion of which new and improved non-thermal plasma devices can be developed
for applications such as this more rapidly than is possible now. Completion of
the project will enable the development of lower-cost protective technologies
for maintaining livestock health, making such technologies economically
accessible to a larger segment of food protein producers, ultimately lowering
food costs and increasing domestic food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase I project proposes to experimentally demonstrate and evaluate the
effectiveness of a non-thermal plasma (NTP) as a means of preventing disease-
carrying particles in outside air from infecting livestock housed in animal
confinement buildings. NTPs are stable electrical discharges that simultaneously
contribute to the removal of airborne particles while also subjecting them to
chemical attack capable of killing harmful viruses. While NTPs have been
demonstrated for disinfection of fixed surfaces, and to a lesser degree for the
destruction of chemical contaminants or biological pathogens in air, the
intellectual merit of this project stems from its evaluation of trace gases
commonly present in the air around livestock, ammonia and hydrogen sulfide, and
their potential to both enhance and diminish the performance of NTPs used in
farm environments. Additionally, this project will identify non-biological
tracers suitable for use in NTP optimization testing which will accelerate the
development of improved designs. Two separate lab-scale NTP reactors will be
used in the execution of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.