* 1820497
* SBIR Phase I: High-power, lightweight, and flexible tandem perovskite solar panels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Kevin Bush, Swift Solar Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an opportunity to open up new applications
that depend on mobile power and dramatically lower the cost of residential,
commercial, and utility-scale solar power. The project will develop lightweight,
flexible, and extremely efficient photovoltaic (PV) modules using perovskite
absorbers. Double-junction or tandem solar cells can reach far higher power
conversion efficiencies than traditional single-junction cells (45% vs. 32%) by
using two absorbing layers that absorb complementary parts of the solar
spectrum; however, tandem cells have previously been too expensive for
mainstream applications. This project uses perovskite materials to make tandem
solar cells on flexible substrates at a lower cost than conventional cells by
using high-throughput manufacturing and lower-cost materials. These efficient,
lightweight, and flexible modules will open the door to long-endurance unmanned
aerial vehicles, supplemental charging for electric cars, solar power for
commercial buildings with roofs too weak for typical panels, and lower
installation, module, and total system costs for residential, commercial, and
utility-scale solar plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses
the technical challenges associated with making flexible perovskite tandem solar
cells efficient, stable, and low cost. Perovskite tandem solar cells have been
demonstrated previously, but never in a lightweight and flexible format. Such a
format creates unique technical challenges associated with delamination of the
many layers in the tandem device stack, and further requires every layer to be
robust to fracture. A critical area of work for flexible perovskite tandem solar
cells is in developing robust, flexible, and dense diffusion barrier layers that
can both conduct current and block the migration of ionic species between
various layers. Much of the proposed work focuses on optimizing these barrier
layers to prevent various degradation modes, some general to all perovskite
solar cells and some unique to perovskite tandem solar cells. Other key focus
areas include developing a flexible device architecture with improved adhesion
between layers and a flexible encapsulation strategy. Realizing these goals will
pave the way for highly efficient and flexible solar cells at substantially
lower costs than today?s leading solar technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.