* 1820789
* Photon Temporal Modes as a Quantum Information Resource
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project aims to develop a new approach for using photons of light to encode
quantum information. In a quantum information network, whose purpose is to
store, transmit and manipulate information in ways not possible using classical
physics techniques, photons transfer quantum information between network nodes.
Single photons are characterized by their color (frequency), polarization
orientation, spatial beam profile, and temporal shape. Only recently has the
temporal shape of photons been recognized as an underutilized resource for
encoding quantum information. The PI will develop methods to encode quantum
information in the temporal shape of single-photon wave packets, and to
demonstrate means for manipulating such encoded information. This research has
the potential to advance quantum information science by improving the ability to
store larger amounts of information in single photons in a manner that is
compatible with optical-fiber networks. The research will impact the growing
field of quantum information technology, including quantum computing, and offers
excellent opportunities to integrate science education with research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on the PI's recent successful
demonstration of the crucially needed information-processing device - the
quantum pulse gate - that is capable of sorting (and routing) optical pulses
according to their temporal shape. The research aims to develop the complete set
of conceptual and practical tools needed for performing quantum information
operations using temporal (wave-packet) modes of light. Temporal modes (TMs)
form a discrete set of field-orthogonal pulse shapes that occupy the same region
of time-frequency (phase) space. The researchers recently experimentally
demonstrated their proposed method for separating (sorting) temporal modes by
using a novel form of optical frequency conversion. Unlike polarization, which
is fundamentally a two-state system, the temporal-mode basis offers the
possibility for multi-level quantum logic (qudits). For TMs to rise to their
potential as a tool for quantum information science, it needs to be demonstrated
that all of the quantum resources and operations needed for QIS with temporal
modes are available. Specifically, the researchers will work to demonstrate: 1)
a source of TM-entangled photons, 2) quantum state tomography in the TM basis,
3) quantum process tomography of the QPG device itself, and 4) coherent and
efficient manipulation of light in field-orthogonal TMs to implement single-
photon quantum logic gates. Controlling the states of quantum systems is of
broad interest in science and information technology, metrology, quantum
chemistry, and nano-mechanics. Optical technology and quantum-optics-based
information science offer excellent opportunities to integrate research with
science education. The PI cofounded in 2010 the Science Literacy Program (SLP)
at the University of Oregon, and served as Co-Director, and is currently on the
Advisory Board. The SLP provides mentored instructional opportunities to many
graduate students and undergraduate science majors serving as co-instructors in
science literacy courses, which have impacted thousands of students at the
university. During this project the PI will teach and mentor instructors for an
SLP course that presents quantum information science to non-science majors,
using inquiry-based-learning techniques to engage students. The PI has published
a popular-level book for the course, Quantum Physics: What Everyone Needs to
Know (Oxford, 2017), and will continue promoting education using material from
this book as part of this project. A PhD student working in quantum information
science research served as co-instructor to plan the course learning goals,
prepare and present several class lectures, write homework and exam questions,
and facilitate group problem-solving activities during class
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.