* 1820527
* Partial Support of the Board on Mathematical Sciences and Anayltics and the Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 690,000.00

The National Academies' Board on Mathematical Sciences and Analytics (BMSA)
provides a broad interface between the research enterprise and federal agencies
that rely on the mathematical sciences. The Board provides objective and
authoritative advice on how best to apply the tools of mathematics, statistics,
operations research, financial engineering, simulation science, analytics, risk
analysis, systems engineering, and decision analysis to practical problems of
national importance. Over its nearly 33 years of existence, the BMSA has
produced 81 reports. Through its work, the Board strengthens the policy-making
process; increases the visibility of, and appreciation for, the mathematical
sciences; and identifies growth areas for the discipline. The National
Academies' Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics (CATS) is a primary
interface between the research enterprise and federal agencies that rely on the
statistical sciences. The Committee provides objective and authoritative advice
on how best to apply the tools and perspectives of statistics to practical
problems of national importance. In so doing, CATS strengthens the policy-making
process; increases the visibility of, and appreciation for, the statistical
sciences; and identifies growth areas for the discipline. CATS increases the
visibility of the statistical sciences among agencies of the federal government
and within the policy community and enables statisticians to play larger roles
in science policy. It does this by involving leading statistical scientists in
workshops and studies that help federal decision-makers address their technical
challenges. Through its execution of this function, CATS strengthens and
broadens the interface between the statistics research community and widespread
users of those research results. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;BMSA provides objective
and authoritative advice on how best to apply the tools of mathematics,
statistics, operations research, financial engineering, simulation science,
analytics, risk analysis, systems engineering, and decision analysis to
practical problems of national importance. It consists of pro bono experts from
a broad range of quantitative fields with experience in academia, industry,
government, and national laboratories. Board members carry out their work by
identifying important steps of value to federal agencies and the mathematical
sciences, and then recruiting leading mathematical scientists to participate in
workshops, studies, and other activities focused on the technical challenges of
federal decision-makers. CATS consists of pro bono experts from across the range
of statistical sciences, particularly those with expertise related to data
science, physical sciences, Earth sciences, engineering, biomedical research,
and health care. CATS meetings provide opportunities to build the interfaces
noted above and to help design and oversee CATS activities, which are funded
separately. Its position as part of the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine enables CATS to also strengthen links between the
statistical sciences and other fields of science, engineering, and medicine by
involving statisticians in multidisciplinary studies, workshops, and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.