* 1820981
* Collaborative Research: The AGEP Historically Black Universities Alliance: A Model to Advance Early Career Minority Faculty in the STEM Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,120,663.00

This Alliance brings together three Historically Black Universities (HBUs) with
the goal of developing, implementing, studying, evaluating and disseminating a
model focusing on career development for historically underrepresented minority
(URM) early career STEM faculty at HBUs, who will become tenured and promoted
faculty. The AGEP HBUs Alliance works with faculty who are writing and
submitting research grants to external funding sources; engaging in visiting
faculty positions at US Department of Energy National Laboratories; working with
experienced STEM faculty mentors across the country; and participating in mock
pre-tenure review processes. While the model work is through partnerships
between Tuskegee University, Oakland University, Jackson State University, and
Tennessee State University, the project is creating a model that will be
applicable to other Historically Black Colleges and
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance was created in response to the
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about
models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of URM graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or
STEM education research fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop, replicate
or reproduce; implement and study, via integrated educational and social science
research, models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education,
postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and
across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
careers. This Alliance is also funded by the NSF's Historically Black Colleges
and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the research components of the Alliance is the team's investigation of URM early
career faculty's perceptions of how they fit in their positions because of the
interaction between institutional variables and the junior faculty's perceptions
of their institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP HBUs Alliance team will
work with external consultants at TMT Group, Inc., to conduct formative and
summative evaluations. They will also engage an Executive Board of institutional
administrators and leaders, as well as an external Advisory Board. The boards
will provide feedback to the Alliance team and suggest adjustments to the
project's management, to the research, and to the model development,
implementation, testing, evaluation, dissemination, sustainability and
reproduction potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.