* 1820220
* International Union on Technical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) Symposium on Architectured Material Mechanics; Chicago, Illinois; September 17-19, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Thomas Siegmund, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2019
* USD 14,725.00

This award provides financial support for the symposium entitled: International
Union on Technical and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) Symposium on Architectured
Material Mechanics to be held on September 17-19, 2018, in Chicago, Illinois.
Architectured or micro-architectured material may be a described as a material-
structure system, which at the larger scales of interest can be effectively
defined as a material system, whereas on the smaller scales it can be explained
in terms of the constituent material(s) and structural features. It is an
emerging field, which aspires to exploit the union between material and
structure to attain otherwise difficult to obtain performance characteristics in
engineered materials, such as multifunctional response behavior, high strength
to stiffness ratio, and enhanced damage and failure tolerance. While researchers
have been able to advance the field through ad-hoc design methods and
prototypical fabrications, a deeper insight into the mechanics principles
underlying the architectured materials is missing. This event aspires to provide
the forum where the experts in mechanics exchange ideas fruitfully and interact
with subject matter experts from relevant fields, such as architecture,
materials science, and physics. It is expected that this interaction will
advance the state-of-the-art in this emerging area, thereby increasing US
economic competitiveness, and potentially improving the quality of life, health,
and well-being of the society. Funding from this grant will support
participation of graduate and post-doctoral scholars and holding of the poster
session.

In this three-day symposium, around 100 leading US and international experts in
the mechanics of architecture materials as well as architects, materials
scientists, and physicists will convene in an interactive setting to discuss
ways to stimulate strong understanding of the principles of mechanics governing
the behavior of architecture materials. The impact of the symposium on the field
will come in terms of scientific and engineering clarity achieved through
speeches, posters, and open discussions. It will increase the possibility of
inter- and cross-disciplinary collaboration, which is quite needed. The
interaction of students and post-docs with established researchers will play a
significant role in their education and field exposure. The meeting proceedings
will be made available through online videos of key lectures and publication of
the conference proceedings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.