* 1820565
* GOALI: Mechanisms of Lithiation and Delithiation Reactions in Layered Materials Combining Transmission Electron Microscopy and Atomic Scale Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* C Carter, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 441,402.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on understanding how batteries
work at the atomic level. There are many methods for generating energy, but
ultimately the limitation is often how to store that energy. Today, society is
highly dependent on batteries, including rechargeable ones. Layered materials,
such as molybdenum disulphide, may provide the key to improving these batteries.
Transmission electron microscopy allows researchers to observe and identify
individual atoms, but the data generated in such studies can only be fully
interpreted using advanced materials-modeling methods. By working with engineers
and chemists at the Yardney Division of EaglePicher, undergraduate and graduate
students gain a broad practical understanding of batteries, while also
developing the expertise and skills necessary to improve these batteries. In
doing so, students need a combined understanding of ceramics, materials science,
physics, chemistry and electrochemistry. A postdoctoral associate is performing
in situ experiments and is linking the computer modeling to understand how the
metals and layered material react. Graduates are then well positioned to join
companies across a spectrum (from transportation to medical implants) where they
are urgently needed across the U.S. The broader impact of this research is
ensured by participating in several community outreach activities including the
UConn Mentor Connection (for high-school students) and the Kids are Scientists
Too (KAST) K-12 summer program (which targets diverse and underrepresented
groups and the Northeast Alliance). These laboratories also participate in a
pre-college experience program for high-school junior and senior students where
students interact with professors and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project focuses on the characterization and
modeling intercalation at the atomic scale. This research combines in situ
experimentation in the transmission electron microscope with atomic scale
modeling methods to improve our understanding of how lithium and sodium move
into and out from layered materials (i.e. intercalation). These layered
materials are a critical component of rechargeable batteries and the
intercalation process is how recharging and charging is accomplished. This
research compares the intercalation process for graphite and several transition
metal dichalcogenides including molybdenum disulphide. This project makes full
use of the recent advances in both characterization and the computing
methodologies that allow the investigation of the mechanisms at the same length
scales, and also builds a strong link to industry that relies on this technology
and needs safer and more reliable batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.