* 1820018
* SBIR Phase I:   Online curriculum for creating purpose-driven Start-ups
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Derrick Drakeford, DRAKEFORD SCOTT & ASSOCIATES
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project takes a deeper look at the concept of 'purpose' and
its relationship to the marketplace, unemployment, and start-up incubators. It
intends to develop a multi-question self-assessment tool to help individuals
find meaningful purpose through free, online, live and self-paced hybrid course
instruction. The coursework will use augmented reality and 3-D video to motivate
individuals to re-think purpose as a central motivation to employment and
entrepreneurship. This project aligns with the NSF?s mission to advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare with science and technology. These outcomes
could potentially generate a new generation of business owners that are
dedicated to meaning and money through a double bottom-line approach to
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines the educational
work of finding purpose through self- help and the technology of 3-D video and
augmented reality for the first time. This unique project provides free online
live synchronous education combined with hybrid self-paced online course work to
help individuals find meaningful self-employment solutions. This project
utilizes a proprietary training method designed to quickly help individuals find
their purpose in life and invent a useful business or nonprofit to solve
problems in the world. This research can help students re-center their
motivations to chart a meaningful life course through a business or nonprofit
start-up. The curriculum starts with this activity and extends to provide
students an opportunity to enter the marketplace through micro-enterprise or
nonprofit creation. The courses will utilize predictive analytics to synthesize
student data (such as the answers each student inputs for the four questions in
the purpose activity). The data will be reorganized and automated into a clear
and targeted purpose proposition statement for the
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.