* 1820883
* Collaborative Research: The Transition Zone of Upper Permafrost: The Frontline for Permafrost  Changes across Climate and Landscape Gradients
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yuri Shur, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,154,815.00

Permanently frozen soils, or permafrost, often contain large amounts of ground
ice, which make it vulnerable to climate change and human activities. These
soils are protected from melting by a surface layer which thaws in summer and
refreezes in winter, and a near-surface layer, termed the transition zone. This
transition zone, which develops through complex interactions between the
environment and permafrost, controls permafrost resilience to ground surface
subsidence (thermokarst). Expectations are that as the climate warms, deeper
seasonal melting will impact this transition zone, and ecosystems and
infrastructure (i.e., roads, airfields, and buildings) stability. The goals of
this project are to evaluate the properties of the transition zone from the High
Arctic to the southern border of the permafrost region and to understand
processes of formation, degradation, and recovery of the transition zone in
various climatic regions. The knowledge gained from this work will inform Arctic
science and engineering. The project will support student training. The
investigators will collaborate with government agencies and engineering
companies whose work is impacted by permafrost ground subsidence
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous research, the investigators identified
a zone in the upper profile of permafrost soils that is critical to permafrost
stability, soil development, and geomorphic processes. However, how the
thickness and cryostructures of this transition zone (TZ) vary across climate
and landscape gradients, the rates of its formation during ecological
succession, and how it contributes to permafrost vulnerability and resilience,
is not well understood. What knowledge we have is in low Arctic tundra and can
be misleading if applied to other bioclimatic regions. To address this gap in
knowledge, our collaborative research with the University of Montreal will focus
on the TZ across climatic regions and landscapes distributed along a north-south
transect from barren polar deserts with continuous permafrost in Canada, to
boreal forests in southern Alaska with sporadic permafrost. Our group will also
monitor and experiment with mass and heat transfer processes between the active
layer (AL) and the TZ to identify mechanisms controlling segregated ice
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.