* 1820277
* SBIR Phase I:  Soft Foam Polyurethanes from Algae Oil
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Marissa Tessman, ALGENESIS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to create sustainable and biodegradable polyurethane
products made from algae oils. Algae-based polymer precursors will be developed
and used to produce finished polyurethane product with the desired physical
characteristics. Development of polyurethane shoe soles will be targeted,
including polyurethane flip-flops, as these are products where consumers are
increasingly demanding the incorporation of sustainable materials and where the
consumer is willing to pay the small extra cost associated with incorporating
renewable materials. Developing algae polymers and high value products made from
these will allow us to develop a novel monomer toolbox based on these bio-
materials and to create new polymers with physical properties equal or superior
to petroleum based polymers. These algae based polymers also provide cleaner,
smarter products- pollution prevention at the molecular level. The development
of environmentally sustainable and biodegradable products will reduce waste,
prevent costly end-of-life remediation, lead to safer products and save energy
and water resources. The development of these algae based polymer products will
enable renewable materials to supplant petroleum-based materials while
maintaining the performance characteristics of polyurethane products that
consumers have come to appreciate.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop sustainable monomers from bio-
based algae feedstocks that will be used to create finished polyurethane soft
foams that have the appropriate properties for shoe soles. It incorporates the
preparation of algae-based polyols from multiple algae oil sources, going from
bench to production scale, followed by formulation of these monomers into
materials that meet the demands of a discerning eco-conscious consumer. The
developed algae polyols will not be formulaic direct drop-in replacements for
the corresponding petroleum sourced materials' careful formulation will be
required to generate polyurethanes with the desired final product properties,
and that are also compatible with current manufacturing techniques. Formulation
and process compatibility are key steps, as industrial users are not looking to
significantly modify manufacturing processes to incorporate new starting
materials. Lastly, physical evaluation of the resulting polyurethanes will be
done by comparing the performance metrics between bio and petroleum-based
polyurethanes typically used by end users in sportswear and automotives. Using
polyols derived from multiple algal strains, a polyurethane formulation for soft
foams will be developed to demonstrate our ability to integrate product
development and manufacturing, from sustainable feedstock and green chemistry
through commercial application.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.