* 1820122
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Rubber Recycling Process Not Involving Devulcanization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Georg Bohm, Appia LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the reuse of rubber compounds from spent tires in
high performance products including new tires without significant loss in
product performance. Only a very small portion of those tires are currently
being ground up for this purpose because of the detrimental impact on product
properties. However, larger quantities could potentially be used if the ground
rubber is treated by the process of our invention. This would have several
benefits. Manufacturers could reduce material cost, the rubber recycling
industry would enjoy significant growth and unsightly tire dumps with associated
pollution problems would disappear. Additionally, the tire industry will become
more sustainable and other unacceptable uses of old tires currently practiced,
such as their use as fuels in low cost operations, would be financially
challenged as novel, more profitable uses that retain the integrity of the
polymer matrix emerge.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to build upon studies conducted by our
company during the last few years. While it was widely known that recycled
ground rubber will significantly reduce physical properties, limited information
and understanding existed on the basic causes. Much hope was pinned by many
companies and academic institutions on the potential merit of the ground up
rubber but no significant commercial process previously emerged. This work aims
to develop a recycling process which does not require a devulcanization step.
This was first demonstrated with model sample geometries that simulate the
environment which ground rubber particles experience when added to and being co-
vulcanized with fresh rubber compounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.