* 1820310
* SBIR Phase I:  Light Emitting Antimicrobial Bandage
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Mitchell Greenberg, SABER Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to identify optimal doses of blue light required
to inactivate common clinical pathogens known to cause surgical site infections,
and test a prototype antimicrobial light emitting dressing that uses the
bactericidal effects of blue light to inactivate surface colonizing bacteria and
disinfect surgical sites. The potential outcomes of the proposed activity are
the development of a thin reusable blue light-emitting bandage that provides
effective post-operative site disinfection, ultimately reducing nosocomial
related infections. The proposed activity would further the development of
antimicrobial blue light therapy devices, providing novel solutions to surgical
site infections, Central Line Bloodstream Associated Infections, and wound
infections, because of blue light therapy's proven ability to inactivate a wide
range of clinical pathogens regardless of their resistance to antibiotics,
ability to improve wound healing, and ability to inactivate bacteria in the
biofilm state. The outcomes of this project will aid in providing a cost saving
solution to Healthcare Associated Infections by reducing their occurrence,
reducing the risks of human error, and improving accountability, quality and
workflow.

Optimization of blue light therapy is needed for clinical application for
killing bacteria on the surface of patient's surgical sites, because of a
radiant energy threshold that must be passed to inactivate bacteria. Due to the
variation in devices and doses used in previous studies, combined with the
clinical need for a device which can be easily incorporated into standard
infection prevention protocols, further experimentation is needed with a device
designed as a wearable for clinical implementation. Objective 1: Determine
optimal light dose (fluence) of blue light (405 nm) required to inactivate
common gram positive and gram negative bacteria known to cause SSIs. Using in
vitro techniques, determine the total fluence of light and treatment times
required to achieve bacterial disinfection of at least a one log reduction in
bacteria colony forming units. Objective 2: Optimize device to deliver the
effective irradiance while maintaining surface temperature below 43 Degree
Celsius for safe use on tissue. The device is to not exceed 43 Degree Celsius on
the surface of the device's therapeutic surface while delivering effective
irradiance, from Objective 1, for inactivation of bacteria on surfaces.
Objective 3: Test the device's infection prevention and tissue response in a SSI
porcine model. Evaluate the device in a porcine SSI model with surface-
inoculated sutured incisions, made to the depth of the fascia, with optimized
light-emitting antimicrobial bandage. Success criteria for bacterial
disinfection is at least a 90% reduction of CFU per gram of tissue or a
multiparametric and semiquantitative score (0-3 range) no greater than 1, based
on standard subjective clinical markers, including fever, erythema, induration,
and suppuration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.