* 1820613
* 3D Magnetic and Thermal Structure of Active Regions of the Sun
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 430,000.00

The Sun is the best astrophysical laboratory for obtaining clues to magnetic
field structure and activity because the magnetic field can be studied across
time frames and physical sizes needed to begin understanding both the complex
structure and dynamics of the magnetic field. This project aims to quantify
magnetism in the solar corona using focused efforts to study the solar magnetic
field. The investigators will create realistic 3-Dimensional (3D) modeling tools
to study the basic science problem of measuring the coronal magnetic field
structure in solar active regions (AR) and reconstructing AR heating structure.
This new modeling will augment the investigators' existing capabilities for AR
modeling, and use all of the advanced modeling tools and computer codes they
have already developed. The project will make new scientific products such as
maps of the coronal magnetic field, and 3D models of individual ARs built using
input from observations. This project supports the mission of the NSF by
promoting our understanding of magnetic field structure and activity at the Sun.
The research group has established a summer internship research program for high
school students in the Union County Vocational Magnet School having
concentration on Science, where the tools developed under this project will be
heavily used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages an
extensive, quantitative use of radio data available from a variety of modern
radio interferometry arrays and combines these diagnostics with more traditional
EUV and optical data as well as coronal modeling approaches based on these data
(in particular, nonlinear force-free field modeling). The investigators will
employ new science capabilities of the radio imaging spectroscopy data from
solar active regions, augmented by advanced theory and 3D modeling of
gyroresonance (GR) and free-free emission. The GR process gives radio emission
its ability to provide direct measurements in the corona of magnetic field
strength and direction, and so provides the key to understanding the basic
mechanisms underlying all of solar activity. Interpretation of the observations
relies on construction of comprehensive models for the atmosphere, including
both plasma and magnetic field models, which are then matched to the data
through forward fitting. These theory and modeling efforts are needed in order
to exploit the powerful new radio data coming online now from a number of radio
instruments including the VLA, Expanded OVSA (EOVSA), and Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.