* 1820814
* Research in High Energy Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Kleban, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew B. Kleban at New
York University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have witnessed many profound
discoveries in particle physics and cosmology. Gravitational waves from merging
black holes were recently detected for the first time, confirming a prediction
of Einstein's theory of general relativity and opening an unprecedented new
window into the physics of strong gravity and extreme states of matter.
Similarly, the Large Hadron Collider discovered the Higgs particle, although
this discovery does not suggest any way of solving certain issues such as the
so-called "hierarchy problem" or provide any clear hint of what physics exists
at shorter distance scales. Likewise, there is strong evidence for dark energy,
which is responsible for the accelerated rate of expansion of the current
universe, and for cosmic inflation, a period of explosive expansion just after
the Big Bang. Yet this evidence tells us little about the underlying physical
origin of either phenomenon. A breakthrough in understanding the meaning of
these recent profound discoveries would promote the progress of science in a
fundamental way, revealing new laws of nature and helping to explain the origin
and fate of our universe. Research in this direction thus advances the national
interest by furthering the development of basic science within the United
States. As part of his research, Professor Kleban will investigate the
theoretical consequences of Einstein's theory of general relativity in exotic
situations, such as during rapid cosmic expansion and near black holes. He will
also study how to understand the effects of quantum mechanics in such
situations. Further, he will study the physics of hypothetical particles called
"axions" that could play a key role in explaining certain mysterious features of
the Standard Model of particle physics. Professor Kleban's work is also
envisioned to have broader impacts in the form of public lectures and
interviews, and in inspiring and training undergraduate and graduate physics
students at New York University. Professor Kleban will also train and aid in the
professional development of a postdoctoral researcher who will participate in
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Kleban will
study the theory of axion landscapes, making use of the techniques he recently
developed to push forward our understanding of the cosmology of such theories.
He will continue his work on extending a "no-hair theorem" for de Sitter
spacetime with inhomogeneous initial conditions in classical general relativity
and the problem of initial conditions in inflationary cosmology. Lastly, he will
study string theory in three-dimensional anti-de Sitter spacetime at a special
string-scale radius of curvature, where the theory appears to undergo a phase
transition from a phase dominated by black holes to one dominated by long
strings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.