* 1820923
* Workshop: St. Louis Area Methods Meeting Graduate Student Colloquium - Ames, Iowa - April 20, 2018
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Olga Chyzh, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Saint Louis Area Methods Meeting (SLAMM) provides a unique opportunity for
participants. It is large enough to attract high quality researchers, but small
enough for individuals to get important feedback on their work and develop
mentoring and professional networks. The graduate students funded by this
project stand to benefit in both ways. First, the work that they present will
get critical comments from leading methodologists and statisticians. In addition
to the senior scholars presenting, several others will attend the conference as
discussants. Theses senior scholars will include guests from other universities
as well as members of the Department of Statistics at Iowa State University,
which will encourage interdisciplinary work. Getting feedback on their research
posters from these scholars will significantly improve the quality of their
work. Second, the connections the graduate students make with the faculty have
the potential to have long lasting effects. Students will be assigned a specific
mentor and the individualized relationship will hopefully last beyond this
meeting. These networking connections can have lasting effects on a person's
scholarship.

The participation of the graduate students at SLAMM has clear implications for
their educational success. Many of the students will be presenting dissertation
related research and the feedback will improve their education experiences. In
addition, the many of graduate students will be from underrepresented groups,
which have traditionally not participated in these types of meetings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.