* 1820640
* SFS Capacity Building in Security of Software Defined Networks
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Zygmunt Haas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,000.00

Software defined networking (SDN) is a relatively new technology expected to
have wide use in the Internet due to its technical flexibility and potential for
cost-savings. However, given the rapid adoption of SDN technologies, security
concerns have emerged. The proposed project from the University of Texas at
Dallas (UT Dallas) brings together a team of faculty with expertise in computer
networks and SDN, as well as faculty with expertise in cybersecurity, to build a
comprehensive curriculum to address the various security aspects of SDN. The
goal is to train a skilled workforce in SDN technology and its security.
Students graduating from this program will acquire the necessary skills to
build, deploy, and operate an SDN based networks in academia, industry and the
government. The course modules and set of capstone projects in SDN security will
be made available to academia and industry so that security of this technology
keeps pace with wide-spread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
aims to design a number of course modules; develop several capstone projects;
and build a laboratory setup for students to implement prototype systems to test
their solutions to the security issues in the capstone projects. Topics covered
in the educational materials will include: cybersecurity including system
security, network security, data and application security, security of cyber
physical systems, and language based security, as well as in next generation
computer networks, network management and SDN. The products will be incorporated
into several existing graduate-level cybersecurity courses at UT Dallas, and be
made available to other institutions that want to expand their curriculum to
cover SDN technologies. Further, the project will involve undergraduate students
in SDN research activities, and serve as a recruitment tool for students
interested in furthering their education in the security of emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.