* 1820345
* RUI: Norfolk State University's Meson Spectroscopy Studies with GlueX and CLAS12 at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Carlos Salgado, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 01/31/2022
* USD 150,351.00

Norfolk State University (NSU) participates in the study of the sub-atomic
structure of matter as members of the GlueX and MesonEx (CLAS12) experiments at
the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Lab) located in
Newport News, Virginia. The group researches the forces that keep the basic
components of sub-atomic particles together, known as the "strong" force. They
expect to identify a new form of sub-atomic particles (exotics) that can greatly
contribute to the understanding of the strong force. These exotics will provide
an external manifestation of the strong force that otherwise is hidden (confined
inside the particles). NSU faculty and undergraduate students are developing a
software infrastructure to perform the analysis of big data in a user-friendly
manner. Specifically, they are exploring new statistical techniques, hardware
options and software programing to help the analysis. The NSU campus is near
Jefferson Lab, providing NSU students opportunities to participate in research
all year around. It is a goal of this project to strengthen the national
participation of undergraduate minorities in nuclear and particle physics
research. Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), such as NSU, have
been more successful than majority institutions in retaining minority students
at the undergraduate level and introducing them to graduate programs in STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Norfolk State University is participating in
the experimental study of the strong interactions by testing basic Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) using Meson Spectroscopy. This project proposes to continue
the group's participation in the GlueX (Hall D) and MesonEx (Hall B) experiments
at Jefferson Lab. Meson spectroscopy is of fundamental importance for the
understanding of the strong interaction at intermediate energies with the goal
of finding more details about QCD confinement. NSU had been involved in hardware
construction and software development for both experiments and in the data
analysis of previous CLAS experiments related to meson photo-production. The
group proposes to continue its current involvement in the analyses and software
development of meson photo-production performing full Partial Wave Analysis
(PWA) of few body final states. The spectroscopy studies concentrate in channels
for the study of exotics and strangeonia states. They are working to obtain more
efficient, user friendly and fast analysis code for pursuing amplitude analysis.
GlueX and MesonEx will obtain data with such better systematic and statistical
uncertainties that the limitations of the current methods of analysis will be
exposed. Therefore new refinements in analysis will be required, and a close
collaboration between theorists (models) and experimentalists (software), to
obtain definite results. Through this program, NSU faculty and undergraduate
students will directly participate in the software development and analysis of
data from experiments in the forefront of nuclear physics research. NSU is one
of the leading HBCU's in the country and its main campus is conveniently located
at a short distance from Jefferson Lab. The group has a continuous record of
involving minorities at Jefferson Lab for the last 20 years. This project will
continue to provide opportunities to under-represented minorities and strengthen
diversity in nuclear physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.