* 1820582
* Collaborative Research: AGEP North Carolina Alliance: An Institutional Transformation Model to Increase Minority STEM Doctoral Student and Faculty Success
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Yvette Huet, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 992,789.00

North Carolina State University, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, are collaborating
to develop, implement and study the AGEP North Carolina Alliance model for
creating institutional, department-level and faculty change to promote
historically underrepresented minority US citizens who are completing their STEM
doctoral degrees and progressing into faculty
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance was created in response to the
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552) The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about
models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of historically
underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP
Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement and study,
via integrated educational and social science research, models to transform the
dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs
in STEM and/or STEM education research careers. This Alliance is also funded by
the NSF's Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
(HBCU-UP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM achievement gap
between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our universities
and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM faculty who serve
as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn from, work with
and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate and full
professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges
and universities and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most research-
intensive institutions. The AGEP North Carolina Alliance has the potential to
advance a model to improve the success of URM graduate students and faculty in
the STEM professoriate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP North Carolina Alliance
will employ institutional change strategies to improve the climate, practices
and policies that positively impact URM graduate students and faculty in STEM.
The Alliance engages university provosts and deans, as well as department heads,
department-level faculty leaders and department graduate directors, to lead the
transformation in science, engineering and computer science departments. The
integrated research will examine faculty mentor training and barriers, and
quality, of mentoring URM graduate student experiences. The formative evaluation
is being conducted by Education Designs, Inc and the summative evaluation is
conducted by Iowa State University's Research Institute for Studies in
Education. There is an external advisory committee which will provide feedback
to the team on the effectiveness and outcomes of the project, as well as the
research, evaluation and dissemination work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.