* 1820652
* EAGER:  High-throughput, culture-independent technique identifying cyanobacteria infections to improve understanding of carbon biogeochemical cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sarah Preheim, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2021
* USD 297,545.00

Viruses in the ocean are 10 times more abundant than bacteria and kill 10-66% of
bacterial cells daily. Viral infections of bacteria, such as of photosynthetic
cyanobacteria that form the base of the food web, impact the flow of energy and
carbon within the marine ecosystem. Thus, viral infections dramatically alter
important biogeochemical and ecological factors in the ocean, such as how much
carbon dioxide is respired or how many fish the ocean ecosystem can sustain.
Despite their importance in the ocean ecosystem, researchers do not know the
answer to the most basic question of viral biology for most environmental
viruses: which bacteria do different viruses infect? Identifying these
infections could help researchers understand more about how viruses shape the
ecosystem through infections of keystone microbial species, infections of
microbes with unique characteristics, or infection patterns that promote
microbial community stability. This project is to develop a cost-effective
method to substantially increase the number of infections identified within
natural microbial communities. The researchers are applying this novel method to
determine viral infections in cyanobacteria in the Chesapeake Bay and compare
the results to standard approaches to determine viral infections. This technique
can be widely used to transform our understanding of how viruses impact many
ecosystems, since it is cost-effective, does not need specialized equipment and
can be adapted to target different viral populations. Additionally, this project
provides research opportunities for undergraduate and high school students,
including underrepresented minority students and women.

To develop a high-throughput, culture-independent technique to identify
infections in the environment, the researchers are optimizing a previously
developed method, emulsion paired concatenation-isolation PCR (epicPCR).
Adapting epicPCR for viral-host associations will identify interactions by
isolating actively infected single cells within a microdroplet to retain the
physical proximity of the host and viral DNA during DNA extraction. Next, fusion
PCR is done within the microdroplet to allow host rRNA genes to fuse to viral
marker genes, such as g20 or ribonucleotide reductase, retained within the same
bead. Only rRNA genes successfully fused to viral markers are amplified.
Finally, high-throughput sequencing is done on the resulting fusion products.
This approach is cultivation-independent, screens a larger fraction of diversity
within the sample than traditional approaches, requires little additional
equipment compared to microfluidic approaches, and can be scaled up to hundreds
of samples because the amount of sequencing required to deeply sample a single
environment is low compared to shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Although this
technique will be limited to viral marker genes and suffers from the biases of
PCR, it still offers great potential to investigate viral-host interactions
across a large number of environments. The method is being applied to determine
how viral infections influence cynaobacterial blooms in the Chesapeake Bay. The
researchers will also compare the results of epicPCR to culture-based, single-
cell, and bioinformatics based methods of host-virus associations to identify
biases, limitations and caveats of various approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.