* 1820821
* Variational Decomposition Models in Imaging Sciences and High Dimensional Multi-Time Hamilton-Jacobi Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jerome Darbon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2021
* USD 140,000.00

Many imaging science problems can be formulated as a variational inverse problem
that can be solved using optimization techniques. Imaging models used to process
data in order to extract the relevant information for applications are becoming
more and more complex and involve many terms. The main objectives of the project
consist of establishing new and unique connections between complex variational
imaging models and partial differential equations in high dimensions. This
connection will be used to better understand, create and learn robust models for
processing data to extract the relevant information for applications. The
investigator will also use this connection to create new numerical algorithms
for solving these optimization problems.

The fundamental research in this project will exhibit new and unique connections
between image processing and computer vision techniques based on convex
optimization and multi-time Hamilton-Jacobi partial differential equations in
very high dimensions. The research will generate new mathematical results about
the robustness of solutions of variational inverse problems in imaging sciences
and new formulas that describe the impact of the estimation under perturbations
of models. New representation formulas, existence and uniqueness results for a
large class of multi-time Hamilton-Jacobi equations will be rigorously obtained.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.