* 1820794
* Assessing Student Learning in an Introductory Computer Science Course: Predictors of Success in Subsequent Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Leland Beck, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 319,466.00

This project seeks to address a challenging issue in Computer Science (CS)
education: determining the readiness of students who complete the introductory
CS course to be successful in subsequent CS courses. Accurately assessing
student learning in introductory programming courses is complex and challenging.
Research studies suggest that many students who receive passing grades in their
first programming class (CS1) are unprepared to succeed in subsequent classes in
the CS curriculum. Several studies have reported failure rates of 30% or more in
students' second programing course (CS2). This project seeks to improve methods
for assessing student learning in CS1 and for identifying students who are
likely to be able to succeed in CS2 and later courses. The results of the
project could help advisors and instructors guide CS1 students in choosing an
appropriate educational path. What is learned through this project's research
agenda could apply not just to CS majors, but also to all students who need to
learn about computer programming. Finding effective ways to assess student
preparation may also help address the persistent underrepresentation of women
and other groups of students in the CS major. Objective evidence that a student
is likely to succeed in later courses might encourage that student to persist in
the major, even if the student is not completely confident about being
prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some CS education researchers have recommended
the use of laboratory exams in CS1 as a direct measure of students' programming
ability. In this type of exam, students are asked to write a program in a
closed-lab setting with a fixed time limit and access to a compiler. Other
researchers assert that the primary objective of CS1 should not be to produce
accomplished programmers, but rather to give students mastery of all the basic
programming concepts. Still others suggest that CS1 should foster students'
abstract reasoning abilities and should provide appropriate learning resources
to promote development of more advanced skills. This project will investigate
and provide evidence concerning these different points of view. Students in CS1
will complete a series of programming tasks in a controlled laboratory setting
to assess their programming skills. They will also take written exams that
assess their mastery of fundamental programming concepts and their level of
abstract reasoning ability. The results from these assessments will be compared
with students' subsequent performance in the following CS2 course. Evaluation of
project outcomes will use standard quantitative statistical methods and
qualitative data derived from interviews with selected students. In addition to
performance in CS2, the evaluation criteria will include factors such as
students' perceived levels of test anxiety and their overall pattern of
performance on the various types of assessment. These evaluations will also
consider subgroups of students according to gender, ethnicity, prior programming
experience, and other factors. The results may provide important information
about the applicability and equity of using different assessment methods as a
primary means of measuring student learning of fundamental CS skills. Project
research findings may benefit CS departments across the nation regarding
successful introductory CS courses which foster the talent of a broad spectrum
of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.