* 1820256
* SBIR Phase I:  Continuous Fiber Ceramic Matrix Composite 3D Printing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Ryan Dunn, Mantis Composites
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop the process
to 3D print continuous fiber reinforced ceramic matrix composite (CMC)
components for turbine and combustion engines, hypersonic vehicles, and
satellites. CMCs are currently a $2.5b market that is expected to triple over
the next decade. The ability to produce CMCs with 3D printing will enable
superior designs in current applications, as well as enabling their use in a
greater number of components that are currently limited by the higher density
and lower temperature capabilities of superalloys such as Inconel and Invar.
Developing this manufacturing process will enable more basic materials research
by serving as a lower cost testbed for new CMC compositions since a mold is not
required and turnaround times are much faster. This will also allow engineers to
develop more optimized systems with a faster design cycle. This capability will
result in efficiency increases in turbine and combustion engines for substantial
improvements in fuel efficiency, reducing costs and environmental impact.
Finally, the ability to 3D print CMCs will vastly improve geometric complexity
of high temperature components, which will enable the next generation of
hypersonic vehicles, supporting national defense.

The intellectual merit of this project is in establishing a novel manufacturing
process for CMCs based on 3D printing. Melt infiltration is a low cost method to
produce CMCs, which starts with a polymer matrix composite that is pyrolyzed,
and then infiltrated with a molten metal. The matrix is usually a phenolic
thermoset, but high temperature thermoplastics have recently been proven viable
for simple coupons. This project will use 5-axis continuous fiber reinforced
high temperature thermoplastic composites as green bodies. Since thermoplastics
melt, support materials will be implemented during the pyrolysis step, which are
effective in retaining part geometry. Additionally, a novel process of growing a
boron nitride interphase layer on the fibers after pyrolysis instead of prior to
forming the polymer composite will be implemented since tight corners during
printing might damage an interphase layer. Finally, 3D printing with larger bend
radius silicon carbide fibers instead of carbon fibers will be attempted. This
project will demonstrate the effectiveness of this interphase with improved
flexural strength and toughness, and the ability to form geometrically complex
CMCs that are extremely difficult, if not impossible, to make with other
methods. These two milestones will enable a path to begin developing parts for
customers in commercial applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.