* 1820867
* Studying Special Holonomy Manifolds Using Conformal Field Theory Tools
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Daniel Robbins, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Daniel Robbins at the
University at Albany. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal field theories (CFT's) are
used in physics to describe phase transitions (such as ice melting into water),
or to understand what happens in a quantum theory at very low or very high
energies. CFT's also play a central role in string theory, which is the leading
candidate for a quantum theory of gravity that unifies all of the fundamental
forces of nature. Strings moving in different geometrical spaces are described
by different CFT's that in turn lead to different physical phenomena and
properties. This research program will explore the connections between CFT's,
geometry, and the resulting physical laws. This work advances the national
interest by fostering the progress of fundamental science at the
interdisciplinary boundary between physics and mathematics, and thereby
strengthening fundamental science within the United States. Students, both
graduate and undergraduate, will also be involved in this project, receiving
research training from Professor Robbins and receiving opportunities to present
their work to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level,
this project will apply recently developed CFT techniques to a class of
superconformal field theories (SCFT's) constructed from special holonomy
manifolds. The philosophy and tools of the conformal bootstrap program and the
modular bootstrap program, both of which exploit CFT consistency conditions in
order to derive constraints on the defining data of a CFT, will be used to find
constraints on the geometrical data of a class of manifolds that play an
important role in string theory, and to explore aspects of their moduli spaces
and the physical properties of the corresponding string theory constructions.
The project will also apply recent ideas and tools from the study of CFT defects
to the same class of SCFT's, investigating connections between theories
connected by domain walls, boundary SCFT's, D-branes in the associated string
theories, and the study of mathematical invariants of special holonomy
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.