* 1820902
* Cosmic Strings from Simulation to Observation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ken Olum, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 60,000.00

This award funds research activities of Professor Ken D. Olum in the Tufts
Institute of Cosmology at Tufts University.

Cosmic strings are microscopically thin or even fundamental objects of
cosmological length, which may or may not exist in our universe. Detection of
cosmic strings would provide a window into fundamental physics at energies
beyond the reach of any accelerator. Observation of a cosmic superstring network
could provide a confirmation of the correctness of string theory. In addition to
the bursts of gravitational waves that have recently been discovered by the LIGO
and VIRGO observatories, there is likely to be a "background" of gravitational
waves that is always present. Loops of cosmic strings are one of the sources
that may contribute to this background, and observation of the background is an
important way in which cosmic strings might be discovered. Professor Olum will
study how the shape and motion of cosmic string loops changes during their lives
and how this affects their emission of gravitational waves that become part of
this background. If and when the gravitational wave background is discovered,
this research will help us to distinguish whether it comes from cosmic strings
or some other source, and to determine the properties of the cosmic string
network if it is the source of the background. As such, research in this
direction advances the national interest by further the development of basic
sciences in the United States. Professor Olum will also involve graduate
students in his work and thereby train future generations of research
physicists. This work will also connect studies of the universe with studies of
the fundamental laws of nature.

More technically, Professor Olum will analyze gravitational back-reaction on
cosmic string loops, to see how features such as cusps and kinks are modified by
back-reaction. He will simulate realistic populations of cosmic string loops to
see how their shapes evolve under back-reaction and compute the resulting
gravitational emission spectrum for comparison with observations. He will also
study the velocities acquired by loops in reaction to anisotropic gravitational
wave emission, the so-called "rocket effect".

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.