* 1820051
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon Fiber Composites for Next-Gen Wind Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Michael Segal, Boston Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2019
* USD 218,992.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore a novel
materials processing technology that progresses the state-of-the-art of carbon
fiber composites while leveraging mature and cost-efficient manufacturing
methods. The processing technology of interest produces a material that
approaches the isotropic properties of high-performance metal alloys while
retaining the light-weight and stiffness of carbon fiber composites. Components
that are fabricated from this new composite will have higher impact strength and
reduced susceptibility to delamination, compared to commercially-available
carbon fiber composites. The broader impact of this project includes providing
engineers with a new tool to implement previously unfeasible designs that
drastically improve performance while reducing energy consumption and material
waste. The rapid adoption of carbon fiber composites in the wind energy,
aerospace, and defense industries provides an opportunity for the novel material
developed in this project to disrupt the $25-billion global carbon fiber
composite market. Effective scale-up to industrial production of the novel
carbon fiber composite can revitalize the Massachusetts textiles manufacturing
ecosystem and increase the competitiveness of the U.S. advanced materials
manufacturing base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is the continuous production of a three-dimensionally (3-D) reinforced carbon
fiber prepreg that features a carbon fiber fabric reinforced with vertically
aligned short carbon fibers. This novel material provides a laminated composite
part with dense through-thickness and interlaminar reinforcement. Conventional
carbon fiber laminates lack through-thickness reinforcement and rely on an
unfilled polymer matrix to bind the layers of the laminate together, resulting
in poor impact performance and frequent delamination. This project involves the
roll-to-roll fabrication of 3-D reinforced carbon fiber prepregs and
characterization of the produced composite material. The anticipated result of
the project is the repeatable fabrication of a 3-D reinforced carbon fiber
prepreg with enhanced performance compared to commercially-available prepregs.
Successful completion of this project will enable further scale-up of the
associated manufacturing technology and the commercial-launch of novel 3-D
reinforced carbon fiber prepregs to produce stronger, lighter, and more durable
composite structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.