* 1820930
* New Color Centers in Diamond: Towards Broadband Quantum Memories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Olga Kocharovskaya, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Information technologies are among the main pillars of society, and information
security is becoming more important. One direction for improving the security of
future information systems is to utilize quantum communication lines. Based on
laws of nature, such lines do not allow non-traceable copying of the information
transmitted. But the same physics that makes them secure (i.e. the non-cloning
theorem) also forbids the use of classical repeaters, which in turn limits
communication distance and speed. This issue may be overcome by using quantum
repeaters, the key ingredient of which is a quantum memory device. The aim of
this project is to develop a novel solid-state quantum memory based on quantum
states of color centers in diamond. This project will utilize theoretical and
experimental advances developed at Texas A&amp;M University both for the memory
access protocol and for its physical implementation. This research project will
strengthen the US presence in the field of optical ensemble-based solid-state
quantum memories. It will also help train the next generation of scientists in
this dynamically developing interdisciplinary field of research. Graduate and
undergraduate students will get involved in the investigations through
participation in the experiments, developing theoretical models, programming,
collecting and interpreting experimental data, and numerical simulations. The
investigators will also incorporate the obtained results into
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new color centers, namely,
Germanium Vacancies and Silicon Vacancies in diamond (GeV and SiV) for
pioneering experimental realization of an ensemble based broadband quantum
memory in diamond. This realization will be achieved using a new approach to
quantum memory based on a discrete spatial chirp of a control field that has
recently been suggested by the co-PIs. The outcome of this work, a single-photon
solid-state interface, will be a milestone on the way to a scalable universal
optical quantum computer. In comparison to existing technologies, like rare-
earth doped crystals and nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond (NV), SiV and GeV
have stronger optical interaction and less spectral diffusion (and inhomogeneous
linewidths). The stronger zero-phonon line gives more efficient interaction of a
single photon with a single silicon-vacancy, while a narrow inhomogeneous line
broadening favors ensemble-based quantum memories. Other advantages of GeV and
SiV are the presence of polarization selection rules and large (160 GHz and 50
GHz accordingly) energy level splitting in the ground state. The last one allows
for large storage bandwidth. It is worth pointing out that multi-GHz vs MHz
bandwidth is a key advantage of an optical over RF quantum networks (i.e.
superconducting circuits (SCC)). The only disadvantage of GeV and SiV is a
shorter electron-spin coherence time. However, it has been shown that this can
be dramatically increased, up to 13 ms, by cooling SiV down to 100
mK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.