* 1820999
* FSML:  Skukuza Science Leadership Initiative: Critical Researchers Accommodations in Kruger National Park, South Africa
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Laurence Kruger, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2021
* USD 272,596.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) is a consortium of nearly sixty
universities, colleges and research institutions worldwide, including 41 in the
U.S. The consortium works to advance research and education in tropical systems
and applies scientific insights to enhance policy in the tropics. Since 2003, in
partnership with South African National Parks and the South African non-profit
Nsasani Trust, OTS has been operating research-based education programs for U.S.
and South African undergraduate students in Kruger National Park (KNP), South
Africa. At 19,485 km2, the KNP has a long history of world-class research on
savanna ecology and on adaptive management of ecosystems. The OTS programs
include semester and summer courses as well as summer research experiences. In
2014, OTS received funding from the National Science Foundation and the
Government of South Africa to construct the Skukuza Science Center (SSC), a
research and education facility, including a lecture hall, laboratory and
library, providing critical research infrastructure for international
collaboration between U.S. and South African researchers and students. The SSC
was completed in 2017. The current project provides essential researcher housing
in close proximity to the SSC. It expands opportunities for cooperation and
scientific exchange among U.S. and South African scientists, as well as
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented communities to
engage in scientific research on the dynamics of coupled human-natural savanna
ecosystems. Kruger National Park (KNP) in South Africa has a long history of
world-class research on savanna ecology and on adaptive management of ecosystems
within protected areas. Since 2003, the Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS),
a consortium of nearly 60 universities and research institutions worldwide, has
operated a research-based education program for U.S. and South African
undergraduate students that includes semester and summer courses and summer
research experiences. In 2011 OTS, the South African National Parks (SANParks)
and a local non-profit, the Nsasani Trust, jointly established the Skukuza
Science Leadership Initiative (SSLI), to support research by U.S. and South
African scientists, field-based education and to provide numerous environmental
education programs for the surrounding local communities. OTS and SSLI occupy a
three-acre campus in Skukuza, the KNP's administrative center. Funding from the
National Science Foundation and the Government of South Africa enabled
construction of the Skukuza Science Center on the SSLI campus, consisting of a
dry and wet laboratory, library and lecture hall. The current project enables
OTS to construct of researcher accommodations on the SSLI campus, in close
proximity to the NSF-funded SSC. Four accommodation units, each roughly 55 m2 in
area, will be built from rammed earth and recycled concrete to minimize
environmental impact. The design of the buildings is flexible, housing eight
researchers for short stays (sharing accommodation) or four researchers for
long-stay periods. This will significantly alleviate the shortage of
accommodations for researchers in the KNP and will increase researcher
productivity. The SSLI campus is surrounded by an electric fence to keep out
dangerous animals, so researchers can safely walk from the accommodations to the
SSC 24 hours a day. It expands opportunities for cooperation and scientific
exchange among U.S. and South African scientists, as well as opportunities for
undergraduate students from underrepresented communities to engage in scientific
research on the dynamics of coupled human-natural savanna ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.