* 1820049
* STTR Phase I:  A Mobile Triage Application for Reducing the Risk of COPD Exacerbations
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Sumanth Swaminathan, E-THERA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the reduction of significant disease flare-ups in
patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), increase in patient
quality-of-life, and a reduction of expensive and unnecessary healthcare
utilization. Current at-home care support for COPD patients is often completely
missing or consists of action plans that fail to provide effective,
individualized care. The alternative solution under development in this project
is an easy-to use, personalized mobile application that catches disease
degeneration early, tracks patient health history, and provides decision support
to guide patients to the right medical care at the right time. COPD is one of
the leading chronic conditions driving potentially avoidable hospital
admissions. Pairing a mobile health management app with a smart triage system
that provides instant healthcare guidance has the potential to dramatically
reduce unnecessary COPD hospitalization and provide long-term maintenance
treatment of COPD symptoms. Moreover, an easily accessible, highly accurate,
convenient solution can empower patients to make better health decisions early.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to demonstrate positive impact and adoption
of a mobile triage application for COPD patients. To date, a set of triage
algorithms has been built and validated on simulated patient cases. The
algorithms exhibited performance that is comparable to or better than a panel of
board-certified pulmonologists. The next vital step is to establish the
technical feasibility of a packaged, stand-alone mobile application. This
research will focus on developing a fully featured prototype that is optimized
for adoption, retention, and efficacy. A mix of user feedback and rigorous usage
analysis collected through human testing will provide necessary insights on
barriers to use, missing functionality, and consumer value. Standardized markers
of health safety, symptom escalations, and patient quality-of-life will be used
as metrics of product performance. Moreover, all data and conclusions will be
subjected to peer review through publication and public presentations. As an
additional objective, the accuracy of the algorithmic triage recommendations
will be tested on real patient cases to further validate their accuracy and
effectiveness. The anticipated result of the phase I procedure is demonstration
that the app is safe (objective 1), operationally sound and optimal (phase 2),
and valuable to consumers (objective 3).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.