* 1820958
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Coupling of Multilevel Partial Differential Equation Solvers and Advanced Sampling Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Timo Heister, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2018
* USD 67,915.00

We know today how to simulate many processes on computers, such as air flow
around airfoils or how objects deform when a force is applied. However, from a
practical perspective, it is often desirable to determine to "quantify the
uncertainty" of our predictions, i.e., to be able to say how accurate or
inaccurate a computer simulation is when the inputs are not exactly known. An
example is how an airfoil behaves when the air ahead is turbulent. In these
cases, one needs to simulate many scenarios, an exceedingly expensive
proposition. This project aims to develop mathematical tools to make this
process more feasible and computationally affordable by taking advantage of
multilevel hierarchies in the sampling and solution
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many processes in the sciences and engineering
are described by parameter-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs) whose
numerical solution is expensive. While their forward solution may be feasible,
the computational cost makes it difficult or impossible to statistically
evaluate questions such as (i) to quantify the uncertainty in output variables
given a known or assumed distribution of parameter values, or (ii) to solve the
statistical inverse problem of inferring a probability distribution among
parameters from noisy measurements. Both of these questions are typically
answered through high-dimensional and consequently very expensive sampling
methods. This project will use hierarchical and multilevel decompositions of PDE
solvers, coupled with error estimates, to derive vastly faster methods to obtain
a sufficient number of samples to achieve statistical sampling with prescribed
accuracy. The approach implies that whenever possible, samples and PDE solutions
can happen on coarse, cheap levels of their respective hierarchies, and
expensive solves are performed only when necessary. The combined use of these
hierarchies therefore promises to deliver more, and more informative, samples at
a cheaper cost - thereby enabling applications in the sciences and engineering
that were not possible before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.