* 1820005
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel, Protective Shield to Increase Safety and Efficacy of rTMS Depression Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Hsiu Huang, NeuroPrex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2019
* USD 224,925.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to make non-pharmacological treatment of depression
accessible to all patients. According to the World Health Organization, 350
million individuals are affected by depression. In the United States, depression
affects 16 million people and it costs $210 billion a year in lost productivity
and care for the illnesses related to the disease. Antidepressant drugs are
coupled with negative side effects and they are ineffective in 30% of the cases.
Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) is an FDA approved non-
invasive method for depression therapy that consists in the administration of
short electromagnetic pulses on patient?s scalp to stimulate regions of the
brain involved in mood control. This SBIR Phase I project will help the
generation of a new rTMS system that will improve outcomes of depression
treatment by stimulating deeper brain cells and reducing the incidence of pain
and discomfort associated with current rTMS therapy. The new device will allow
broad distribution of rTMS based therapy for both professional clinicians and,
in the future, home-care settings. It will avoid reliance on drugs to people
affected by depression and it will reduce the impact of depression on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and
demonstrate the efficacy a new wearable rTMS stimulator device. Although rTMS
has a 75% success ratio on depressed patients, 40% of subjects report pain,
headaches and discomfort during therapy with current rTMS systems, resulting in
a high dropout rate. This is mainly due to poor localization of electromagnetic
pulses with commercially available rTMS devices. The new system will combine a
new technology that stimulates the brain?s deepest regions involved in
depression with unprecedented precision and a new protective shield designed to
ward off unwanted heat away from the head, reducing scalp pain and discomfort.
The project will develop and validate the efficacy of these components and their
integration into a wearable helmet. The project will also demonstrate the
superiority of the new device over current gold standard rTMS solutions. The
company expects that this research will lead to the generation of a new device
capable of treating depression patients through precise stimulation reducing
over 40% the unwanted heat, thereby preventing headache and scalp
discomfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.