* 1820540
* Collaborative research: Quantifying the influence of nonconsumptive predator effects on prey population dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 11/22/2017,12/31/2022
* James White, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,591.00

Predators can affect populations of their prey in two ways: by consuming them
("consumptive effects" or "CE"s), or by causing the prey to change behavior to
avoid contact with the predator. For example, prey often spend less time feeding
and more time watching out for predators, which comes with the cost of lower
food intake and thus slower growth. Such "non-consumptive effects" (NCEs) have
been described for a wide range of terrestrial and marine prey species, from elk
to clams, but mostly in short-term (&lt; 1 month) experiments. These prior
results suggest that in some cases, the behavioral changes (NCEs) have a bigger
effect on prey populations than consumption by predators (CEs). However, those
short-term, controlled experiments may artificially inflate the perceived
importance of NCEs. Over longer time periods, prey may adapt or become
acclimated to predation risk, and NCEs may become less important. Additionally,
environmental variability (e.g., differences in the availability of the prey's
food between study sites) may have a bigger effect on prey populations than NCEs
do. This project will use a combination of short- (months) and long-term (years)
field experiments and mathematical models to evaluate the role of NCEs on
Florida oyster reefs. The prey species in this study is the eastern oyster, an
important marine resource in the southeast US for harvesting and habitat
creation; the main oyster predator is a mud crab. In this study, results from
mathematical models of oyster populations will be compared to experimental data
from the field to see whether including NCEs in the model leads to better model
predictions. Better understanding of NCEs in oysters should improve management
of that important marine resource. Furthermore, the mathematical model will be
used to develop broader, generalizable conclusions about the importance of NCEs
that could be applied to other important prey species. This project will provide
data useful for oyster resource management, will support public education
regarding the ecological importance of NCEs, and will enhance the scientific
engagement of underrepresented groups in the study region. The project will
support a partnership with the Guana Tolomato Matanzas National Estuarine
Research Reserve in Florida, including data sharing, sponsoring an oyster
management symposium, and funding the development of multimedia scientific
outreach materials at the reserve that will be used by a large and diverse
population of K-12 students in the surrounding community. The project will train
a postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students, two undergraduate students,
and research results will be disseminated by those students and the principal
investigators at scientific conferences, in journal publications, and in online
content through an ongoing partnership with a Florida public television station.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predators can alter prey population dynamics by causing
fear-based shifts in prey traits (nonconsumptive effect, NCE). The importance of
NCEs for prey populations - relative to direct consumption by predators
(consumptive effects, CEs) - remains uncertain, particularly because short-term
studies of NCEs cannot estimate their effect over multiple prey generations.
This project addresses that knowledge gap by combining short- and long-term
field experiments with population models to investigate the importance of NCEs
on oyster population dynamics in a Florida estuary. The central question is
whether accounting for NCEs improves the ability to predict long-term trends in
oyster population abundance. Several types of NCEs are present in this system:
exposure to water containing predator odors reduces oyster larval recruitment
and causes juvenile oysters to increase shell thickness, reducing their somatic
growth. In addition to CEs and NCEs , environmental gradients in stress, food,
and propagule delivery are also present in this system. Those environmental
factors can have strong effects on post-settlement survivorship, growth, and
recruitment of oysters, so the relative importance of predator CEs and NCEs may
vary along those spatial gradients as well. This project will consist of four
components. (1) A series of short-term field experiments to test how NCEs vary
with predator density and environmental variables, and whether one of the NCEs
(increased shell thickness) actually reduces vulnerability to predators. (2) A
population model, parameterized using experimental results; model simulations
will quantify how the relative importance of NCEs should vary over time, space,
and environmental gradients. (3) A longer-term (3.5 year) field experiment; the
results from this experiment will be compared to model predictions to test
whether accounting for NCEs improves predictions of long-term variation in
oyster population dynamics. (4) A general form of the model will be developed to
broadly investigate the effect of NCEs on non-equilibrium, transient population
dynamics. By combining models and field experiments, this project will bridge
the gap between the theoretical understanding of how NCEs affect population
dynamics and empirical tests of that theory, advancing the field towards the
goal of predicting how multiple interacting factors structure communities.