* 1820240
* SBIR Phase I:  A System for Automating End-to-End Creation of Natural Language Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Ajay Patel, PLASTICITY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,679.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable more efficient access to
information, goods, and services from organizations and businesses through
conversational interfaces. With an estimated 33 million voice-activated devices
installed in the U.S. by the end of 2017, consumers are beginning to see the
benefits of the rise in business services on these devices. Interacting with
computers in natural language is more efficient than ever before, and business
are urgently seeking to include their services on this new modality. Yet, while
advances in machine learning have increased the speed and accuracy with which
conversational interfaces are built, today's solutions still result in major
bottlenecks in the development process. Addressing these bottlenecks would
result in significant savings of time and resources for businesses, in addition
to increased convenience for end users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances the development of machine
learning and natural language processing technologies that will enable rapid
creation of conversational interfaces and increase the efficiency with which
individuals interact with computers. Despite major recent advances in
conversational interface tooling, current bottlenecks in building robust
conversational interfaces still exist, as portions of the development process go
from highly-automated to manually-programmed. Instead, the proposed approach
will achieve end-to-end automation using an innovative LSTM sequence-to-sequence
machine learning model to learn and simulate human behavior on a web page, as
well as a new system for open-domain question
answering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.