* 1820953
* Long Term Human Response To Sea Level Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Mark Golitko, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 167,523.00

Dr. Mark Golitko (University of Notre Dame), with colleagues in Papua New Guinea
(PNG), will conduct combined environmental and archaeological survey on the
north coast of PNG to assess how people living there responded to rapid climatic
and environmental changes during the mid-Holocene period (~7000-3000 years ago).
Coastal dwellers are particularly vulnerable to environmental variability and
natural disasters, for instance tropical storms and tsunamis. Anticipated
increase in environmental variability and rising sea-levels during the coming
centuries place many such communities at risk, increasing the likelihood of
social unrest and potentially large scale migration out of poorer coastal areas.
Predicted climatic changes are analogous to those that occurred during the mid-
Holocene period, when marginally warmer global climate inundated many coastal
areas. The north coast of New Guinea lies along a tectonically active zone with
frequent earthquakes and resultant tsunamis, and is affected by the El Nino-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle, which produces alternating years of drought
and extreme rains. The ENSO cycle intensified during the mid-Holocene at the
same time that developing coastal flats may have supported increasing
populations. At present, people living in coastal areas of the Southwestern
Pacific utilize a variety of risk management strategies, including growing
resilient tree crops such as sago palm, and maintaining wide-ranging social ties
that can be drawn upon in times of need. The proposed research will examine how
people on the north coast of PNG coped with varying levels of ecological risk
during the mid-Holocene period, including the antiquity of tree-cropping, extent
of social networks, and relative human population levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use a combined strategy of soiling
coring and archaeological survey and excavation. Soil coring will establish
changes in environment including evidence of ancient tsunami events.
Environmental indicators from core samples (pollen, charcoal) will be used to
examine relative changes in population levels and the degree of human impact on
forest composition, including the promotion of economic crops like sago palms.
Archaeological survey and excavations in rock shelters and along the edges of
ancient lagoons will examine the intensity of land use and provide evidence for
transport of material culture, indicative of ancient social networks. The mid-
Holocene was a period of increased mobility during which time new ideas and
practices began to widely circulate in the Southwestern Pacific. Results will
indicate how intensely people used the landscape in the context of rapid
climatic shifts, how successful they were at mitigating ecological risk, how
rapidly population grew, and to what extent these ecological changes may have
promoted mobility in the broader Southwestern Pacific. The project will serve as
a test case for anticipated outcomes of climatic and environmental change during
the coming centuries in similar coastal areas. The project will also generate
new ancient climate datasets of use for understanding the ENSO cycle and long-
term patterns of climatic variability, as well as understanding the human role
in tropical forest composition and conservation. Additionally, the project will
provide training to New Guinean archaeologists and US undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.