* 1820721
* Collaborative Research: Investigations in Strings, Fields and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* V Nair, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,000.00

This collaborative award funds the research activities of Professors Sebastian
Franco and V.P. Nair at the City College of the City University of New York, and
Professor Daniel Kabat at Lehman College of the City University of New York.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to further our understanding of nature
at its most fundamental level, tackling questions in quantum field theory (QFT),
gravity, and string theory. Professors Franco, Nair, and Kabat will study the
dynamics of QFT's in various dimensions, a topic of fundamental importance since
QFT's provide a general framework through which physicists study subjects
ranging from the behavior of the elementary particles to the physics of
condensed matter. Professors Franco, Nair, and Kabat will approach this problem
from multiple perspectives, including the use of string-theoretic tools. They
will also investigate the entanglement of quantum states --- a mysterious
phenomenon that has bearing on diverse topics such as quantum computing and
strange new phases of matter. As such, research in these directions advances the
national interest by pushing forward the boundaries of fundamental science
within the United States. This research also has significant broader impact
components. Professors Franco, Nair, and Kabat will actively involve
undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral associates in their
research, providing ideal training to junior physicists entering research in
this field. This research project will also strengthen the close collaboration
between City College and Lehman College. Maintaining a joint research program
has had a positive impact on attracting students to these research areas,
especially from minority and underrepresented groups which constitute a large
part of the student body at both colleges. Professors Franco, Nair, and Kabat
will also continue and expand a broad outreach program that they established in
recent years at City College, building partnerships with several local
institutions which serve underprivileged populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the key objectives of this research can be organized into three
areas: 1) Quantum field theory, its applications and variants including the
Casimir effect, entanglement, noncommutative geometry and gravity, and infrared
behavior of non-abelian gauge theories; 2) The dynamics and dualities of QFT's
in various dimensions, and development and application of novel brane
constructions for these purposes; and 3) String-theoretic investigations into
nonperturbative D-brane instanton effects, reconstruction of bulk physics in the
AdS/CFT correspondence, and holographic cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.