* 1820997
* Collaborative Research: An AGEP Alliance Model to Advance Underrepresented Minority STEM Faculty at Predominately Undergraduate Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Wesley Francillon, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 283,938.00

This Alliance brings together three universities with the goal of developing,
implementing, studying, institutionalizing, evaluating and disseminating a model
focusing on career development for historically underrepresented minority (URM)
doctoral degree students in STEM, who successfully transition into early career
STEM faculty positions at predominately undergraduate institutions (PUIs), or
who enter postdoctoral STEM scholar positions and then transition into early
career STEM faculty positions at PUIs. The AGEP PUI Alliance works with URM
doctoral degree students, postdoctoral scholars and early career faculty to
provide them with mentoring, professional development training, and the teaching
pedagogy skills necessary to succeed in academic faculty positions. The AGEP
Alliance model work is through partnerships between Stony Brook University - The
State University of New York (SUNY), Suffolk County Community College - SUNY,
and Farmingdale State College - SUNY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance was
created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks
to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and
success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific
STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Transformation
Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement and study, via integrated
educational and social science research, models to transform the dissertator
phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement,
and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or
STEM education research careers. While this Alliance is primarily funded by the
AGEP program, additional support has been provided by the NSF INCLUDES program,
which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for
inclusive change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate
and full professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year
colleges and universities, and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. The AGEP PUI Alliance has the potential to
advance a model to improve the success of URM early career STEM faculty in PUIs,
which ultimately leads to improved academic mentorship for URM undergraduate
students in STEM at community colleges, two-year academic institutions, and
other PUIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the research components of the Alliance
investigates the role of self-mindset beliefs versus perceptions of others'
mindset on dissertating students' success and engagement; assesses the specific
role of mentor mindset versus mentee mindset on relationship quality and mentee
engagement outcomes; and explores change over time in psychosocial engagement
among doctoral students through their work on dissertation development and
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP PUI Alliance will work with an
assessment team at the Center for Advanced Study of Education, at the City
University of New York's Graduate Center, to conduct formative and summative
evaluations. They will also engage an Executive Board of institutional
administrators and leaders, as well as an external Advisory Board. The boards
will provide feedback to the Alliance team and suggest adjustments to the
project's management, to the research, and to the model development,
implementation, testing, evaluation, dissemination, sustainability and
reproduction potential. The boards will also provide input about how the
Alliance work impacts institutional policies and practices to advance URM early
career faculty in their academic STEM careers at PUIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.