* 1820631
* Workshop: Present and Future Theoretical Frameworks in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Horacio Rotstein, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2023
* USD 95,000.00

One important goal of the Brain initiative has been the development of novel
neurotechnologies, which together with the technologies that have been developed
in the recent past will provide vast streams of experimental data in the coming
years. The potential flood of data and experimental advances makes the need to
develop the appropriate theoretical frameworks that spam across scales, systems
and species imperative in order to frame and ask key questions that advance our
understanding of brain function in action and in context. This proposal requests
funds for the organization of the workshop on Present and Future Theoretical
Frameworks in Neuroscience. The workshop will take place in San Antonio, TX. An
interactive format based on discussions and working groups during this activity
will help identify key theoretical questions and develop experimental frameworks
with a long-term vision to incorporate new tools, their capabilities and the
data they will produce to advance neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
multi-day workshop will bring together a diverse group of scientists, a mix of
young faculty and trainees (graduate students and postdocs) along with leading
theoretical and experimental neuroscientists in a variety of fields to provide
the necessary "cross-generational" perspective for the proposed activities to
have an impact that persists in time. The discussions are expected to guide
experimental and theoretical neuroscience research towards the understanding of
brain function across interacting levels of organization (e.g.,sub-cellular,
cellular, microcircuit, complex networks), scales (spatial, time) and range of
species. The participation of a scientists from a broad variety of universities
and research institutes across the nation is expected to provide the necessary
geographic representation and diversity for the workshop to succeed in its goals
and recruit the best people and ideas for future endeavors. A key dissemination
platform will be the production of a podcast to ensure the ideas discussed at
the workshop reach the broader community and bring the discussion to a more
general level of participation. Efforts will be made to secure the participation
of members of underrepresented minorities in neuroscience and for the broad
dissemination of the workshop outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.