* 1820614
* Donor Electron Spins in Direct Bandgap Semiconductors for Quantum Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 428,725.00

Quantum information networks are expected to enable breakthroughs in computation
for optimization problems, encryption-breaking, and materials simulation, as
well as realize fundamentally secure communication. Quantum defects in crystals
have been shown to exhibit some of the characteristics needed to realize a
scalable quantum network; however finding a system that simultaneously exhibits
all of the requisite optical and quantum properties remains challenging. Based
on promising preliminary results, single donor defects in zinc oxide (ZnO) may
satisfy these criteria. This project is to demonstrate single ZnO donor creation
and detection with complete control and characterization of the donor electron
and nucleus. The goal is to determine the outlook of this system for scalable
quantum information applications. In addition, the study of single donor
impurities in ZnO may lead to new techniques for studying dopants in
semiconductors and will train a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students in quantum optics and nanotechnology, preparing them for careers in
national laboratories, industry, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defect-based
quantum information processing is attractive due to the potential for device
integration, the possibility of spin-photon transfer, and the long quantum
coherence time in high-purity crystals. For defect systems with optical
radiation, measurement-based protocols can be utilized to create quantum
networks between non-interacting, remotely separated qubits. This project will
investigate a defect system with favorable optical properties, i.e. the donor
system in ZnO, which has homogeneous optical transitions and near-unity
radiative efficiency in the zero phonon line. Prior studies in an ensemble of
donors showed the potential for long coherence times of the donor system if
isotopically purified ZnO crystal is available. Here, different techniques will
be utilized to isolate single donors: growth of single ZnO nanowires with small
diameters, and nano-scale masking or focused ion beam etching combined with
epitaxial ZnO layers of low donor density. The isolation of single donors will
be confirmed by a photon autocorrelation measurement. Optical pumping and
microwave pulses for high-fidelity coherent control will be used to study the
optical and spin (electron and nuclear) coherence properties of single ZnO
donors, testing the suitability of this system as a qubit candidate. Due to the
effective mass nature of the donor, it may be possible to generalize the quantum
properties found in ZnO to the entire class of donors in direct band gap
semiconductors, furthering the impact of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Quantum
Information Science (QIS) Program in the Physics Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP)
Program in the Division of Materials Science in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, and the Electronics, Photonics and Magnetic Devices
(EPMD) Program in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
Division in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.