* 1820971
* The AGEP Alliance State System Model to Transform the Hiring Practices and Career Success of Tenure Track Historically Underrepresented Minority Faculty in Biomedical Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Michael Scott, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 317,879.00

This collaborative research brings together five public universities with the
goal of developing, implementing, studying, evaluating and disseminating a state
level AGEP Alliance model to increase the number of historically
underrepresented minority (URM) tenure-track faculty in the biomedical sciences.
This AGEP Alliance model represents a state system approach to recruiting and
training URM postdoctoral fellows and transitioning them into tenure-track
faculty positions. In addition to providing professional development and
mentoring for a group of 16 URM postdoctoral fellows and early career faculty,
this AGEP Alliance also addresses institutional URM faculty hiring and
advancement policies and practices. This AGEP Alliance model work is through
partnerships between the University of Maryland Baltimore County, Salisbury
University, Towson University, the University of Maryland College Park (UMCP),
and the University of Maryland at Baltimore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance
was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks
to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and
success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific
STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Transformation
Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement and study, via integrated
educational and social science research, models to transform the dissertator
phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement,
and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or
STEM education research careers. While this Alliance is primarily funded by the
AGEP program, additional support has been provided by the NSF INCLUDES program,
which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for
inclusive change. The ADVANCE program also provided support for this AGEP
Alliance model work, and the ADVANCE program embraces three goals that are
relevant to this Alliance model's development, implementation and testing: To
develop systemic approaches to increase the participation and advancement of
women in academic STEM careers; to develop innovative and sustainable ways to
promote gender equity that involve both men and women in the STEM academic
workforce; and to contribute to the research knowledge base on gender equity and
the intersection of gender and other social identities in STEM academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM achievement gap
between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our universities
and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM faculty who serve
as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn from, work with
and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate and full
professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges
and universities, and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most research-
intensive institutions. This AGEP Alliance's state system approach is advancing
a model to improve the success of URM early career biomedical sciences faculty,
which ultimately leads to improved academic mentorship for URM undergraduate
students in STEM and innovative biological science research to benefit our
nation's security, economic progress and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integrated research component, led by UMCP's KerryAnn O'Meara examines how the
intersectionality of race, ethnicity and gender shape the experiences of
candidates for assistant professorships, and the evaluation of those candidates
by reviewers. Institutional faculty hiring practices, processes and procedures
are also being studied to better understand how they advantage or disadvantage
some candidates over others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AGEP Alliance state
system model is engaging institutional leadership and external advisory boards,
which will provide feedback to the team and suggest adjustments to model
development, implementation and testing, as well as efforts for institutional
transformation and sustainability. Staff at Westat will provide formative and
summative evaluations. The dissemination plan includes article submissions to
peer-reviewed social science, academic career diversity, and disciplinary
education and research journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.