* 1820747
* Topological Fermionic Quantum Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* James Whitfield, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 385,000.00

Quantum physics has the potential to expand computer power in industrially and
economically significant ways. Just as computers have become an integral part of
people's lives, quantum computation is likely to become equally impactful in the
long term. The path to this grandiose goal needs achievable milestones along the
way, and quantum simulation provides many such stepping stones. However, to take
advantage of quantum computation for simulating matter, new tools and methods
must be developed to map model systems of fermions (e.g. electrons and certain
nuclei) onto quantum computers. This project will develop models that
incorporate topological ideas that aid qubit-based quantum computers to simulate
the fermion systems found throughout chemistry, physics, and materials science.
The nature of topologically inspired fermion-to-qubit mappings opens new
possibilities for simulating electronic structure on the qubits of a quantum
computer. This allows local addressing of information that is stored non-locally
which helps to simplify the algorithms for quantum simulation. The goals of this
project include designing and implementing new algorithms that can be tested on
early quantum hardware and incorporated into open-source code collections. The
outcomes of this project will serve the broader scientific community by
introducing tools that will be incorporated into rapidly developing quantum
technology on the path to outpacing traditional computers. This project also
include efforts to increase the inclusion of underrepresented groups in science
and technology by inviting female freshmen and sophomore interns in conjunction
with the Women In Science Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the long-
term goal to understand how best to utilize a quantum computer, the Topological
Fermionic Quantum Simulation project aims to flesh out topological quantum
simulation algorithms. The central hypothesis of this work is that topological
approaches can enhance the efficiency of quantum simulations. This hypothesis
has been formulated based on this team's preliminary findings demonstrating
benefits for fermionic encodings based on locality of the encoded spin operator.
The proposed work has three major directions. The first delves into automation
and implementation of the Bravyi-Kitaev Super-Fast model and explores its close
connections to the toric code. The second area is to consider auxiliary fermion
methods where additional modes are included to reduce the locality of the spin
operators. Third, group theoretic approaches to black box simulation are ripe to
explore and integrate with this growing area of quantum simulation. There are
two cross-cutting themes that overlap with all branches of the project: local
basis set design and benchmarking with numerical tools and with existing quantum
hardware. The basis sets play a vital role in determining the efficiency and
accuracy of any simulation while actual implementations provide metrics for
success. Extension of quantum simulation algorithms based on topology has the
potential for an immediate impact on the use of quantum computers. Additionally,
this project opens questions about the nature of fermions, provides insights
into the limitations of simulating them, and informs the requirements for the
quantum simulation path to quantum supremacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics Experiment
program in the Division of Physics and the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry (both Divisions are
in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences) as well as the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (NSF EPSCoR
program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.