* 1820038
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial conversion of pectin-rich agricultural waste into specialty chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Luke Latimer, ZestBio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of yeast fermentation technologies
that enable conversion of sugars abundant in pectin-rich agricultural waste into
useful specialty chemicals. The U.S. is a leading producer of pectin-rich
agricultural wastes including citrus peels (&gt;5 million tons annually), sugar
beets (&gt;37 million tons annually), and grape pomace (&gt;1 million tons
annually). These peel and pulp byproducts lack value, however, the proposed
technologies developed in this project will allow for significantly higher
valued products to be produced from these waste streams. The initial target
chemical product is used as a chelator in cleaning products and a precursor to
plastics. Other chemical products potentially may be produced using this
platform. Implementation of this fermentation process offers a lower carbon
footprint and emissions compared to petroleum or even other sugar-derived
products, and has impact in reducing waste and combating climate change. When
implemented at scale, these fermentation processing plants will be co-located
with rural agricultural processing plants, adding high-tech jobs in these areas,
and offering a means to de-risk historically volatile crop harvests by accessing
alternative markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
engineer yeast strains capable of converting sugars in pectin-rich agricultural
wastes into valuable specialty chemicals. Currently, the fermentation rates for
utilizing the primary sugar in pectin, D-galacturonic acid, limits production of
these chemicals, including the proposed first product, which is a biodegradable
metal chelator. Previous characterization has identified that uptake of the
pectin sugars by a transporter as the limiting step. Accordingly, the first
objective of this proposal is to characterize this class of transporter to
identify new transporters with improved rates. The second objective is to
improve the best transporter through protein engineering. Using this improved
transporter, the final objective will assess the cellular energy requirements
for the fermentation process using bioreactors to control fermenter conditions,
as product synthesis and transport is energy-demanding. If successful, this
project will enable production of specialty chemicals from pectin-rich
agricultural waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.