* 1820485
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Specific Flex-Hinge Antibody-Like Checkpoint Inhibitors for Safer and More Effective Cancer Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Daniel Capon, Hinge Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2019
* USD 224,455.00

This SBIR Phase I project introduces a new design for antibody-based therapeutic
molecules. The generally rigid arms in Y-shaped conventional antibodies are
replaced with flexible and extendible linkers attached to binding domains that
are smaller than those found in conventional antibodies. This new design allows
multiple therapeutic targets to be bound at once, with greater binding strength
and fewer off-target effects than was previously possible. This project will
remake two of the most successful cancer drugs of the last decade, creating
improved versions of each. In addition, a new molecule combining the
functionality of both will be produced. If this project is successful, it may
improve the treatments available for many kinds of advanced metastatic cancer,
especially melanoma and lung cancer. Though the current focus is on cancer, the
method described here may improve or combine the performance of many therapeutic
antibodies; this project is just the first demonstration. The potential long-
term impact of this SBIR Phase I project may extend throughout the
pharmaceutical industry, representing a significant commercial opportunity and a
milestone of applied biological research.

This project introduces a novel drug design that improves on monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs). It uses a chemical assembly method that joins immunoglobulin
Fc domains to small, single-chain fibronectin binding domains through flexible,
extendible, non-peptidyl linkers. The resulting flexible drug molecules benefit
from two-handed cooperative binding, in which both domains are able to bind a
disease target or targets simultaneously. They thus achieve higher binding
affinity and target selectivity than mAbs, while also being smaller and easier
to manufacture. These molecules can also be mono- or bispecific as needed. This
project will produce flexible monospecific and bispecific molecules against the
targets of the two most successful checkpoint inhibitors in current cancer
immunotherapy. This project encompasses chemical synthesis, verification of
binding stoichiometry, in vitro measurements of binding affinity to both
purified protein and target cells, and cellular assays of both checkpoint
inhibition and bispecific binding. It sets the stage for pre-clinical animal
studies of these cancer drugs, and showcases a molecular design that could be
used to improve most antibody therapies in the broader pharmaceutical market.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.