* 1820795
* Particle Theory for LHC Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Nikolaos Kidonakis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Nikolaos Kidonakis at
Kennesaw State University.

This research project concerns theoretical particle physics that is relevant to
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which has been the highest-energy particle
collider in the world for many years. By colliding protons with protons at high
energies at the LHC, physicists expect to learn more about the fundamental
particles of matter and their interactions at higher energies and smaller
distances than have ever been previously explored. The top quark is the most
massive elementary particle that has been discovered, with many unique
properties, and thus it is a central part of the physics program at the LHC. The
Higgs boson is the particle responsible for generating masses for all of the
other elementary particles, and the determination of its properties is a high
priority. Professor Kidonakis will improve theoretical predictions for top-quark
production, Higgs production, and other processes by performing state-of-the-art
calculations. As such, this research will advance the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the
discovery and understanding of elementary particles and the search for new
physics. This project is also expected to have significant broader impacts.
Professor Kidonakis will involve students in his research, and thereby provide
critical training for junior physicists beginning research in this field. The
project will also strengthen physics education and research at Kennesaw State
University and the wider region. Professor Kidonakis will also continue to speak
at conferences and remain active in outreach activities to the wider community
and the public at large.

More technically, the objective of this research project is to develop
formalisms that can improve theoretical predictions for cross sections and
differential distributions for various processes at the LHC, including top-quark
production, Higgs production, and other processes in the Standard Model and in
models of new physics. High-order corrections, including collinear and soft-
gluon corrections, will be calculated for differential and total cross sections.
Resummations will be derived for three-particle final states in various
kinematics, thus greatly extending current methods. Theoretical calculations of
soft anomalous dimensions will be performed to three-loop accuracy. These
calculations are important for precision studies of the top quark, for
understanding the Higgs boson and electroweak physics, and for the search for
new physics at the LHC. The project will also advance the state-of-the-art in
perturbative calculations. The inclusion of soft and collinear corrections is
necessary to improve the accuracy of theoretical predictions for LHC physics.
Differential distributions, including double-differential distributions in
transverse momentum and rapidity, are very important because they are sensitive
to new physics. Resummations for processes with three or more particles in the
final state are also needed to improve theoretical predictions, in particular
for processes that involve top quarks and Higgs bosons. The results of the
project will therefore be important in making state-of-the-art predictions for
various processes, for the interpretation of data from the LHC and the search
for new physics, and for understanding the top quark and the Higgs boson. The
results of this research will be widely disseminated through publication in
refereed journals and presentations in international conferences and workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.