* 1820290
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Biofabrication of Next Generation Materials for High Performance Water Filtration
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Justin Whiteley, Emergy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2019
* USD 221,176.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the introduction of an environmentally-beneficial
filtration material and corresponding high performance, and long-lasting point-
of-use water filter. The competitive advantages of the product are increased
treatment efficiency, longer service life, and sustainable production at a
similar price point to commercial products. The biofabricated advanced media
filter results in sophisticated material properties and higher consumer value at
a lower overall cost. The success of this Phase I project has potential for far
reaching commercial impacts beyond consumer water filtration. By demonstrating
the consistency of the metal impregnated filter material, commercial
applications could be extended to the fields of emissions control, energy
storage, and chemical production. In each of these fields, including water
filtration, the new filter material would be replacing unsustainable materials
derived from coal and coconut. These existing materials have significant
environmental impacts associated with their production and transportation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposed to use the efficiencies
of biological organisms to produce high performance, economical, and sustainable
materials for premium filtration applications. To achieve this goal, a
biofabrication process has been developed that involves the controlled
cultivation of fungi serving as a template for the production of advanced
activated carbon. This bioprocess allows for precision control over the chemical
and physical properties which can be easily customized for targeted
applications. Using the process of bioaccumulation and biosorption, the fungi
can be functionalized simultaneously with nitrogen heteroatoms and biogenic
metals/metal oxide nanoparticles. These in-situ functionalities greatly improve
material performance, extension of water filtration service life (2X over state-
of-the-art), whilst reducing overall energy consumption during manufacturing.
While this process has been demonstrated on the gram production basis, the
technical hurdles in this Phase I include scaling production to the kilogram
level, providing critical material validation testing, and prototyping of a
final consumer product. To execute these goals, growth conditions will be
optimized in scaled bioreactors, industrial testing methodology will be
employed, and a simple, yet high value water filtration device will be
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.