* 1820849
* Quantum Computing with CS Atom Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 590,000.00

Quantum computing is being explored using several implementations for quantum
bits (qubits) including: ions, superconducting Josephson junctions, quantum
dots, photons, nitrogen vacancy centers in diamonds, and neutral atoms. Each
candidate qubit has its strengths and weakness. This project will pursue several
important steps towards scalable quantum computation with atoms. Neutral atoms
trapped in optical lattices can be well-isolated from their environment, so they
have relatively long coherence times, which is an essential feature for qubits.
Trapping atoms with light presents a straightforward path for putting many
qubits in the same system. This team has recently demonstrated high fidelity
quantum gates involving single atoms, and has trapped exactly one atom at each
of 50 lattice sites. This team will work to measure qubit states without
particle loss. This team will also investigate ways to make the trapped atoms
colder, which might enable new ways to entangle these atoms using collisions.
Using improved methods to control and cool atoms, this team aims to dramatically
improve the state of the art for entangling neutral atoms. Entanglement is an
essential feature of quantum mechanics. For instance, if two identical particles
can each be in either state A or B, they can be in the entangled state AA+BB,
which means that the particles are in a superposition of both being in A or both
being in B, while there is never one in A and the other in B. These highly non-
classical states are central to the working of quantum computers. This is
important because a quantum computer with &gt;50 qubits could solve certain
kinds of problems that are otherwise unsolvable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team
will develop experimental techniques needed for a neutral atom quantum computer
using cold atoms in a 3D optical lattice with 5 micron spacing between the
lattice sites. They recently demonstrated perfect filling of 4x4x3 and 5x5x2
arrays, and the ability to perform single qubit gates at any site with 0.997
gate fidelity and little cross talk. For part of this grant period they will
develop a new technique for measuring qubit states by coherently splitting atoms
based on their internal states, and then locking them in place with a shorter
length scale optical lattice. In this way their location encodes their initial
internal state, which will allow them to distinguish atom loss from other
errors. By dynamically switching to a deeper lattice, they will also attempt to
improve atom cooling beyond the current situation with 90% of the population in
the 3D vibrational ground state. If they can achieve better than 99%, it will
open up the possibility of creating massive entanglement with a few collisions,
which might allow for the realization of one-way quantum computing. While
pursuing the above goals this team will work on demonstrating a novel form of
two-qubit Rydberg gates, using a combination of ultraviolet and microwave
photons. Adapting principles from their 3D addressing for one-qubit gates, they
will explore ways to achieve site addressed fidelities comparable to the one-
qubit gates. This would make a better quantum computer platform, and set the
stage for more fully realizing the scalability potential of cold atom
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.