* 1820332
* SBIR Phase I: TerraSentia: Ultra-compact, Autonomous, Teachable Under-canopy Phenotyping Robot for Plant Breeders and Crop Scientists
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Chinmay Soman, EarthSense, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Broader Impacts: The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) project include improving food security, while at the same time enhancing
the economic viability and environmental sustainability of large-scale
production agriculture. In order to improve crop varieties, agricultural
production, and sustainability of farming, there is an urgent need for better
technologies to acquire under-canopy plant trait and health data. Examples of
high-value under-canopy data include emergence, stem width, corn ear height,
plant life-cycle events like flowering and fruiting, and symptoms of pathogens,
diseases, and nutrient deficiency. Because these data cannot be obtained by
aerial imaging, under-canopy data collection has dramatically greater
actionability and value compared to aerial data. However no cost-effective,
scalable ways of collecting this data are currently available. In fact, the
state of the art is manual data collection by crop scientists (and their
students or interns), agronomists, crop-scouts or farmers - an extremely labor
intensive, and therefore expensive way of collecting this highly valuable data.
Our work will greatly enhance the availability of under-canopy data from field
crops. The commercial value of the field data for crop breeding is in excess of
$50 Million/year for breeding major row-crops in the US.

Intellectual Merits: This SBIR Phase I project will demonstrate the technical
feasibility of autonomously collecting under-canopy data from field crops using
TerraSentia, our low-cost ground robot. In preliminary work, we have built the
robot hardware, demonstrated its ability to collect high-value plant data from
row-crop fields, and analyze it to generate plant-trait information. In the
proposed work, we will enable and demonstrate the ability of TerraSentia to
collect data autonomously throughout the season. We will demonstrate the
technical feasibility of fusing information from low-cost LIDAR, GPS, and
vision. We will also demonstrate the feasibility using real-time control
algorithms to adapt camera perspective and robot path in order to obtain the
highest quality information from the complex and dynamic under- canopy field
environments. These high-risk innovations will together enable long-term
deployment of TerraSentia for effective data collection and phenotyping,
benefiting crop scientists and agricultural product development professionals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.