* 1820885
* Dynamics of Entanglement in a Trapped Ion Quantum Magnet
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

One of the most important goals of modern quantum sciences is to learn how to
control and entangle many-body systems and use them to make powerful and
improved quantum devices, quantum materials and quantum technologies. The
overall goal of this project is to develop protocols that will quantify the
build-up of quantum correlations and the storage of quantum information in a
crystal of trapped ions. The research effort can be placed in the context of
quantum simulation: First, theory will guide experiments in regimes where
theoretical predictions can be made and used to benchmark experiments. Next,
experiments will be done in regimes where the dynamics are inaccessible to
current theoretical methods. Finally, these experiments will push the theory and
enable the development of new numerical methods capable of reproducing the
observed dynamic. These investigations will be foundational to a new generation
of synthetic quantum materials, not necessarily limited to trapped ions, with
applications ranging from precision sensing and navigation to quantum
communication and quantum information science. Moreover, the investigations will
train and provide research experience to a graduate student and a postdoc. They
will work with the NIST/Boulder experimental ion trap group and the theory
groups at JILA and the University of Colorado at Boulder, and thus will be
exposed to a highly collaborative atmosphere that will promote advances in
quantum information science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
work is to develop new methods capable of describing the dynamics of quantum
correlations and entanglement in trapped ion crystals. These numerical and
analytic methods will be used to benchmark and guide the NIST-Boulder
experiments where hundreds of cold beryllium ions are confined by a Penning trap
in a two-dimensional triangular lattice geometry. In these experiments the spin
degree of freedom is encoded in two hyper-fine states of the ions and the
collective vibrational modes of the crystal, excited by laser beams, used to
generate highly tunable long-range spin-spin interactions. By combining improved
numerical techniques with better experimental protocols this team will push
trapped ion experiments into a regime where they are able to create highly
correlated quantum states and profit from the quantum advantage of these states
for enhanced sensing and quantum information processing. These are challenging
goals, but the synergy of interests and abilities of the investigators, with
expertise spanning quantum optics, condensed matter physics, and theoretical and
experimental atomic physics, will allow this group to delve into a broad range
of problems motivated by the promise of new quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.