* 1820074
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Assessment of Water Quality, Harmful Algal Blooms, and Toxins from Distributed, Networked Sensor Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* scott gallager, CoastalOceanVision, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project extends from years of research into the impact of
Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs), and yet there is still no direct, field assay for
toxic cells. The identification of HABs is critical to determine their patterns
of occurrence, to protect water and food supplies, and to alert the general
public when there is a problem. Harmful Algal Blooms are a world-wide fresh
water, brackish water and marine phenomena that occur in every coastal and
inland country and annually cause significant economic damage and take human
lives. The detection of HABs and their toxins is currently completed by complex,
expensive, and time consuming microscopic analyses that do not necessarily
provide the critical and timely information that water quality mangers require.
Raman spectroscopy provides a strong and distinct fingerprint of HAB cells and
their toxins without the need for sample preparation, and can be used on-site at
beaches, drinking water reservoirs, or within distributed networks of Raman
sensors all communicating through the cloud to provide managers immediate and
spatially distinct information on the presence and concentration of potentially
toxic cells.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop and market an in-situ 3D
microscope with on-axis Raman spectroscopy to provide both morphological
information and a chemical signature for identification of HAB cells to species,
and in some cases specific strains, along with the presence and concentration of
toxin on a per cell basis. The novel technical specifications include: 1) the
use of Light Field (LF) microscopy to maximize the depth of field to allow for
detection of low cell concentrations (< 1 cell/ mL). LF microscopy also provides
a 3D image for more complete and accurate morphological assessment of cells and
particulates, 2) Advanced software for color and texture feature extraction and
classification of cells using Gabor wavelets and a novel color angle feature,
which provide 100% classification accuracy in many cases, 3) the use of
Resonance Micro-Raman Spectroscopy (RMRS) to collect spectral fingerprints on
the inorganic and organic content of cells, particulates and dissolved
compounds, and 4) the integration of these technologies into sensor packages as
part of the IoT cloud computing thrust that is sure to gain traction over the
next few years, and will provide regional protection of both large and small
drinking water reservoirs, globally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.