* 1820886
* Collaborative Research: The AGEP California Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) Alliance to Increase Underrepresented Minority Faculty in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Carol Genetti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,264,017.00

This AGEP Alliance brings together four Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) in
California (CA) with the specific goal of developing, implementing and testing a
model for creating a more diverse STEM faculty, which is broadly replicable
across the nation in HSI institutions. The AGEP CA HSI Alliance model focuses on
pedagogical training and faculty career mentoring to prepare historically
underrepresented minority (URM) doctoral students, who are at the stage in their
training where they are completing their dissertations, for teaching-focused
faculty careers at colleges and universities. While the model work is through
partnerships between UC-Santa Barbara, UC-Merced, CSU-Fresno and CSU-Channel
Islands, the project is creating a model that will be applicable in other states
with multi-tier systems, as well as the UC and CSU
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance was created in response to the NSF's
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about
models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of historically
underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP
Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement and study,
via integrated educational and social science research, models to transform the
dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs
in STEM and/or STEM education research careers. This Alliance is also funded by
the NSF's Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance model is targeting processes for
developing, implementing and testing faculty career mentoring and instructional
trainings, including: (1) a summer institute for students to learn pedagogical
practices for CSU curricula and classrooms; (2) a pairing of CSU faculty members
with UC doctoral students to mentor them on discipline-specific teaching
strategies and goals; (3) a semester-long teaching fellowship to incorporate
research, assessment, and service-learning opportunities into CSU classrooms;
(4) assistance with transitions to postdoctoral fellowships, when necessary, as
part of the preparation for a teaching faculty position; and (5) networking and
social support from the AGEP cohort and program while the URM doctoral students
complete their dissertations and enter the STEM academic faculty
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component is investigating the
attitudes and assumptions of Ph.D. students and faculty members regarding
pursuing faculty positions at non-research-intensive institutions. It is
assessing career goals of URM and non-URM STEM doctoral students, as well as
STEM faculty values and norms regarding their students' careers. It is also
examining the perceptions of faculty normative beliefs held by doctoral students
at UC campuses. Framed in terms of social norms theory, the research is
comparing the degree to which doctoral students' perceptions of faculty members'
views match the faculty's own stated views and norms regarding career choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP CA HSI Alliance team will work with external
consultants at SmartStart Evaluation and Research, to conduct formative and
summative evaluations. They will also engage an Executive Board of UC and CSU
administrators and leaders, as well as an external Advisory Board. The boards
will provide feedback to the Alliance team and suggest adjustments to the
project's management; to model development, implementation, testing,
dissemination, and sustainability; to the mechanisms for replication and
reproduction; to the evaluation; and to the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.