* 1820688
* Collaborative Research: A Combined Geophysics-Mineral Physics Approach To Investigating The Mid-Lithosphere Discontinuity Within A Stable Continent
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gary Egbert, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2022
* USD 55,446.00

In stable continents worldwide, a substantial velocity decrease has been
detected at about 100 km depth (varying depending on region) and at an expected
temperature of about 1000 degrees C. This decrease in velocity of roughly 3-5%
or more, is called the mid-lithosphere discontinuity (MLD). The lithosphere
(hard rocks) of a stable continent is expected to be old, and cold, therefore
observations of a geological wide-spread discontinuity in seismic velocity
internal to the lithosphere is puzzling. This has led to a variety of different,
often contradictory, explanatory models for a wavespeed drop within stable
lithosphere, e.g., partial melt, anisotropy, sub-solidus rheology transitions,
and chemical stratification. This project will evaluate these proposed causative
models against new geophysical and geological constraints, using EarthScope
data, laboratory experiments and computer modelling. The project will focus on
(1) variation in elastic and anelastic properties and electrical conductivity
across the MLD, (2) a global presence of the MLD, regardless of geological
history, (3) laboratory studies of the influence of water (hydration) on
properties of rock that could cause the velocity to increase, and (3)
composition and textures of mantle xenoliths, samples of solid mantle rock that
hitch a ride with rising magma. This project will engage early career
scientists, Ph.D. students, and undergraduate students. The project will also
promote EarthScope's education and outreach goals, by presenting the science
results and research opportunities at the IRIS minority recruitment speaker
series and the Nifty Fifty science lectures to K-12 educators and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1) extend the seismological
observations using new receiver-function estimates and Bayesian methodology that
can quantify the magnitude of anisotropy and the sharpness of the velocity drop
over a more extensive footprint of seismic stations; (2) acquire measurements of
surface wave amplitudes and Pg reverberation coda to identify whether there is a
peak in attenuation around the MLD depth; and (3) jointly integrate
magnetotelluric (MT) conductivity estimates with new mineral-physics and
seismological constraints, to identify the presence of melt or hydration across
the MLD. The investigators will focus the study on the stable Precambrian North
American Craton, which was covered by the second half of the lower-48 deployment
of the EarthScope Transportable Array. The project will also involve new lab
experiments on how water influences grain-boundary mobility in mantle rocks. An
improved understanding of the MLD is crucial for relating EarthScope results to
the evolution of continents. The extension of the seismological observation and
its integration with MT and mineral physics is a unique approach that will
provide new insights into the origin of the MLD. These new strategies for
processing seismic data and integrating MT data with seismology and mineral
physics will be useful to the general geophysical community. With this
interdisciplinary hypothesis-testing approach, the investigators propose to
obtain a better understanding of the cause of the MLD that will extend the
initial studies of USArray data to the structure and evolution of the North
American continent, and by analogy, to other
continents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.