* 1820760
* Investigations in High Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Adam Leibovich, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 480,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Ayres Freitas and Adam
Leibovich at the University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of
their research, Professors Freitas and Leibovich aim to develop improved
theoretical tools and calculational methods for the robust interpretation of
results from current and future particle-physics experiments, both at the
highest-energy colliders and at dedicated experiments searching for dark matter.
In particular, they will develop advanced techniques for identifying a
potentially small new physics signal --- an endeavor that requires an extremely
precise understanding of known particles and interactions. Furthermore,
Professors Freitas and Leibovich will investigate the phenomenological
implications of various types of dark-matter models, with particular attention
to scenarios that will be extremely difficult to probe in most search
experiments. To constrain these models, it is therefore crucial to combine
laboratory searches with constraints from astrophysics and cosmology. As such,
research in this area advances the national interest by fostering the
development of basic science within the United States and expanding our
knowledge of fundamental physical laws. This project will also involve educating
several PhD students and a postdoctoral researcher in cutting-edge calculational
and analysis tools. Professors Freitas and Leibovich also plan to work closely
with astrophysicists and high-energy experimentalists to develop new search and
analysis strategies that will aid in the search for new physics and improve the
precision and theoretical robustness of our present understanding. Professors
Freitas and Leibovich will also help to organize workshops and summer schools to
disseminate results from modern research to a larger audience of students and
young researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research program
of Professors Freitas and Leibovich can be divided into three main parts: (1)
The development of calculational techniques for higher-order corrections to
electroweak precision observables which are relevant for planned future e+e-
colliders as well as for several low-energy precision experiments currently in
development at Jefferson Laboratory and the MESA accelerator; (2) The
application of effective field theories, in particular Soft-Collinear Effective
Theory, for production of jets at the Large Hadron Collider, fragmentation of
partons into hadrons, and new physics signatures; and (3) An investigation of a
varied class of dark-sector extensions of the Standard Model, including light
weakly coupled messenger fields that could be more efficiently probed with non-
traditional experimental setups rather than at high-energy colliders. This
research plan is guided by ongoing and planned experimental particle-physics
efforts, and results will be made available to the experimental community in a
suitable form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.