* 1820807
* Proposal to Support Student Travel for the ACM SOSR 2018 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Yaoqing Liu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The Symposium on SDN Research (SOSR) is the premier venue for research
publications on Software Defined Networking (SDN), building on past years'
successful SOSR and HotSDN (Hot Topics in Software Defined Networking)
workshops. SOSR 2018 will be held in Los Angeles on March 26- 27, 2018. As in
2017, SOSR will be co-located with the Open Networking Summit (ONS), providing
opportunity for industry and academia to jointly explore and debate recent
developments related to all aspects of SDN. This conference will enable
interaction among the academic and industrial attendees of these two events
focused on research and development of SDN. This award support ten US-based
students to participate in the symposium. The conference can provide students
with a unique opportunity to interact with senior researchers and expose them to
cutting-edge research topics and progress in the field. In addition, SOSR,
sponsored by Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), is unique in its
emphasis on interactions among networking researchers and industry practitioners
from multiple countries. Attending SOSR presents an excellent opportunity for
U.S. students to connect with the thriving international research community.
Furthermore, SOSR 2018 will include demo and poster sessions that allow students
to present and obtain feedback on their work in progress. The travel support
will enable students to attend both the main conference and the demos and
posters sessions. These ten students would otherwise be unable to attend the
conference. The investigator is the travel grant chair and is committed to
encouraging the participation of women and under-represented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. The SOSR conference has developed into a top-tier international
conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their
breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical perspective. Women and other
minorities will be encouraged to participate and thus will particularly benefit
from the attendance. With National Science Foundation travel grant support, SOSR
conference will help bring new blood to the vibrant SDN
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.