* 1820827
* CDS&amp;E: Structure-Aware Representation Learning Using Deep Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiuyuan Cheng, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In recent years, deep neural networks have been widely applied to analyze Big
Data produced in various fields of science, industry and society. In the area of
signal processing, deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is one of the most
successful computational models, with numerous applications including visual
object recognition, object detection and localization. Despite the wide success
of deep networks, the data representation computed by these models does not
necessarily reflect the geometric information in the input data in an
understandable way; a gap remains between the remarkable performance of deep
models and the interpretability of such performance. In particular, deep
networks trained from enormous amounts of data typically have no specific
structures in the model parameters, which also leads to significant redundancy
in the model. This project will investigate the mathematical foundation for
imposing appropriate structures in deep networks, aiming at more analyzable and
efficient network models with theoretically guaranteed performance. The results
will have direct applications in various machine learning tasks, improving the
accuracy, computational efficiency and interpretability of existing models. The
theoretical analysis to be developed will deepen the mathematical understanding
of deep networks, which is important for the next generation of computational
tools for machine learning. Students engaged in the project will be trained in
an interdisciplinary environment of mathematics and electrical engineering,
developing skills in both analysis and software implementation, which benefits
their future careers in academia or industry. The project will also train future
mathematicians and electrical engineers through course development, especially
courses on machine learning and image sciences with public online repositories.
The project explores the new possibility of representation learning using deep
networks, a tool with immense potential to address key challenges in today's Big
Data analysis and artificial intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to develop novel mathematical analysis of the deep Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) model, as well as innovative designs of CNNs with
appropriate structures based on the analysis. Specifically, the PIs will study:
(1) the geometric structures in the channels of the convolutional layers, with
which the CNN representations can collaboratively and explicitly encode
geometric information in the data with improved interpretability and robustness;
(2) the spatial structures of the convolutional filters, by which the filter
regularity can be analytically imposed so that the CNN representations can be
provably stable to input variations; and (3) efficient software implementation,
which transfers the theoretical results into applications such as object
detection and image segmentation in computer vision. The PIs will use tools from
harmonic analysis and approximation theory to address the following open
problems in the field: the removal of redundancy in trained CNN filters in a
principled way while avoiding under-fitting, the more efficient learning of
invariant representations with respect to geometrical transforms in the data,
and the theoretical guarantees of the deep representations learned by an
adaptive network that is trained from data. The new mathematical understanding
will guide the design of deep networks to achieve better performance, in
accuracy and computational speed, and better interpretability of the learned
data representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.