* 1821241
* Online Spatiotemporal Filtering and Bayesian Topology for Tracking in Dynamically Designed Sensor Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Vasileios Maroulas, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This project focuses on the problem of predicting threats' trajectories in
realtime designed sensor networks. Sensor networks facilitate the collection of
information in different environments. The quality of this information relies on
the design of the network, which in turn is associated with the network's
coverage and online predictability. Indeed, sensor networks are prone to
threats, which are quite spatiotemporally unpredictable, and if they are not
detected and monitored promptly, they may have a devastating socioeconomic
impact.

This project engages homological techniques with data assimilation to (i)
establish a novel method for online designing a sensor network whose coverage is
queried in real time, and (ii) predict trajectories of spatiotemporally dynamic
objects moving in the network using an innovative sequential empirical Bayes
scheme. The coverage of the network is verified within a new probabilistic
setting in the space of persistence diagrams by computing their distribution.
Assimilating the collected data and estimating the parameters associated with
spatiotemporal uncertainty in the network, the real-time design is derived as a
function of the underlying posterior filtering distribution, related to the
threats' underlying motion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.