* 1821566
* Combining Project-based Learning, Citizen Science, and Authentic Research to Enhance the Success of STEM and STEM Education Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Kate Muir Welsh, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2021
* USD 674,991.00

This project at the University of Wyoming will engage multi-disciplinary teams
of undergraduate STEM and STEM education majors in designing meteorological
experiments. They will then launch these experiments into near space on high-
altitude balloons in collaboration with K-12 teachers and students in Wyoming.
The undergraduate students will be in their second and third years of college,
when students are most likely to leave STEM. It is expected that providing them
with authentic, hands-on experiences will build the skills and confidence of
both STEM and STEM education majors in their chosen field. Students will work in
teams on a real project, effectively bringing together education and practice
for both groups of students. The project integrates interdisciplinary teams of
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows to develop activities that will engage
K-12 students in authentic meteorological research. The project has the
potential to be transformative for the participating students, since they will
be engaged in active learning, will learn by teaching one another and younger
students, and will work in teams made up of scientists, engineers, and
educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project strength is its combination of
project-based learning, citizen science, entrepreneurial or experiential
learning, and peer teaching. Through this project, students will learn team
building skills, problem-solving skills, and STEM collaboration and
communication skills by interacting with K-12 teachers and students. The project
team will assess undergraduate student learning through a combination of proven
and new assessment tools, compare student learning gains to a control group, and
track students longitudinally as they progress through their degree and into the
workforce. The project will also work with K-12 teachers and students across
Wyoming, including those from schools on the Wind River Reservation. A large
part of this project involves the development of scientific payloads that will
be designed, built, and sent into near space by undergraduate students working
closely with postdoctoral research fellows. The possibility exists that
something developed in this process might have patent or technology transfer
potential. Therefore, each year the postdoctoral research fellows and
undergraduate students will participate in a workshop with University of
Wyoming's Business Resource Network, which includes the Wyoming Technology
Transfer &amp; Research Products Center, to learn about entrepreneurship,
resources, and competitions on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.