* 1821936
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Kentucky:  Center for Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Subba Palli, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2024
* USD 607,199.00

The development of new pest management approaches is critical for the production
of sufficient food for the increasing human population, and for prevention of
arthropod-transmitted disease to plants and humans. The more widespread pest
distribution associated with changing climatic conditions exacerbates the need
for new pest management tools. The economic losses associated with the
activities of arthropods and nematodes are a significant burden to society
through both agricultural losses and human health costs. The Center for
Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech) addresses issues that limit
effective management of the major insect and nematode pests that impact
agriculture and human health. The center addresses the need for specific
knowledge and research tools to expedite delivery of pest management solutions
by industry partners to the marketplace, and to investigate both new approaches,
and expansion of existing approaches for pest suppression. The major limitations
in the field are common to the agricultural biotechnology and urban pest
management industries and restrict widespread adoption of strategies shown to be
effective in some systems. The center contributes key advances through state of
the art, industrially relevant research and by training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers including underrepresented groups, toward continued
advancement of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMTech serves as a platform for
innovative, interdisciplinary research activities at the interface of academia,
government, and industry. Expertise in entomology and other departments at the
University of Kentucky include insect physiology, genomics, population genetics,
vector biology, and symbiosis. The research needs of industries in the
agricultural biotechnology and human health domains align well with the
expertise of university participants providing for the expedited development of
pest management solutions to the benefit of agricultural sustainability and
public wellbeing. Advanced methods including next-generation sequencing and
-omics, confocal microscopy, RNA interference and genome editing are employed to
conduct non-competitive research of crucial importance to the industrial sector.
The research products are transferred to member companies through quarterly
reports and presentations at bi-annual IAB meetings and to the public in the
form of publications and presentations at conferences. Fundamental knowledge
gained from center research on mechanisms of RNA interference, insecticide
resistance, toxicological effects of insecticides, physiological processes of
pests and disease vectors facilitate R&amp;D efforts of industry and expedite
the development of new products for pest and disease vector
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.