* 1821047
* A next generation instrumented buoy for Lake Annie, Archbold Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hilary Swain, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 181,897.00

Archbold Biological Station (Archbold www.archbold-station.org) is a biological
field station in Florida dedicated to long-term ecological research and
education. Archbold owns and manages a globally significant scrub preserve
including the beautiful 90-acre, Lake Annie. Studies of Lake Annie are
recognized globally for providing insights into the history of lakes in the
southern USA (40,000-year sediment record), long-term (30-year) ecological and
chemical sampling, and a moored buoy (since 2008) with sensors measuring
chemical and physical conditions at the lake surface. This NSF award will
support deployment of a new "next-generation profiling buoy" equipped with many
more sensors (climate, oxygen, pH, algae and chlorophyll, temperature, water
color, light, heat, solar radiation, and CO2) than Archbold's old buoy. Most of
the new sensors will be "profiling", or constantly moving up and down, gathering
data from the lake surface to the bottom of the lake at 67'. For deep lakes,
like Lake Annie, continuous data from top to bottom are critical to measure
features such as the "metabolism" of the whole lake, or how much energy (growth)
is occurring (such as plant or algae production) versus energy loss such as via
respiration. Lake scientists, especially those engaged with the Global Lakes
Ecological Observatory Network or GLEON, plan to combine Lake Annie data with
data from other lakes around the world, allowing them to answer questions such
as how lakes of different sizes, latitude, and surrounding land use are
responding differently to changing conditions. The new Lake Annie buoy will
provide research and education opportunities for visiting scientists and college
classes, training for graduate students and interns, online data and remote data
access, as well as a new module for Archbold's K-12 program, and expanded
offerings for public programs including citizen science, lake association
groups, science-arts events, and public seminars. A new interpretive sign will
be installed at Lake Annie as well as increased sharing of lake science via a
new video, Archbold social media, and enewsletters,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will deploy a next generation,
highly-instrumented profiling buoy at Lake Annie, a significant upgrade from the
existing old buoy. The extensive (2 million record) Lake Annie buoy dataset is
already available online via CUAHSI and this award will further expand
Archbold's ability to deliver data for collaborations in lake science,
especially with the Global Lakes Ecological Observatory Network GLEON. Lake
scientists around the world plan to conduct analysis, synthesis, and modeling
using Lake Annie data. Two new sondes and associated sensors will allow for
continuous profiling of D.O., pH, total algae and chlorophyll, temperature,
conductivity, fDOM, and light, as well as surface measures of meteorology, heat
fluxes, solar radiation, and CO2. The new instrumentation will expand Archbold's
role in cross-lake studies in areas such as: (i) lake metabolism by adding new
measures of CO2 and D.O profiles; (ii) controls of high frequency variance in
algal production and colored organic material by adding depth-resolved
fluorescence sensors in a low-chlorophyll, oligotrophic humic end-member lake;
(iii) spatiotemporal environmental heterogeneity in controlling our highly
spatiotemporally variable phytoplankton dynamics, a feature of subtropical
lakes; and (iv) climate and physical modeling through new measurements of
mixing, heat flux, and solar radiation. The new buoy will also allow more
flexible maintenance, enhance access to real-time data, and expand Archbold's
role linking field stations with lake research networks such as GLEON and
NEON.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.