* 1821185
* Commutative Subalgebras and Bethe Ansatz for Quantum Affine and Toroidal Algebras via the Shuffle Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Oleksandr Tsymbaliuk, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2019
* USD 52,856.00

This research project lies in the intersection of three fields of mathematics:
algebraic representation theory, integrable systems, and geometric
representation theory. The former two branches of mathematics originate from
physics, while the last deals with applications of purely algebraic concepts to
geometry. Representation theory concerns the study of symmetries of a vector
space such as our three-dimensional space (more generally, an infinite
dimensional space) with additional structures. These symmetries can be often
thought of as algebraic structures. The following two cases are of particular
interest: (1) the case of pair-wise commuting symmetries, when sufficiently many
exist, is of central importance in the study of integrable systems; (2) the case
when the underlying vector space arises from geometric objects is of central
importance in geometric representation theory. In this project the principal
investigator plans to explore these concepts in the particular cases of algebras
known as quantum toroidal algebras and affine Yangians. These associative
algebras can be viewed as deformations of Lie algebras and provide
generalizations of the classical quantum affine algebras and Yangians that have
been studied extensively in recent decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is devoted to the study of quantum toroidal algebras and affine Yangians. The
PI's plan is as follows: (1) Develop shuffle realizations of all quantum
toroidal/affine algebras of ADE type. (2) Unify all known different
constructions of their representations and provide a wider class of shuffle type
modules. (3) Study the maximal commutative subalgebras of quantum toroidal
algebras via the shuffle realization, and develop a new (shuffle) approach to
the well-known Bethe ansatz problem, concerning diagonalization of such maximal
commutative subalgebras in interesting classes of representations. (4) Relate
the aforementioned maximal commutative subalgebras to the study of quantum
cohomology and quantum K-theory of Nakajima quiver varieties and affine Laumon
spaces. (5) Generalize all the above to the additive case of affine Yangians.
(6) Study quantizations of the shift of the argument algebras corresponding to
all vertices of the "degeneration" rhombus and describe the relation of these
algebras to the right hand sides of the KZ equation and Casimir equation rhombi.