* 1821199
* NSF Conference Grant to Support the 2018 Ciliate Molecular Biology Meeting; July 17-22, 2018, Washington, D.C.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Chad Pearson, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,997.00

This award will support early career researcher attendance at the 19th
conference on Ciliate Molecular Biology, which will be at the American
University campus in Washington D.C. on July 17-22 of 2018. The format of the
meeting is a combination of talks and posters, which will promote scientific
exchange in both formal and informal settings. One session is devoted to
undergraduate research talks and another session is devoted to the integration
of ciliate research and teaching. A workshop between sessions focuses on the
professional development and mentoring of early career scientists. There will be
ample opportunity for sharing the latest research results and for
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference participants use ciliates as
models to investigate diverse questions in cell biology, molecular evolution,
structural biology and nucleic acid biochemistry. The structure of the meeting
provides both breadth and depth to the scientific communications. The objectives
of the conference are the following: (1) support and mentor early career
scientist; (2) encourage interdisciplinary research; (3) integrate research and
education focused science; (4) develop and share technical innovations; (5)
develop community resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.