* 1821342
* Learning Geometry for Inverse Problems in Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Stacey Levine, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 116,803.00

The quantity of digital image data our society relies on for medical, military,
and a wide range of engineering and scientific applications continues to
increase, yet digital images still typically exhibit some level of degradation
during formation, transmission, and storage, often obscuring vital information.
Despite significant advances in the fields of image processing and computer
vision, this problem still persists due to the difficulty in accurately modeling
random degradations such as noise, pixel loss, and blur. The main objectives for
this project are to learn critical geometric and higher order image features for
accurately solving a variety of inverse problems in imaging, including image
denoising, image deblurring, image inpainting (filling in of missing data), and
super-resolution. The new algorithms developed in this project are expected to
yield improvements over existing algorithms in the form of standard image
quality metrics as well as in the preservation of accurate, fine details, a
feature missing from many current state of the art image processing algorithms,
yet vital for automatically interpreting this image data in practice.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In recent work the PI and collaborators have developed several
frameworks for image denoising that attempt to recover an image from a denoised
geometric feature of the image. These approaches have successfully improved upon
existing state of the art denoising algorithms, providing information in the
reconstruction that has been elusive using alternate approaches. The challenge
in working with this geometric data is that while it is very robust in practice,
mathematically sound mechanisms developed for handling natural image data do not
necessarily apply to their geometric features. This project involves learning
geometric descriptors from image data that have suffered from some combination
of the aforementioned random and/or linear degradations for the purpose of
aiding in image reconstruction, analysis, and interpretation. Preliminary
analyses and experiments indicate that the benefits of this approach could be
significant, yet computationally intensive experiments are required to explore
how best to exploit these benefits in practice. Theoretical analyses of these
models will be an important part of this project as well, in order to better to
understand when these models are guaranteed to be reliable in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.