* 1821916
* RAPID:  Biogeochemical effects of fire ash deposition to the coastal ocean, in response to the 2017 Southern California fires
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2020
* USD 109,990.00

Massive wildfires in coastal regions cause ash to fall into the ocean, with
unknown impacts. Ash contains chemical elements and materials that can encourage
the growth of microscopic organisms in the surface ocean. The Thomas Fire has
burned over 240,000 acres in southern California since Dec 4, 2017. The winds
have carried a plume of smoke, ash and soot more than 1000 km over the Santa
Barbara Channel. The intellectual merit of this RAPID project focuses on the
impact of fire ash supply to coastal ocean ecosystems, by studying the 2017
Thomas Fire. This is achieved through a combination of experiments and
environmental measurements, including an oceanographic expedition to the
affected area aboard the R/V Sally Ride. The broader impacts of this award
include the shipboard training of more than twelve graduate students as well as
providing insight as to effects of the Thomas Fire on the coastal
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive wildfires can couple terrestrial ecosystems
to coastal ocean ecosystems through depositional and runoff processes. The
Thomas Fire, which began on Dec 4, 2017, has burned over 240,000 acres and the
persistent offshore winds created a plume of smoke, ash and soot that extended
over 1000 km off shore. This unfortunate circumstance provides an opportunity to
investigate the impact of ash deposition on the coastal ocean. This research
entails a series of incubation experiments and measurements designed to assess
the impact of fire ash deposition on the biogeochemistry of the coastal ocean.
Specifically, the research tests the hypothesis that the deposition of wildfire-
derived particulate matter to the coastal ocean impacts the planktonic
communities of the upper water column, providing nutrients that facilitate
blooms of phytoplankton, leaching dissolved organic carbon to surface waters
that feeds heterotrophic bacterial populations, and serving as a source of
sinking particulate matter that feeds heterotrophic bacterial populations deeper
in the water column. These hypotheses are tested through a series of experiments
at sea and in the home laboratories, and through shipboard measurements and
analysis of samples collected from impacted waters.