* 1821815
* Theory-Guided Discovery of Tin-Based Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Alexey Kolmogorov, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 354,105.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research to advance theory-guided discovery of new materials through
rapid search of the large space of chemical compositions. The central aims of
this project are to perform a systematic screening of tin alloys and develop a
library of neural network-based interatomic potentials for an extended set of
chemical elements. The neural network models will be used to accelerate the
search over possible structures at the level of atoms. Research into tin alloys
has attracted renewed interest due to their potential to display novel physics
and next-generation functional features. Finely tuned tin-based topological
insulators could find future use in spintronics, quantum computing, and
thermoelectric materials which can generate electricity from heat. High-capacity
tin-based electrodes with improved durability could make batteries cheaper and
safer. Carefully optimized tin-based solders may reduce the use of toxic lead-
containing materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes educational
activities to attract young students and members of underrepresented groups to
scientific research. The PI will contribute a new theme to Binghamton
University's Physics Outreach Program for middle school students, develop a set
of hands-on presentations on neural networks for undergraduate students, and
recruit students from different majors enrolled in Binghamton University's
Evolutionary Studies program to carry out interdisciplinary undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports computational and theoretical research to advance theory-guided
discovery of new materials through rapid search of the large space of chemical
compositions. The PI will focus on the systematic study of tin-based materials.
The work is motivated by the remarkable richness of the tin alloys' structural
and electronic properties enabling their use as topological insulators, battery
anodes, solders, and more. The main challenges associated with the study and
development of tin alloys lie in the complexity of their structures and the
diversity of their bonding mechanisms. These factors limit the scope of ab
initio-based study and the accuracy of classical potential-based modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to demonstrate that the efficiency and
reliability of materials prediction can be improved considerably by: (i)
screening a large materials class with a suite of diverse search strategies, and
(ii) using emerging neural network methodology for modeling interatomic
interactions to accelerate the search. For the comprehensive sampling of the
configuration space of structures and compositions, the research team will rely
on a combination of high-throughput, evolutionary, and rational design searches.
Identification of new tin-based wide-gap topological insulators, durable battery
anodes, and stable lead-free solders will advance knowledge in several areas of
basic and application-driven research. For the systematic construction of
reusable neural network models, the research team will use a recently developed
stratified training procedure enabling a natural extension of libraries to
larger sets of chemical systems. The neural network models will be freely
available as a part of the group's open-source MAISE package. This effort will
promote the development and application of emerging machine learning methods in
materials research. The scientific work will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities which will foster the interest of the next generation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.