* 1821284
* Co-production of scientific knowledge and the building of local archeological capacity in Greenland.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jette Arneborg, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 850,261.00

This project builds upon prior NSF-supported work to understand the interactions
of humans, landscape, seascape, and climate in the region since humans occupied
Greenland. The work is given additional urgency as there is rapid loss of once
well-preserved organic remains due to rising soil temperatures and accelerated
coastal erosion. The work will directly build local Greenlandic capacity so that
the key Greenlandic partner, Greenland National Museum and Archives (NKA) can
improve long-term site management preserving the ability to study these and
other sites in the future. The threat extends to all periods and extends to
cemeteries and structural ruins. New laboratory studies making use of stable
isotopes, trace elements, and ancient DNA demonstrate the value of
archaeological sites as a "distributed observing network of the past" for
collaborative interdisciplinary socio-environmental research. This work
contributes to a long-standing relationship developed in 2004 between the US,
Greenland, and Denmark to advance common projects and encourage cooperation
across a diverse range of policy areas including science, culture, and the
environment. Greenland has shown particular interest in projects that develop
knowledge about its cultural past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will work
closely with the Greenlandic hosts and other international partners to rescue
urgently endangered archaeological sites, gather a wide range of paleoecological
data, and collaborate with modern communities eager to save their heritage while
co-producing knowledge and participating directly in global change science. The
project will excavate three Norse cemeteries to recover human remains that now
produce dietary evidence (i.e., nitrogen and carbon stable isotopes, dental
calculus analysis), evidence of migration from Iceland (e.g., strontium
isotopes) and family relationships (via ancient DNA). The project will also
excavate animal bones, insects, wood remains, and artifacts from stratified
Norse middens at three sites that still retain organic preservation. Expanded
site survey using drones and mapping GPS, coring of lake and bog deposits for
pollen, insects, and macrofloral remains, professional medial documentation to
produce education and outreach products, and an expanded geo-archaeology program
to assess Norse field and farm management strategies are all part of the
project. A key element will be the engagement of early career students and
professionals and the close collaboration with schools and local residents
focused upon the early Moravian mission and settlement site of
Alluitsoq/Lichtenau, which was a major center for cross-cultural contact and the
development of a distinctive Greenlandic culture in the 18th- early 20th
centuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.