* 1821286
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Predictive Modeling and Data-Driven Closure of Chaotic and Noisy Dynamics in Discrete Time
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kevin Lin, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,998.00

From the human brain to the electric power grid, scientists and engineers
increasingly depend on large-scale computer models to understand, predict, and
even control complex dynamical systems. However, these models often reflect the
complexity of the systems they represent, and require supercomputers or large
computing clusters to run. For many tasks of modern scientific computing, this
can represent an impediment. For example, when estimating the values of model
parameters based on physical measurements (a critical step in using a model to
make predictions), it is necessary to run a model many times. Even with ever-
increasing computational power, this may be time-consuming. This project studies
computational and mathematical techniques for constructing simpler models that
nevertheless capture key features of more complex models, so that tasks like
parameter estimation can be done more efficiently. The algorithms resulting from
this research are expected to be applicable to a wide range of scientific and
engineering problems. This research project is also expected to be a good
training vehicle for young scientists in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project concerns a discrete-
time approach to model reduction for high-dimensional chaotic / noisy dynamical
systems. The primary aims are (i) to develop a general mathematical framework
for discrete-time model reduction, focusing on enabling both short- to medium-
range forecasting as well as reproducing selected long-time statistics; (ii)
adapting the general methods to handle specific types of dynamical systems that
arise in practice, e.g., chaotic, noisy, etc.; (iii) apply the methodology to
model reduction and data-driven modeling problems in specific biological and
physical applications. As many dynamical systems of interest in contemporary
science and engineering consist of a large number of degrees of freedom
interacting across spatial and temporal scales, detailed first-principles models
may not provide a practical basis for tasks like uncertainty quantification,
parameter / state estimation, and optimization. Moreover, for many such systems,
our knowledge of pertinent facts and principles are incomplete. Reduced models
that capture the essential dynamics without resolving all degrees of freedom are
thus of practical utility. They are also of great interest in their own right,
as good reduced models leave out irrelevant details and often contain useful
insights into the phenomenon at hand. This project draws on diverse ideas from
applied probability, dynamical systems, and statistical physics, and provide
ample opportunities for training mathematical scientists for the mastery of
these tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.