* 1821243
* Collaborative Research: New Statistical Learning for Complex Heterogeneous Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ji Zhu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 110,000.00

This project focuses on several important and challenging issues concerning
complex heterogeneous data that arise from medical imaging and social networks.
The major goals are to develop powerful and innovative statistical machine
learning methods and tools that are able to flexibly model signal heterogeneity
across images, integrate imaging data with multimodal and spatially distributed
data, and tackle heterogeneity of network data. The integrated program of
research and education will have significant impacts in many different fields
such as biomedical studies, genomic research, environmental studies, public
health research, and social and political sciences, among others. The project
will also stimulate interdisciplinary research and collaboration with scientists
from disparate fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to
substantial advancement in heterogeneity learning and modeling through
exploiting individual variation from the general population, and integration of
multiple sources of imaging information to enhance prediction accuracy for
disease diagnoses and treatment outcomes. In addition, this project develops
innovative unsupervised learning methods through utilizing node covariate
information for analyzing heterogeneous network data. Each component of the
research plan contains a broad range of topics, from methodological and
computational development to applications in real world problems. Specifically,
the PIs study subject-variant scalar-on-image regression models to incorporate
the heterogeneity variation for brain imaging data, multi-dimensional tensor
learning methods for breast cancer imaging data, flexible Gaussian graphical
models for network data, and a novel clustering framework for heterogeneous data
that are linked by networks. Furthermore, the development of advanced
optimization techniques, algorithms and computational technologies will be
applicable to many practical problems arising from large-scale heterogeneous
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.