* 1821962
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: Predictable Wireless Networking and Collaborative 3D Reconstruction for Real-Time Augmented Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 08/31/2017,09/30/2020
* Hongwei Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 550,371.00

Eliminating the line-of-sight constraint of human vision and machine vision, the
developed network systems foundations of predictable wireless networked and 3D
reconstruction will enable 'see-through vision' which will transform the ways
humans and engineered systems interact with environments and thus have far-
reaching impact on domains such as road transportation, public safety, and
disaster response. This project develops the network systems foundation for a
vehicle equipped with sensors and an augmented reality display to indicate the
presence of other nearby vehicles hidden by obstacles. In collaboration with
Wayne State University (WSU) police and Ford Research and leveraging the WSU
living lab and the OpenXC open-source platform for connected vehicles, the
project will take an integrated approach to the research, deployment, and
dissemination of the wireless network systems for see-through vision. This
project proposes a cross-layer framework for addressing physical-domain
uncertainties and the interdependencies between wireless networking and 3D
reconstruction, and it develops novel algorithms for predictable wireless
networking and real-time wireless networked 3D reconstruction. Using the
developed network system, this project will develop a see-through vision
application for human-driving. The wireless networked see-through vision system
will be deployed in the WSU police patrol vehicles, and the project team will
outreach to the Detroit and State of Michigan police as well as open-source
communities for broad adoption and deployment of the see-through vision
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the bold objective of eliminating the line-of-
sight constraint of human vision and machine vision, this project addresses
wireless networking and 3D reconstruction challenges in a holistic cross-layer
framework. By integrating research investigation with systems development and
deployment, this project will make the following significant contributions: 1)
Effectively leveraging multi-scale physical structures of traffic flows, the
multi-scale approach to resource management in vehicular wireless networks not
only ensures predictable vehicular wireless networking, it also transforms
fundamental challenges of vehicular networks to ones similar to those of mostly-
immobile networks, thus enabling the exploration of fundamental, generically-
applicable principles and mechanisms for predictable wireless networking; 2) the
multi-scale approach to joint scheduling, channel assignment, power control, and
rate control enables predictable control of per-packet transmission reliability
in the presence of fast-varying network and environmental conditions such as
wireless channel attenuation, internal and external interference, data traffic
dynamics, and vehicle mobility; 3) the real-time scheduling algorithm enables
controllable exploration of real-time capacity regions for system-level
optimization; 4) the collaborative 3D reconstruction model integrates visual
sensors in a divide-and-conquer fashion, and it enhances the capability of
networked vision as well as its robustness to physical uncertainties; 5) the co-
design of collaborative 3D reconstruction and wireless networking permits
adaptive communication capacity allocation to optimize the quality of 3D
reconstruction; 6) the attention-aware see-through vision application creates a
new research field of vision augmentation by uniquely integrating computer
vision and computer graphics research and by proposing a practical solution for
displaying augmented 3D vision.