* 1821721
* Increasing Retention of Veterans in Engineering and Science Through Student Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Djuradj Babic, East Los Angeles College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,676,028.00

Project SERVES (Success, Engagement &amp; Retention of Veterans in Engineering
and Science) aims to provide participating student veterans with the skills
needed for successful careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. Almost half of undergraduate student veterans enroll in a community
college after separation from service. However, veterans are considerably under-
represented in STEM. In this project, East Los Angeles College (an HSI community
college) and the University of California Los Angeles (a research university)
will collaborate to offer a coordinated series of classroom performance
interventions, internships, and counseling that focus on understanding and
meeting veterans' needs. By evaluating effective practices to increase
engagement and retention of student veterans, this project has the potential to
model a way for other postsecondary institutions to meet the needs of student
veterans and their transition into civilian STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project SERVES is designed to broaden participation of
veterans in STEM careers. The project will use three assessments, developed by
the Center for Community College Student Engagement, to track multiple
benchmarks of student engagement. Many veterans possess unique strengths as
potential college students, including commitment, strong work ethic, discipline,
accountability, and teamwork. Veterans may also have undergone highly
specialized technical training in a Military Occupational Specialty. However,
veterans face challenges that may be compounded when they encounter traditional
STEM education. Research indicates that confidence levels, curriculum overload,
STEM faculty teaching styles, and inadequate advising/counseling are responsible
for poor retention of STEM students, including veterans. SERVES will pilot and
disseminate results of their research, which will assess the effectiveness of
STEM student engagement strategies. This program may provide a replicable model
for increasing the success of community college?s in recruiting and retaining
student veterans in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.