* 1821852
* Using Virtual Humans in 360-degree Immersive Digital Sites to Practice Communication Skills within Complex Spatiotemporal Contexts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2022
* R. Raymond Issa, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Direct observation of professionals and communication with them in real-life
environments is a beneficial experience for students in engineering fields
ranging from aeronautical to chemical and construction engineering. Although in-
person site visits can be arranged to achieve this objective, the visits present
significant logistical and safety challenges. In addition, financial, legal, and
time constraints are inherent in organizing site visits, especially for
educational institutions and faculty. One alternative is to use virtual reality
to provide students with immersive digital learning experiences that are close
to real life, but that do not have the expense and constraints of in-person
field trips. In this project, the University of Florida will explore this novel
paradigm in construction engineering instruction. The goal of the project is to
teach construction engineering using an immersive digital environment called
iVisit, which features virtual human professionals working collaboratively with
students on virtual construction sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide engineering students with the opportunity to navigate the complex, data-
rich environment of a construction site at which they can interact with virtual
human professionals, engineering structures, and equipment. Students will
observe design challenges and communicate with virtual human professionals to
better understand and resolve those challenges. A quasi-experimental and
qualitative educational research design will compare the impact of virtual site
visits to in-person site visits. These results are anticipated to generate
knowledge about the impact of this immersive virtual environment on student
learning, communication, and spatio-temporal skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.