* 1821220
* CDS&amp;E: Statistical Methodology for Analysis and Forecasting with Large Scale Temporal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* George Michailidis, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,999.00

Technological advances have enabled the collection of large, complex data that
evolve over time. Such data also exhibit heterogeneity across multiple entities
(e.g. countries, patients) and on many occasions are sampled collected) at
different frequencies. Hence, there is a strong need for developing and
tailoring data analysis techniques to the specific requirements imposed by the
presence of temporal dependence across multiple variables and also address
varying sampling frequency and heterogeneity issues. The statistical learning
models, and associated analysis methods developed in this project would be
applicable across a wide range of fields, including analysis and forecasting
with macroeconomic and financial data and in neuroscience. Empirical work based
on the work of this project would provide insights on functional connectivity of
brain regions, but also quantify the degree of heterogeneity of subjects
suffering from a common disease. They would also be useful to policy makers and
financial regulators for devising monitoring schemes that assess stress
conditions across markets. Further, we expect significant technology transfer to
other application areas, such as environmental sciences where similar types of
data, characterized by heterogeneity and mixed frequency sampling, are
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenges of temporal
dependence, heterogeneity and varying sampling frequency in the data this
project would: (i) develop and investigate Bayesian versions of Vector
Autoregressive (VAR) models for high-dimensional time series data, based on
novel prior distributions, (ii) introduce structured sparsity in VAR models and
also incorporate exogenous variables, (iii) develop approximate dynamic factor
models that can accommodate strongly correlated idiosyncratic components, (iv)
develop methods for joint estimation of related VAR models and finally (v)
develop Bayesian methodology for handling mixed frequency time series data. A
strong emphasis is placed on providing uncertainty quantification of the model
parameters, which is particularly important in applications and is usually
lacking in many modern methods for large data sets. This project would advance
the state of the art for Big Data settings involving a large number of time
series both at the modeling, computational and inference fronts. Finally,
doctoral students would receive mentoring in novel, timely topics on time series
modeling, analysis and forecasting and course curriculum would be
advanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.