* 1821994
* An Open Science Platform for the Neurobiology of Language Community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Steven Small, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 114,647.00

The advent of non-invasive brain imaging at high spatial and temporal resolution
in awake, behaving human beings has had a profound impact on the study of
language in the brain. It is now the ten-year anniversary of the first
international conference on the Neurobiology of Language, a field that has grown
substantially since then and continues to blossom. Studying the neurobiology of
language requires highly specialized skills (e.g., brain imaging) and broad
multidisciplinary knowledge (e.g., psychology, linguistics, neuroscience). In
order to promote scientific inquiry of the highest quality, it is vital to
promote dialogue and interaction among the relevant disciplines. This project
explores how to facilitate this interaction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
"neurobiology of language" is the biological implementation for representations
and processes involved in the production and understanding of speech, sign, and
language in context. Previously, brain structures and functions for language
could only be inferred from studying humans with brain injury. By monitoring the
anatomical encodings and physiological dynamics of language processing in awake,
behaving human beings, researchers can now study human language at a biological
precision previously possible only in animal models (of functions other than
language). Concomitant with these new approaches has been a dramatic increase in
the number of investigators dedicating their effort to understanding the
biological basis of language. The growth in the number of investigators and the
use of expanded techniques and theoretical perspectives have driven the need for
enhanced transparency, integrity, and robust and rapid research dissemination.
The PIs will explore these topics while developing systems and operations for
open science, facilitating reproducibility and replicability of research, and
dissemination of new findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.