* 1821567
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Data-Driven Inquiry and Exploration (EDDIE): Using Large Datasets to Build Quantitative Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Thomas Meixner, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,771,556.00

Teaching students the mathematical and statistical skills needed to work with
large amounts of data is a challenge in contemporary STEM education. This
project aims to address that challenge by developing classroom modules that
enable undergraduate students to explore real-world data from biology, geology,
and environmental science. Faculty at four institutions (Illinois State
University, Carleton College, the University of Arizona, and CUNY-Queens
College) will collaborate to develop these modules, which will enable students
to use real data to ask and answer questions. By working together as a
community, instructors who use these modules may identify ways to improve
teaching of quantitative reasoning skills, with the potential to transform how
data science is taught. Modules will be used to teach both STEM majors and non-
majors, to help build an informed citizenry that can understand and make
science-based decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a
novel way to build a community of instructors, as well as develop materials that
may enhance the teaching and learning of data at the undergraduate-level at a
broad range of institutions. This community will develop curricular and
supporting materials to enhance teaching of quantitative and statistical skills
to undergraduate students in earth science-related fields. The project will also
promote faculty engagement with materials and professional development
activities designed to foster pedagogical orientation favoring inquiry-based
pedagogy with large datasets. Shifting pedagogical orientation of instructors
from direct instruction to inquiry-based instruction may improve student
learning outcomes related to quantitative literacy. The project will investigate
connecting teaching quantitative skills with real-world data and a community-
based approach that includes 1) collecting and documenting community needs
through topical workshops; 2) the development and evaluation of new teaching
resources and instructional strategies; 3) new adaptations and examples of
successful curricula, implementation, and material sequencing; and 4)
professional development and project propagation activities promoting widespread
adoption of these new approaches. The project seeks to generate evidence about
how to develop and engage a broad community of users, as well as how an
instructor's pedagogical orientation shifts from direct to inquiry-based. A
variety of metrics (e.g. participant demographics; website pageviews; social
network analytics) and survey data will be gathered and analyzed. Feedback from
the instructors will inform improvements of the module materials and the
training in inquiry-based pedagogy. The co-developed and tested modules will be
publicly available. The project also aims to produce a cadre of faculty members
who are trained in skills and tools for teaching quantitative skills, as well as
an advanced understanding of how the collaborative development of teaching
materials might lead to a change in pedagogical
orientation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.