* 1821140
* NSF-EAGER: Eastern Mediterranean Paleoclimate and Ecosystems during the Rise of Early Civilizations (EMPIRE)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Richard Norris, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 02/28/2021
* USD 40,615.00

Archaeological evidence shows that Neolithic people in the eastern Mediterranean
made extensive use of marine fish until about 6000 years ago, after which
domesticated sheep and goats and agricultural products became primary staples in
the early Bronze Age. This switch in human food supply has similar timing to the
end of the African Humid Period when a drop in rainfall in Northern Africa and
southern Europe decreased oceanic productivity and dried-up wetlands and savanna
in North Africa. Hence, it is possible that the end of the African Humid Period
played a role in reducing the yields of marine fisheries exploited by Neolithic
people and 'nudging' them to find other resources. This project will reconstruct
marine fish abundances through the Neolithic-Bronze Age transition by counting
and identifying fish teeth in deep sea sediments. The research will support US
involvement in the international "EMPIRE" Expedition to the Aegean and Adriatic
seas. Sediment cores collected during the cruise will provide a first
quantitative assessment of how those civilizations were affected by available
fish stocks. The use of fish teeth is a novel new proxy system for directly
studying fish communities and will provide a 'proof-of-concept' test for the
method. The results will be significant because fish teeth make it possible to
quantify fish stocks in the past, show the relationship between fish communities
and environmental change, and assess our impact on fish populations through
fishing. Prior to this new work on fish teeth, almost all studies of ocean
productivity have focused on unicellular plankton and have been blind to changes
in the fisheries resources that societies rely on.

The project will obtain samples that can be used to test the links between human
resource use and the natural abundance of fish. While archaeologists can tell us
how many fish people have been consuming, there has been no other direct way to
assess what fisheries resources have been like, or how fishing pressure may have
changed those resources over time. This project will examine whether the
intensity and pattern of human exploitation of fish is linked to the
availability of marine resources by supporting participation in an international
research cruise (EMPIRE Expedition) designed to quantify changes in terrestrial
and marine ecosystems during the rise of human civilization around the Aegean
and Adriatic. The expedition will collect "Kasten" cores that recover the large
volumes of sediment needed for fish tooth research. These cores will be sampled
using custom-built plastic core boxes (purchased through this project) so that
the cores can be delivered intact to the US to allow for evaluation of core
stratigraphy using XRF and x-ray imaging. The project will return large amounts
of new core material from the Mediterranean to the Scripps Geological
Collections where it will be available to the US community through normal sample
requests. The project will enable proof-of-concept research on fish communities
to be integrated with the larger international effort to understand human
impacts on vegetation, soil erosion, ocean production, and paleoclimate in the
region. In turn, this environmental work will be linked with human cultural
development seen through archaeological and historical data sets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.