* 1821919
* The Role of Temperature-Driven Chemical Reactions in the Evolution of Solar System Ices
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mark Loeffler, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2022
* USD 443,166.00

Many of the icy satellites in the outer Solar System have low surface and
subsurface temperatures. Spacecraft measurements at both Jupiter's satellite
Europa and Saturn's satellite Enceladus measured various molecular species on
their surfaces. Recent work by the Principal Investigator and his colleagues
have shown that these molecular species react at low temperatures (~80 K), well
within the range of these lower satellite surface temperatures. Using this
grant, the investigators will study the role that temperature-driven reactions
of ices of different chemical compositions play in the evolution of icy objects
within the Solar System. They will use the newly-designed ultra-high vacuum
laboratory at Northern Arizona University. Ice samples will be created under
conditions similar to those where Solar System ices are found, and then studied
as they are heated at various rates. This project supports the mission of the
NSF by promoting our understanding of the chemical evolution of icy objects in
the outer Solar System. The PI will include graduate and undergraduate students
in this research, speak to a local elementary school, as well as give science
presentations at the Flagstaff Festival of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice samples containing oxidants (ozone
and hydrogen peroxide) and various sulfur-, carbon-, and nitrogen-containing
compounds will be prepared under conditions relevant to Solar System ices and
characterized with infrared spectroscopy. Then, the samples will be warmed at
various rates, while being monitored with infrared spectroscopy, mass
spectrometry and microbalance gravimetry. This combination of techniques allows
new products to be identified and the destruction of existing ones to be
monitored. Heating the sample at different rates allows for the calculation of
the activation energies for the reaction. Finally, the concentration will be
varied in these mixtures, which will help to elucidate the reactions pathways
that are active in these different chemical systems. The results of this new
work will have strong implications on how our Solar System may evolve over time
and could change how modelers and theorists view the role that non-radiolytic
processes play in the chemical evolution of not only solar system ices but also
other objects, such as comets or interstellar ices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.