* 1821900
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying microbial controls on the annual cycle of methane and oxygen within the ultraoligotrophic Central Arctic during MOSAiC
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brice Loose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 541,432.00

The central Arctic Ocean is changing rapidly as multiyear sea ice gives way to a
new seasonal sea ice regime, and these regional shifts have important
implications for global climate as well as the entire Arctic system. As part of
the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
(MOSAiC), the investigators will use a research vessel frozen into polar ice as
a sampling platform to focus on the influence of sea ice on the uptake and
release of oxygen and methane across a full annual cycle. Combined with other
observations made by MOSAiC collaborators, these data will allow the
investigators to build a detailed conceptual model of carbon and energy flow
across seasons and improve numerical models explaining the behavior of the
broader Arctic system. In addition, they will use genomic techniques to gain a
new understanding of microbial dynamcis and diversity in this understudied
region. The broader impacts of this work include support for early-career
scientists, significant international collaboration as part of the MOSAiC
program, and training for postdoctoral scientists and undergraduate students.
Public outreach will include viewings of the Northwest Polar Passage documentary
Frozen Obsession in San Diego, CA, and Providence, RI, followed by panel
discussions on polar exploration, ecology, and change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to identify the biological and physical drivers
underlying the production and uptake of oxygen and methane, establishing the
metabolic balance of these key gases in the oligotrophic Central Arctic. The
investigators will take advantage of the unique opportunity afforded by the
international, year-long Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of
Arctic Climate (MOSAiC) expedition to determine net community production from
year-round measurements of oxygen and argon, as well as methane oxidation and
production from methane concentration and isotopic ratios. They will measure
bacterial and community respiration, bacterial production, and microbial
community structure, and analyze gene expression to identify the genes,
organisms, and pathways associated with methane production in the surface ocean.
Results will be used to model the oceanic methane cycle using the MITgcm Arctic
Regional Model and improve the biogeochemical components of the Regional Arctic
System Model (RASM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.