* 1821017
* Collaborative Research: RUI: A Half Century of Changing Glacier Dynamics at Athabasca Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Martin Truffer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 02/29/2024
* USD 494,626.00

Meltwater reaching the base of a glacier behaves like a lubricant, resulting in
fast downslope movement. In hot years, studies have shown that glaciers move
relatively slow, as meltwater infiltrating the glacier form large subglacial
rivers, that deprive the basal surface of meltwater. However, it is difficult to
make long-term predictions of glacier behavior from existing, short datasets,
because we know the way a glacier responds to meltwater reaching the bed can
change. This research will develop a unique long-term dataset to investigate how
the speed and pattern of water-mediated glacier motion changes as a glacier?s
shape and plumbing system adjust to a changing climate. The work will allow
better prediction of future glacier change and enhance understanding of how
glaciers shape landscapes over geologic time. We will train undergraduate and
graduate students in field and laboratory research practices, preparing them for
careers in science. We will partner with a documentary filmmaker and Jasper
National Park (Alberta, Canada), which hosts our field site, to develop
educational materials that will show park visitors the importance of glaciers
and scientific research to human society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
centennial scale changes in basal motion is essential for predicting how the
world?s glaciers will respond to climate warming, with implications for sea
level rise and downstream habitat quality and water resources. The investigators
will revisit Athabasca glacier to offer a detailed picture of how the glacier
basal motion has evolved as the glacier has thinned and retreated since seminal
glaciology research conducted there in the 1960s. We will collect borehole
inclinometry and water pressure, glacier surface velocity, radar-based ice
thickness, and hydrometeorological data, among other field-based and remotely
sensed observations. We will use a numerical glacier flow model to interpret
these data. Our focus will allow us to extend insight gained at Athabasca
Glacier to the rest of the world?s warm-bedded
glaciers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.