* 1821842
* Topological superconductors: Materials, topological order, and quenched disorder
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Andriy Nevidomskyy, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2019
* USD 7,000.00

The Condensed Matter and Materials Theory and Condensed Matter Physics Programs
jointly contribute support to this award. This award provides resources for a
workshop that brings together theorists and experimentalists to discuss a
possible new kind of superconductivity that may have application in the
development of quantum computers. The workshop will be held at Rice University
on April 24-25, 2018. Whether a material conducts electricity or not provides a
natural classification of materials into metals like copper and insulators like
silicon. Within the past 20 years, it was realized that insulators can be bit
more interesting. There are the classic insulators like silicon and rubber, but
there are also topological insulators which have an insulating bulk and
intrinsic metallic states that surround the surfaces and edges. Bismuth
selenide, a compound made from the elements of bismuth and selenium, provides an
example of a topological insulator. Since the discovery of topological
insulators, new classes of topological materials have been proposed, among these
are topological superconductors. Superconductors have no resistance to the flow
of electricity. This reflects the collective quantum mechanical behavior of the
electrons in the superconducting state. Topological superconductors have a
superconducting bulk. While topological insulators have associated metallic
surface states, topological superconductors have exotic surface states that
behave differently than collections of ordinary particles like electrons and
photons - the "particles" of light, but in a way that could form the basis of
computation by manipulation of a quantum mechanical state. Topological materials
are robust to noise and defects that would disrupt most quantum mechanical
states and severely limit their use in quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;Driven by
potential applications to quantum computing, there is now an intense worldwide
search for materials that exhibit the experimental signatures of topological
superconductors. This two-day workshop will bring together scientists from
around the world that use experiments to probe candidate materials, as well as
those that develop the theory and phenomenology of topological
superconductivity. An important distinguishing feature of this workshop will be
a focus on bulk topological superconducting materials and two-dimensional
surface states. The workshop will address an acute need to gather and focus
theoretical and experimental leaders in this nascent field, which has received
much less attention than other efforts to engineer quantum computers. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be encouraged to attend the workshop to excite
interest in the next generation. A report on opportunities in research on
topological superconductivity will result from this activity. This workshop is
aligned with the NSF's Quantum Leap Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.