* 1821816
* Pre-Columbian Human Modifications of Terra Firme and Fluvial Forest in Western Amazonia: Terrestrial Soil Phytolith and Charcoal Records
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Dolores Piperno, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 102,200.00

Dr. Dolores Piperno of the Smithsonian Institution will explore pre-Columbian
human modifications of tropical environments. The Amazon Basin located in the
heart of tropical South America and stretching from the Atlantic ocean to the
Andes is an area approximately the size of the continental United States. It is
presently home to the largest contiguous expanse of American tropical forest and
it contains much of what remains of the New World's indigenous cultural and
biological diversity. Numerous studies show how this diversity is ancient, its
species-rich forests being tens of millions of years ago and its native cultures
dating to first human entrance of the Americas 15,000 years ago. Understanding
how past patterns of natural- and human-caused alterations of the Amazonian
forest affected its biology and cultures, including still in the present time,
is therefore of considerable importance to environmental historians,
archaeologists, climate modelers, and conservation biologists alike. For
example, organizations increasingly rely on such information to formulate good
policies, including by better understanding species resilience in the face of
significant disturbance. With this research, the researchers will undertake
reconstructions of vegetation and fire history across five different regions of
Amazonia through analysis and dating of plant fossils that they have sampled
from directly underneath present-day forests. The researchers will provide
sensitive indices of both cultural and natural influences on past and modern
forest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out phytolith and charcoal
analyses on terrestrial soils sampled from remote, previously unstudied regions
and areas of western Amazonia where they have hypothesized human impacts were
less significant than in other regions. The problems addressed in this research
are of high interest to, and align with important questions from diverse
scholarly disciplines focused on human/environmental relationships with the
present and future Amazon as well as its past. Conservation, sustainability, and
reforestation programs are more successful if environmental histories are
understood, and these programs are also extremely important to modern indigenous
societies who seek to utilize well their natural resources. Climate modelers and
forecasters require more information about the effects of prehistoric activities
on past atmospheres, so that they can better model the links between present and
future atmospheric conditions and tropical/global environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.