* 1821553
* Developing and Validating Proof Comprehension Tests in Real Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Keith Weber, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

The primary way that professors convey mathematics to students in advanced
mathematics courses is through the presentation of mathematical proofs. However,
both in the classroom and in mathematics education research, students'
understanding of these proofs is rarely assessed. This assessment void is partly
due to the lack of valid assessment tools to measure such understanding. This
project will develop and validate eight reliable proof comprehension tests for
an undergraduate real analysis course. The generation of proof comprehension
tests serves urgent needs for undergraduate mathematics instructors, students in
advanced mathematics courses, and mathematics education researchers. For
mathematics instructors, the ability to assess students' proof comprehension
would improve feedback on the effectiveness of their lectures, or reveal aspects
of proofs that students find confusing. For students in advanced mathematics
courses, knowing they will be assessed on their comprehension of proofs will
encourage them to study these proofs and can direct their attention to aspects
of proof that they may not ordinarily consider. For prospective mathematics
teachers, this assessment could help them see proof as a tool for studying and
learning mathematics, which could have a positive impact on their teaching.
Finally, some mathematics education researchers have begun to study the efficacy
of different modes of proof presentation, and developing valid instruments to
assess students' comprehension of proofs would further facilitate research in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the authors will develop and
validate short, multiple-choice tests to reliably assess a reader's
comprehension of eight proofs in real analysis. For each proof, the authors will
first generate open-ended proof comprehension assessment questions using their
theoretical model, observe 12 mathematics majors answering these questions
individually, and use their responses to create a large repository of multiple-
choice assessment items. They will pilot these items with 12 mathematics majors,
before having 200 students complete the eight multiple-choice tests. For each
long test, psychometric analyses of student responses will allow the authors to
select a subset of items that provide information equivalent to the information
provided by the long test. They will validate these short tests by asking 12
mathematics majors to complete both the open-ended and the short multiple-choice
versions of the tests, and by comparing their scores with performance in other
measures. The aim at this stage will be to verify that the multiple-choice tests
are valid indicators of the test taker's understanding of the proofs. This study
of students' proof comprehension (and its relationship to other competencies),
as well as the study of the psychometric properties of the developed tests, will
make a significant contribution to the study of the construct of proof
comprehension in mathematics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.