* 1821008
* Collaborative Research: The AGEP Engineering Alliance: A Model to Advance Historically Underrepresented Minority Postdoctoral Scholars and Early Career Faculty in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Valerie Conley, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 607,306.00

This Alliance brings together four universities with the goal of developing,
implementing, studying, evaluating and disseminating a model focusing on career
development for historically underrepresented minority (URM) engineering
postdoctoral scholars, who successfully transition into early career faculty
positions, and eventually become tenured and promoted in Engineering academic
departments. The AGEP Engineering Alliance works with URM postdoctoral scholars
to provide them with mentoring, professional development training and the skills
necessary to succeed in academic faculty positions. The model also addresses the
needs of the early career faculty, including teaching pedagogy training, grant-
writing and student mentoring education. The model work is through partnerships
between the Georgia Institute of Technology, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University, William Marsh Rice University, and the University of Colorado
Colorado Springs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This alliance was created in response to
the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about
models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of URM graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or
STEM education research fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop, replicate
or reproduce; implement and study, via integrated educational and social science
research, models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education,
postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and
across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
careers. While this Alliance is primarily funded by the AGEP program, additional
support has been provided by the NSF INCLUDES program, which focuses on
catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive change; the
Directorate for Engineering's Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) and the
Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) program; and the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources' Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) and Centers for Excellence in Science and
Technology (CREST) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate
and full professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year
colleges and universities, and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. The AGEP Engineering Alliance has the potential
to advance a model to improve the success of URM early career faculty in the
field of Engineering, which ultimately leads to improved academic mentorship for
URM undergraduate and graduate students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
research components of the Alliance investigates Engineering post-graduation
plans for PhD graduates and their faculty pathways, and another study examines
the policies and practices of higher education Engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP Engineering Alliance team will work with
the BSCS Science Learning to conduct formative and summative evaluations. They
will also engage an Executive Board of institutional administrators and leaders,
as well as an external Advisory Board. The boards will provide feedback to the
Alliance team and suggest adjustments to the project's management, to the
research, and to the model development, implementation, testing, evaluation,
dissemination, sustainability and reproduction potential. The boards will also
provide input about how the Alliance work impacts institutional policies and
practices to advance URM postdoctoral scholars and early career faculty in their
academic Engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.