* 1821391
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Video-Enhanced Tutorials on Problem Solving in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Robert Teese, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 290,104.00

This collaborative project at the Rochester Institute of Technology and the
University of Cincinnati aims to increase the number of students who graduate in
STEM, so that the United States can maintain a strong workforce for global
competitiveness. Retaining more students in STEM majors during the first two
years of college is especially critical. This project will create, test,
evaluate, and disseminate a set of interactive online tutorials for introductory
physics classes. These tutorials will be designed to help students develop the
skills necessary for solving complex problems, while giving students early,
positive experiences that will build their confidence and persistence. Based on
multimedia learning principles and research on human learning and memory, each
tutorial will provide varying amounts and types of support, aligned with
individual student needs. The support will be delivered through (online) mini-
lectures, hints, tips, or encouragement by a tutor (a real person who appears in
a video). Students who struggle more will receive more guidance, and students
who struggle less will be able to navigate through the tutorial at a faster
pace. The process is intended to be similar to having a live tutor for help and
guidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's overarching goals are to improve
physics instruction for all students by using online tutorials for teaching
problem solving, and to contribute to physics education research by studying the
use of the tutorials. To achieve these goals, the project team has identified
the following objectives: (1) Create a set of 30 online Interactive Video-
Enhanced Tutorials (IVETs). (2) Disseminate the IVETs through the ComPADRE
Digital Library of educational resources in physics and astronomy
(https://www.compadre.org/). (3) Evaluate the effectiveness of at least ten of
the IVETs, and compare the effectiveness of IVETs at the two collaborating
universities. (4) Disseminate the results of the research. The IVETs will be an
innovative resource that can support introductory physics courses. In addition,
the research on students' interactions with the IVETs can increase understanding
of instructional strategies that optimize students' use of online homework
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.