* 1821135
* Geospace Energy Exchange in Structured Electrodynamic Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Joshua Semeter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 446,964.00

This research is based upon a science plan to develop an Incoherent Scatter
Radar (ISR) data analysis approach that would be applied to high latitude Poker
Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR) and Resolute bay Incoherent Scatter Radar
(RISR) radar measurements resulting in high spatio-temporal measurements of
densities, temperatures, and velocities and the associated electrodynamic and
energy quantities. The resolution for these data products would be of a finer
resolution than that available from current global simulations (sub-grid). The
foremost aim of the award research is to contribute to and enhance the
understanding of small-scale structures that are associated with the
Magnetosphere Ionosphere Thermosphere (MIT) coupling and energy transfer
processes. The researchers would combine these radar measurements with in-situ
satellite measurements of ion drifts and auroral images to address two
fundamental science objectives: 1) the role of ionospheric structuring
mechanisms (e.g. ionization, chemistry, diffusion) in various high latitude
regions (polar cap, cusp, auroral zone) and 2) the factors impacting energy
dissipation including plasma density structuring, free energy sources, and data
quality. A graduate student would be supported for this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation would address five specific
questions: 1), How do impact ionization, transport, diffusion, and chemistry,
work in concert to structure the high latitude ionosphere and, hence,
conductivity? 2) How does the relative importance of structuring mechanisms vary
between the polar cap, cusp, auroral zone, and the boundaries between these
regions? 3) How do variations in conductivity, driven through M-I coupling,
affect the form, rate, and partitioning of energy dissipation over regional
scales? 4) How are experimental results impacted by resolution, registration,
and statistical uncertainties in the derived parameter fields? 5) How does the
source of free energy (e.g., substorm versus steady reconnection versus high-lat
reconnection versus cusp) impact energy dissipation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.