* 1821658
* A Service-Learning Partnership to Enhance Engineering Education and Elementary Pre-service Teacher Education for Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Stacie Ringleb, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,993.00

Improving the teaching and learning of STEM concepts at the elementary level is
an important priority for STEM education. This Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE), Development and Implementation project aims to develop service
learning projects that involve teams that include undergraduate engineering and
education majors. These undergraduates will collaborate to develop and deliver
one-hour engineering lessons to elementary school students. This project
addresses three needs: 1) to increase the academic and professional persistence
of engineering students; 2) to prepare engineers and elementary pre-service
educators for workplace demands of collaborating and communicating in multi-
disciplinary contexts; and 3) to prepare elementary teachers to gain confidence
and competence to integrate engineering into instruction. These cross-
disciplinary, service-learning projects will be embedded into three core classes
for education and three core classes for engineering students. Collaboration 1
will pair first year engineering students studying engineering design and pre-
service teachers in Education Foundations. Collaboration 2 will pair upper level
engineering students in Computation Methods and pre-service teachers in
Educational Technology. Collaboration 3 will pair upper division engineering
students in Fluid Mechanics with pre-service teachers in Science Methods. The
research conducted in this study seeks to examine the ways in which this
intervention affects: 1) the engineering students' understanding of engineering
concepts; 2) the education students' knowledge of engineering and science; 3)
the collaboration skills of both groups of students; 4) the first year
engineering students' academic persistence in engineering; and 5) the upper
level students' professional persistence in engineering and teaching. Data will
be disaggregated by student participant demographics (e.g., race, gender,
ethnicity, and military status). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to: 1) increase academic persistence in first year engineering students; 2)
increase professional persistence in upper level engineering students; 3)
enhance collaboration skills for engineering and education students; 4) enhance
engineering knowledge of engineering students; and 5) enhance engineering
knowledge of pre-service teachers. Engineering students and pre-service teachers
will be guided by the Next Generation Science Standards and Virginia Standards
of Learning as they develop lessons to enhance elementary students'
understanding of engineering and computational thinking. Engineering students
will help devise the engineering challenges that will drive the inquiry-based
lessons, while education students will be primarily responsible for developing
the lesson plans. Both student groups will be involved in lesson delivery to
elementary school students. This project intends to: examine standardized exam
results appropriate for each group of students (e.g., fundamentals of
engineering and Praxis exam questions suitable to the topic being studied); use
standardized assessment rubrics to assess student technical work (engineering
only) and collaboration skills (engineering and education); qualitatively assess
student reflections about the process of lesson development; and track
persistence in the engineering students. This project aims to determine if this
approach to teaching can significantly change engineering content knowledge,
communication and collaboration skills, and persistence. The proposed research
is expected to contribute to the body of knowledge in teaching and learning by
determining whether significant changes in engineering/science content knowledge
can be achieved through collaborative partnerships between engineering and
elementary education students. It is anticipated that a replicable instructional
model that can be adopted by engineering and teacher preparation programs across
the country will result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.