* 1821146
* RAPID: Using the Science of Hurricane Resilience to Foster the Development of Student Agency and Appreciation for Science in Puerto Rico
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 03/31/2021
* USD 199,928.00

This project uses the science of hurricane resilience to foster the development
of student agency and appreciation for science in Puerto Rico. It will have a
direct impact on over 1000 Puerto Rican middle and high school students this
school year. This research will contribute to a deeper understanding of the
characteristics of educational interventions after a humanitarian crisis that
can foster positive adaptation. Students will gain a scientific understanding of
the natural disaster that occurred and of the resilience of the local El Yunque
rainforest. In addition, these investigations will provide a positive outlet for
students to express their feelings in creative ways and propose design solutions
for their local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For school age children on the
island of Puerto Rico, the back-to-back hurricane strikes of Irma and Maria were
their first experience with the tragedy of hurricanes in Puerto Rico. There is
much concern in the media and associated reader comments about the ability of
the forests in Puerto Rico to recover. These concerns reveal common
misconceptions about the dynamics of forest ecosystems. Long-term research
conducted by Luquillo ecologists paints a different picture. The El Yunque
rainforest has adapted to being struck by hurricanes on a regular basis.
Engaging in investigations of El Yunque resilience at different timescales and
different perspectives allows students to connect their learning about the
rainforest to the current tragedy of their everyday life. Students will propose
designs for their local community for rebuilding after Hurricane Maria and
preparation for future hurricanes by mimicking how nature recovers from
hurricanes. Researchers hypothesize that the quality of implementation will be
predictive of the quality of students' projects, increased understanding of the
dynamics of resilience in El Yunque, as well as increased appreciation for
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.