* 1821822
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Incorporating Sociotechnical Cybersecurity Learning Within Undergraduate Capstone Courses
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hadar Ziv, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2022
* USD 64,038.00

All technology professionals require basic proficiency in cybersecurity.
However, typical computing curricula do not require any courses in
cybersecurity. As a result, a majority of students graduate without any
proficiency in cybersecurity relevant to the systems they will develop and use
when they join the workforce. Moreover, cybersecurity electives often cover only
technical topics, and technology professionals must understand how cybersecurity
is influenced by social factors. This project will fill this curricular gap and
will develop, deliver, and evaluate a suite of sociotechnical cybersecurity
learning modules. These modules can then be used in standard computing curricula
to create a cybersecurity proficient software workforce that can significantly
enhance cybersecurity in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modules will be
used in capstone courses at Informatics at the University of California, Irvine
(UCI) and Indiana University (IU). The researchers will utilize the modules to
create an assessment for the most critical and essential cybersecurity knowledge
and skills. The outcomes of the research will advance the understanding of how
students could develop sociotechnical cybersecurity proficiency as a part of
their capstone experience. Since capstones are typically a graduation
requirement, integrating cybersecurity learning within these courses will have
the transformative effect of all students in the computing disciplines
graduating with core cybersecurity knowledge. As a part of the research
activities, several cohorts of undergraduates will receive cybersecurity
training useful for their professional careers. The learning modules and
assessments will be openly available to other educators and
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.