* 1821074
* Improving Particle Filter Performance in Spatially-Extended Problems Using Generalized Random Field Likelihoods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Gregory Beylkin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 219,814.00

Ensembles of model simulations are used in a variety of fields to estimate and
predict things like rain, plankton blooms, or oil well pressure. Ensembles are
used to provide uncertainty quantification to the predictions: one wants to know
not just the most likely estimate but also how likely this estimate is, and
whether any other outcomes are likely. The main mathematical framework that
underpins the rigorous use of ensembles for uncertainty quantitfication is
called, for historical reasons, the 'particle filter.' Each ensemble member is a
'particle.' Unfortunately particle filters do not work well for problems in high
dimensions -- a `dimension' can be loosely understood here as a location where
observational data is available, not the dimensions of space and time -- since
they require an astronomically large number of ensemble members. This project
will develop methods to improve the performance of particle filters in problems
with spatial extent, like weather forecasting. The improvement comes by reducing
the effective dimensionality by smoothing the observations. For example,
millions of satellite observations of the atmosphere and oceans are taken each
day; the project reduces the dimensionality of this data in a manner
qualitatively similar to compressing an image. Since the required ensemble size
for a particle filter is exponentially sensitive to the effective dimension of
the system, even a small compression of the data can lead to enormous
improvements in the performance of the particle filter.

The sequential importance sampling particle filter with resampling is known to
converge, in the limit of infinite ensemble size, to the Bayesian posterior of
the filtering problem for dynamical systems (under mild assumptions).
Unfortunately the rate of convergence is slow: the required ensemble size is
exponential in the effective dimension of the system. This is prohibitive for
spatially-extended problems like weather forecasting, where the effective
dimension is enormous. Alternative methods like the ensemble Kalman filters are
very successful in practice, but there is no rigorous analysis relating the
distribution that the ensemble members represent and the true Bayesian
posterior. This project aims to improve particle filter performance by reducing
the effective dimensionality of the system for spatially extended problems. The
true likelihood representing the relationship between the observational data and
the system state is altered by smoothing the observations. This reduces the
effective dimensionality of the system and is equivalent to modeling the
observation error as a generalized random field. Although the particle filter
converges more rapidly, it converges to a distribution that is not the true
Bayesian posterior. However, the character of the error between the true and
approximate posteriors is known and can be controlled to balance accuracy and
cost, unlike the ensemble Kalman filters where the difference between the
ensemble distribution and the true posterior is unknown and uncontrolled. The
main technical goal of the project is to develop smoothing operators that can be
applied to scattered spatial data in Cartesian coordinates or on the sphere.
These operators need to be computationally efficient, and to allow the degree of
smoothing to be tunable. Fast methods will be developed based on radial basis
function interpolation of the data, followed by the fast application of a
smoothing integral operator, approximated using multi-resolution Gaussian atoms.
The method will be applied to meteorological data to build intuition on how the
degree of smoothing impacts the posterior. If necessary, the method will be
combined with other methods for improving particle filter performance, like
implicit sampling or optimal transport.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.