* 1821912
* Workshop: Advancing ethics for trustworthy cyberspace and data analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/08/2017,05/31/2019
* Susan Sterett, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 8,757.00

Big data analytics centers promise to address central public policy problems
such as health disparities and access, mitigating natural and human disasters,
contributing to social stability in urban settings, and managing and planning
habitat for wildlife. Embedded in these problems are central ethical questions
that take up issues of privacy, inequalities, validity, and meaningful use.
National commitments to bringing new analytical skills to the collection and
analysis of data make a theoretically and empirically driven analysis of ethics
crucial to science and society. Those who develop new analytical tools are not
always closely connected to those who use them, yet collaboration develops
meaningful ethical practices. This workshop will develop a collaborative
strategy for ethical big data practices by including data scientists, local
government officials, community stakeholders, and social scientists. Bringing
together these various stakeholders will build research teams and projects that
combine ethics and big data in productive ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems
are better defined and gain better answers when people from diverse perspectives
are included in the design of research and its use. Research concerning data
analytics emphasizes the centrality of local stakeholders' definitions of
problems and of where and how analyses are used, yet academic professions do not
always build in incentives for collaboration. Building in validity, and a
concern for privacy, surveillance and inequality requires working with multiple
communities and analytical strategies. By including ethnographers of scientific
practices of and users of data analytics who have tracked how analyses have been
used, as well as data scientists who design problems and users of analyses, the
workshop will develop a framework for the creation of big data with an emphasis
on analysis of ethical issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.