* 1821213
* SBIR Phase I:  An E-Learning Program for High School Equivalency (GED) and Remedial Education for Prisoners
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Noah Freedman, Nucleos Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,999.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses the pressing need for providing incarcerated
youth and adults with continual systematic and secure personal education and
training opportunities, giving inmates the skills they need to productively re-
enter society. It will also reduce recidivism rates, and increase their
confidence and the potential for contributing to local communities. Every year,
more than 700,000 state and federal prisoners are released back into their
communities, often with no greater skills than when they went in. The majority
of prisoners lack basic high school degrees. The goal of the project is to
provide the most effective, secure and flexible offline e-Learning applications
for acquiring high school equivalency, the area of greatest need, within the
constraints of the prison environment; covering both instructor-led and self-
directed learning sessions. At the completion of Phase I, correctional
facilities will have an opportunity to utilize a secure, easy-to-administer,
offline e-Learning solution for the General Education Development (GED) or for
any other education and training in a digital format. A wealth of high-quality
instructional programs will be incorporated into the platform that will
ultimately lead to a high school equivalency diploma, and additional support to
address technical and vocational skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase I
project innovation is centered around the delivery of a single, highly-flexible,
secure learning management platform, where multiple applications can be stored
on a single server. It will provide the General Education Development (GED)
content and will be expandable to incorporate additional e-Learning applications
including those that can address recidivism. The adaptable learning management
platform will automate the provisioning and installation of these GED and non-
GED educational applications on private servers, either on-site at the
correctional facility or on off-site private server networks. Different sets of
content would be automatically customized for each prison, with no outside
Internet connectivity required. Another key innovation will be the ability to
have the e-Learning system follow the inmate as they are moved. They will always
have access to their specific content and progress status as their data will be
centrally-hosted on the fully secured prison servers. Their individual records
can be confirmed and reviewed for parole evaluations. By providing uniform
student analytics and continuous monitoring of learning outcomes with different
content and educational application vendors, the system will advance the
capability of offline learning to be a data-driven endeavor and will deliver a
personalized experience comparable to systems in civilian
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.