* 1821819
* Phase I IUCRC The Georgia Institute of Technology: Center for Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking for Heterogeneous Mobile Data Communications (FiWIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking (FiWIN) Center for Heterogeneous
Mobile Data Communications is an NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research
Program (I/UCRC) led by the Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) since 2015.
Based on recognized research leadership and accumulated expertise in integrated
fiber-wireless access technologies, FiWIN is favorably positioned to make
substantial contributions to access network architectures, functional designs of
network elements, and optimized system interfaces and operations for the
globally competitive next generation mobile communication networks. FiWIN has
successfully completed the first three years of operation. The center expands
its scope with the addition of Auburn University (AU) as a Member Site in
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GT has been and continues to be a leading global
player in the development of fiber wireless integration and networking
technologies for delivering high data rate, large capacity and low latency
multi-band 5G services. The combined expertise of AU and GT will expand FiWIN's
scope to develop radio frequency (RF) integrated circuits for beamforming in
coordinated multi-point transmission, in mission-critical sensors for industrial
and health Internet of Things (IoT) applications and in heterogeneous cell
coverage with mobile edge computing. Mutual synergy will foster advances in data
compression algorithms, bandwidth efficient waveform and modulation, and machine
learning to autonomously mitigate nonlinear behaviors of 5G network
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An affordable and reliable advanced communication
network will drive academic innovation and business agility for providing a
vital gateway for economic and societal growth. The continuing rise of social
media and artificial intelligence will revolutionize on how we interact with the
internet, the machines and with one another. It will enable new kinds of data
analytics to be harnessed for tangible business, education and everyday life
benefits. Outcomes of our research will be innovative technologies to benefit US
competitive industrial offerings for 5G systems and cloud/fog computing by
teaching and fostering students to be ready for a versatile and skilled
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All FiWIN Center research products are
published in archival journals or conference proceedings in compliance according
to the Center's Membership agreement and Bylaws. A reference library containing
archival research products (Annual reports, Industrial Advisory Board (IAB)
presentations, student project proposals and outcome presentations, and a list
of publications) will be maintained and updated and be accessible to FiWIN
Center Members, FiWIN research team members, and general public with security
protection for a period of 5 years after the Center has graduated. An
interactive web-based server http://fiwin.org will be used for sharing
scientific data products with IAB members and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.