* 1821130
* Ocean Research Equipment for the Coral Reef Research Foundation
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Patrick Colin, Coral Reef Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 98,123.00

With the oceanographic equipment funded by this project, the Coral Reef Research
Foundation in Palau will be able to examine the physical environment associated
with coral reefs, fish spawning aggregations and marine lakes with endemic
jellyfish. The multibeam sonar mapping system will allow the creation of bottom
maps of the entire perimeter of Palau's outer reef slope (300 km) to 200 m
depths, allowing a better understanding of deep coral reef communities. The
ocean current profiler will track water movement on and adjacent to reefs,
information that can help track where fish eggs and larvae go after spawning.
This important aspect of the life history of fish will help to estimate where
young fishes come from after spending their larval life in the open ocean. The
CTD profiler will be used to measure how the temperature and salinity of the
ocean and lagoon varies with depth. In Palau's marine lakes these instruments
can also provide information leading to important work on climate change, where
bottom cores from the lake provide a historical record of past climates. All of
these instruments are used to measure important physical characteristics of the
ocean, lagoon and marine lakes. Overall this project will improve the
understanding of highly diverse tropical marine environments and their resources
which are under increasing stress from climate change and human population
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will purchase 1) a multibeam sonar
system for bathymetric mapping, 2) two Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP)
and 3) two Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD) profilers. All equipment will be
used by visiting researchers and staff at the Coral Reef Research Foundation
(CRRF) in Koror, Palau (coralreefpalau.org). The multibeam system will be used
to map outer slope reef environments and deep lagoon areas to benefit broad
studies of mesophotic environments, topography of reef fish spawning
aggregations, and marine lakes. The current profiles will be used to study fish
spawning aggregations, fish vortices, and marine lake hydrodynamics while the
CTDs will complement other location specific data collection. The equipment will
enhance long-term data collection efforts stimulated by major events such as
coral bleaching (1998, 2010) and jellyfish population crashes (1999, 2016).
Broad impacts of the work include addressing the suggestion that mesophotic
coral reefs are possible "lifeboats" for shallow water (less than 30 m depth)
coral reefs, and help move beyond the relatively simple considerations of deep
reef refugia presently being debated. Deep reefs also hold various organisms
usable as proxies for questions of climate change, including ocean warming and
sea level rise, and mapping will help delineate where such organisms occur. The
health and fate of reef fish spawning aggregations, critical for fisheries in
developing countries and understanding human impacts on reef fisheries, will be
examined in new ways to quantify the locations and number/sizes of fish present.
Marine lake investigations will benefit from improved understanding of the
physical and biological dynamics. Surveys of lake bathymetry will drive
selection of locations for sediment coring of their bottoms, which hold multi-
thousand year records of El Nino conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.