* 1821762
* EPSRC-CBET: Molecular Engineering of Inhibitors to Self-Assembly:  Fundamental structure informing in silico design
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Michael Hoepfner, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 10/31/2021
* USD 197,185.00

Polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are organic compounds composed of multiple
aromatic rings. PAHs are abundant in nature, and better understanding of their
association in mixtures of organic solvents is important for a diverse range of
engineering applications, including the fabrication of organic photovoltaics and
the prevention of fouling in the petroleum industry. Even though PAHs are widely
used in industry, little is known about how they associate with themselves or
with other organic molecules. The proposed collaborative research between the
US-based principal investigator and a UK team will use experiments and molecular
simulations to study the aggregation of PAHs and identify the best ways to
control self-assembly of PAHs in organic solvents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promoting or inhibiting PAH association is accomplished by
varying solvents or additives using heuristics or trial and error approaches.
The proposed research aims to determine the role of heteroatomic functional
groups (N, O, and S containing) on the self-association of PAHs and the solvated
structure of PAHs. To accomplish this task, convergent bottom-up and top-down
approaches will be pursued. In the bottom-up approach the intermolecular
structure of simple solvent systems will be measured using neutron diffraction
and molecular refinement. The experimentally consistent intermolecular
structures obtained will be used to inform molecular simulations. In the top-
down approach, the complexity of crude oil will be exploited to perform a large-
scale investigation of the molecular features correlated with self-association.
The collaborative research team combines expertise in neutron and X-ray
scattering, atomistic and coarse grain simulation, and self-association
measurements of hydrocarbons. The team has access to top of the line scattering
facilities. The education and outreach plan aims to expose undergraduate and
K-12 students to computer simulations and the role of chemical structure on
molecular behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.