* 1821334
* Collaborative Research: Robust and Scalable Methods for Simulation and Data-Driven Modeling of Particulate Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Denis Zorin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Complex fluids are mixtures of homogeneous fluids and deformable or rigid
particles or fibers. These fluids are ubiquitous in biological systems and
engineering applications and accurate prediction of their behavior is important
for a broad set of problems such as hemodynamics modeling, simulation of
intracellular processes, and microfluidics device modeling. Currently, accurate
models of complex fluids require highly expensive simulations at microscopic or
mesoscopic level, resolving the behavior of each particle (e.g., a deforming
cell or fiber) and their interactions. In contrast, macroscopic continuum models
for complex fluids (when available) allow for a far more efficient computation.
However, these models often lack accuracy, and cannot capture all important
aspects of the flow behavior in realistic settings; hindering construction of
fast predictive models. The goal of the project is to enable construction of
such models in a data-driven way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
develop a framework based on microscopic numerical simulations. The challenge in
developing efficient and accurate continuum computational models of such fluids
is the hard-to-analyze transition from microscopic to macroscopic parameters. In
this work, the investigators focus on (1) robust and scalable solvers for
particulate flow in 2D and 3D; and (2) the utilization of our framework to
explore data-driven macroscopic models for the complex flows in 2D, with an
initial exploration of extensions to 3D. The team will develop the algorithms
for accurate solution of large-scale 3D flows with a high volume fraction of
immersed deformable particles handling viscosity contrast, complex geometric
boundaries, and long simulation times. Key mathematical components for this
include boundary integral formulation and computation, kernel-independent
quadrature schemes for singular and near-singular integration on surfaces in 3D,
contact handling and close interaction, and improving efficiency of time-
stepping schemes. In the second component of the project, the investigators will
apply this framework to explore macroscopic characteristics of complex flows and
their dependence on microscopic parameters and local geometry; this will create
a foundation for data-driven continuum models for complex
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.