* 1821372
* Changing the Culture: Developing a Guide of Effective Practices to Improve, Assess, and Review Undergraduate Physics Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,299,673.00

In recent years there has been a growing emphasis on accountability in higher
education. In response, college and university accrediting agencies have
increasingly emphasized the need for performance measurements that are based on
established learning goals and robust assessment processes. Most physics
departments engage in a program review every five to seven years. To support
such reviews, this project will create a guide for assessment, review, and
improvement of undergraduate physics programs. The guide will aid physics
faculty in more effectively using: (1) documented effective practices to improve
their departments and programs, aligned to their local context, mission, and
resources; and (2) externally imposed requirements for programmatic review and
accreditation as an opportunity to develop a strategy for improving educational
practice. The guide will collect relevant literature and effective practices,
and that information will be distilled by experts. This information will be
valuable for faculty who wish to design or improve program components. It will
also help departments prepare for accreditation and promote the wider use of
evidence-based educational practices. Over time, the expectation is that this
guide will positively affect most, if not all college and university physics
department in the United States. Thus, it has the potential to provide a model
for promoting program improvements in other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration of two
professional societies: the American Physical Society and the American
Association of Physics Teachers. The investigators are at Millersville
University of Pennsylvania, Oregon State University, the University of Maryland
at College Park, and the University of Colorado at Boulder. The project team
will create a guide for program assessment, review, and improvement that is
compact and that offers practical advice without assuming prior expert
knowledge. The guide will recognize the following principles: effective
practices depend on the goal and local context; effective practices are based on
the best available information; users' goals and problems drive the structure
and content; guide content is descriptive, not proscriptive. After the guide is
developed, the project will host workshops, online learning communities, and
other activities to engage and support program leaders and reviewers in using
the guide. The project will develop and implement a sustainability plan to
ensure that the guide is regularly updated, and that programs continue to be
supported in adopting its principles. Finally, the project will conduct and
publish research studies that explore the impact of the guide and associated
support mechanisms on culture and practice in physics programs. In this way, the
project can contribute to understanding how to promote institutional changes
that improve undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.