* 1821171
* Collaborative Research: A Fast Hierarchical Algorithm for Computing High Dimensional Truncated Multivariate Gaussian Probabilities and Expectations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yichao Wu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 144,387.00

The "curse of dimensionality" has severely limited human's capability of
handling high-dimensional data in many application domains. However, most useful
data in existing human knowledge database has certain compressible features.
This project focuses on the mathematical description of these compressible
features, and develops a novel hierarchical modeling technique to extract these
features from high-dimensional datasets in science and engineering applications
and process the compressed information efficiently on a hierarchical tree
structure. The investigators will develop fast algorithms for high-dimensional
integrations involving a truncated multivariate normal distribution that targets
the analysis of medical datasets. The techniques developed from this project
will provide the scientific community a very powerful tool to handle high-
dimensional datasets and at the same time foster the training of researchers
with interdisciplinary knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multivariate Gaussian
distribution is one of the most important continuous distributions in
statistics. If some components are restricted to an interval, either finite or
semi-finite, it is referred to as the truncated multivariate normal (TMVN)
distribution. Many statistical algorithms rely on the evaluations of the
probabilities and expectations with respect to a TMVN, especially in the
expectation-maximization (EM) type algorithms. Direct computation of the desired
expectation is very challenging. A commonly used alternative approach is based
on the Monte Carlo simulation by drawing random samples from the corresponding
TMVN distribution. However, it is equally challenging to simulate from a TMVN
distribution in high dimensional cases. This project will develop new
hierarchical algorithms to efficiently compute very high dimensional TMVN
probabilities and expectations. The core ideas include the hierarchical data
clustering, low-rank and low-dimensional features extraction, and their
efficient processing on the hierarchical tree structures. The resulting
algorithm can compute the expectations with respect to a class of p-dimensional
TMVN distributions in asymptotically optimal O(p) operations in high dimensional
cases, which can also be used to tighten the likelihood ratio bound of the
target TMVN distribution in the acceptance-rejection method to achieve the
highest acceptance probability while avoiding the burn-in period of some
competitive algorithms such as the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. The
hierarchical nature of the algorithm allows easy adoption of the recent progress
in adaptive, dynamic, and asynchronous runtime systems to efficiently utilize
the computing resources at scale. The project provides advanced numerical tools
to accelerate the computations and improve the applicability of the EM
algorithms to handle large and complex biomedical data, with target applications
aimed at improving public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.