* 1821940
* Experience during adolescence shapes brain development: from synapses and networks to normal and pathological behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Diana Dow-Edwards, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 12,623.00

Adolescence is a period of dramatic neural reorganization and can be a
vulnerable period. Social, emotional, and cognitive capacities mature during
adolescence. Life experiences of adolescents can play a significant role in
shaping the maturing brain. This award funds a symposium among a diversity of
scientists and other professionals to examine topics such as synaptic plasticity
in adolescent brains, environmental factors influencing adolescent brain
development, neuroimaging methods used to study the brain, and Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder. Approximately 200 people across a wide range of
professions are anticipated to attend the symposium. The broader impacts include
enhanced understanding across multiple fields, which in turn, informs training,
research, and policy. In addition, a summary of the symposium will be published
to reach a wider audience. The information presented will benefit society by
informing researchers, and health care professionals about the vulnerability of
the developing adolescent brain and how this vulnerability can contribute to
adolescent well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adolescent brain experiences
dramatic neural reorganization. The mechanisms underlying decision-making and
risky behaviors of adolescents need to be examined with this reorganization in
mind. This award supports a symposium which will take place as a component of
the 2018 Annual Meeting of the Developmental Neurotoxicology Society (DNTS). The
symposium will bring together major contributors to the field of adolescent
brain development. Presentations will address numerous topics such as (a) how
endocannabinoids impact cortical development; (b) what neuroimaging has revealed
about cortical network development; (c) how discord between impulsivity and
control contribute to risky behaviors, and (d) how exposure to common stimulants
contribute to abnormal brain functioning. Experience-dependent plasticity will
also be discussed. Conference attendees will be researchers, policy makers,
basic scientists, clinical researchers, and government representatives (e.g.,
Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control). The symposium
summary will be published as a means of making the information available to the
scientific community. A better understanding of the connection between
environmental factors and brain development may help us determine how to foster
well-being among adolescents in our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.