* 1821691
* EAGER: Efficient Utilization of FPGAs in HPC Centers and the Cloud:  A Software/Hardware Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Lina Sawalha, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 11/30/2022
* USD 215,435.00

Cloud and high-performance computing (HPC) are essential for advancing science
and education. Field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are being integrated into
data centers and cloud computing due to their power and performance benefits.
This proposal focuses on filling the gap between the current use of FPGAs and
the use of such computing infrastructures for mainstream computing. Exact
solution for hardware/software partitioning is known to be a computationally
difficult problem which is often solved based on static analysis without taking
program runtime behavior into account. This work aims to take full advantage of
FPGAs in cloud computing via automated partitioning to speed up HPC while
minimizing energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates
techniques from computer architecture, compilers, machine learning and computer
systems to allow for an efficient automated task partitioning and tuning. The
cross-layer techniques will exploit CPU-FPGA systems and will be based on
hardware-software cooperation with new innovative architectures. This work could
result in solutions for adaptable, scalable, energy-efficient and high-
performance use of heterogeneous architectures for cluster and cloud computing.
In addition, the research ideas developed in this project are expected to
significantly speed the pace of discovery in many computing domains from cloud
computing and cyber physical systems to mobile computing and embedded
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.