* 1821914
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Florida:  Center for Arthropod Management Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Bryony Bonning, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 05/31/2024
* USD 830,000.00

The development of new pest management approaches is critical for the production
of sufficient food for the increasing human population, and for prevention of
arthropod-transmitted disease to plants and humans. The more widespread pest
distribution associated with changing climatic conditions exacerbates the need
for new pest management tools. The economic losses associated with the
activities of arthropods and nematodes are a significant burden to society
through both agricultural losses and human health costs. The Center for
Arthropod Management Technologies (CAMTech) addresses issues that limit
effective management of the major insect and nematode pests that impact
agriculture and human health. The center addresses the need for specific
knowledge and research tools to expedite delivery of pest management solutions
by industry partners to the marketplace, and to investigate both new approaches,
and expansion of existing approaches for pest suppression. The major limitations
in the field are common to the agricultural biotechnology and urban pest
management industries and restrict widespread adoption of strategies shown to be
effective in some systems. The center contributes key advances through state of
the art, industrially relevant research and by training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers including underrepresented groups, toward continued
advancement of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAMTech serves as a platform for
innovative, interdisciplinary research activities at the interface of academia,
government, and industry. The center conducts non-competitive research of
crucial importance to the industrial sector using advanced methods such as next-
generation sequencing and -omics, confocal microscopy, RNA interference and
genome editing. Research expertise at the University of Florida site, which has
the largest entomology and nematology department in the U.S., includes insect
physiology and toxicology, microbiology, resistance management, integrated pest
management and agricultural nematology. University of Florida participants work
with a very diverse agriculture and a diverse range of pests of urban and public
health importance. This diversity results from the large number of invasive
species in Florida combined with the sub-tropical climate that favors pest
populations. The research needs of industries in the agricultural biotechnology
and human health domains align well with the expertise of university
participants providing for the expedited development of pest management
solutions to the benefit of agricultural sustainability and to public
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.