* 1821266
* Theory-Driven Solutions to Robust and Non-Convex Data Science Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Gilad Lerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Many solutions to data science problems are based on non-convex optimization.
Recent surprising theoretical and empirical results have shown that directly
solving non-convex problems can yield computationally efficient, high-accuracy
algorithms. This has spurred the expanding body of work on the analysis of non-
convex algorithms for a variety of structured data problems. One class of these
is robust recovery problems, which aim to recover a hidden structure in
corrupted data. While robustness is a classical theme in mathematical
statistics, computationally efficient methods with guaranteed accuracy for high
levels of corruption have not been widely studied. Non-convex minimization
methods indicate the potential to obtain competitive speed and accuracy for such
problems, as was already demonstrated by the PI and his collaborators on the
problem of robust subspace recovery. The research work aims to further establish
and extend such guarantees to many other robust recovery problems whose
solutions are crucial for modern applied problems. Applications include the
problem of three-dimensional reconstruction from a set of two-dimensional
images.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI and his collaborators aim to develop robust
theory and algorithms for truly challenging non-convex recovery problems. These
recovery problems are typically NP-hard with highly complex energy landscapes.
However, these landscapes often exhibit special structure that seems to allow
for recovery under certain adversarial settings and recovery with high
probability under certain generative models. For some of the problems of
outlier-robust optimization over special, continuous non-convex sets, the PI and
his collaborators aim to establish that the corresponding non-convex energy
landscapes are "well-tempered" under some generic conditions. This implies that,
under these conditions, one may apply an iterative scheme initialized at a pre-
specified point and guarantee its fast convergence to the global minimum of the
energy landscape. In other challenging discrete settings, "multi-valley"
landscapes are observed. In this case, special structures and phase transitions
will be quantified. The PI and his collaborators plan to apply their theory-
driven, non-convex optimization solutions in order to solve several applied
scientific problems, in particular, problems that arise in the current pipeline
of structure from motion in computer vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.