* 1821990
* Promoting Student Participation in IEEE Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Yufei Huang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides travel support for students to attend and present their work
at the IEEE International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics, 2018
(BHI18). BHI18 is the premier flagship conference sponsored by IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) in the area of mHealth and health
analytics. BHI18 will be held from March. 4-8, 2018 in Las Vegas and jointly
organized with IEEE conference on Body Sensor Networks. The goal of the
conference is to provide a unique platform to showcase novel sensors, systems,
signal processing, analytics and data management services. BHI18 will offer the
latest findings of researchers on efficient and innovative signal acquisition,
transmission, processing, monitoring, storage, retrieval, analysis,
visualization and interpretation of multi-modal signals including physiological,
biomedical, biological, social, behavioral, environmental, and geographical
data. It will also provide a forum for bioinformatics and computational biology
researchers in especially EMBS and IEEE Signal Processing Society to interact
and exchange research ideas among them and others in Biomedical and Health
Informatics community and discuss future challenges in cutting edge areas
including Precision Medicine. As integrated bioinformatics and medical
informatics approaches become one of the focus areas in Precision Medicine,
BHI18 is uniquely positioned to spark novel ideas and promote new collaborations
between researchers in these communities.

An important mission of the Workshop is to promote participation of graduate
students, especial woman and minority students, and foster student education on
computational biology for precision medicine. This award will be used to provide
travel grants to qualified graduate students, whose papers are deemed of high
quality, to support their participation in the conference. The Workshop
organization includes the student award committee, which will be responsible for
evaluation and selection of student awardees. Particularly, 20-30% of the awards
are allocated to women and minority students to participate and submit papers to
the Workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.