* 1821148
* Collaborative Research: A Tensor-Based Computational Framework for Model Reduction and Structured Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Misha Kilmer, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 139,997.00

Many tasks in scientific computing involve either data or operators that are
inherently multidimensional: for example, a database of gray-scale images
constitutes a three-dimensional array when each image is stored in a standard
two-dimensional array format. Yet many standard numerical methods treat the data
and associated operators as two-dimensional arrays, or matrices. This suggests
that additional structure that could be leveraged for computational gain may be
going undiscovered and underutilized. Recent research has shown that tensors
(multidimensional arrays) and several types of corresponding decomposition
methods can be instrumental in revealing latent correlations of both data and
operators residing in high-dimensional spaces. Indeed, tensor decompositions can
be provably superior to matrix-based counterparts in representation of certain
types of data. This research project tackles two important questions: (1) how to
uncover latent structure in data and operators using multidimensional tensor
factorizations, and (2) how to use these revealed structures to develop a
powerful computational framework that can harvest the benefits of this
structure. Hands-on teaching material for graduate courses will be developed on
randomized matrix methods and tensor decompositions. This teaching material, in
the form of Python notebooks, along with the code developed as a part of this
project, will be freely available as a software library under an open source
license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators aim to answer these questions in
the context of two applications in scientific computing of major importance and
far-reaching consequences: model reduction, a mathematical framework for
reducing the computational cost associated with high-fidelity simulations of
complicated physical phenomena, and structured matrix approximation, which is
important in applications such as parametric partial differential equations and
image deblurring. The work will approach these questions through an entirely
new, multidimensional lens with the advantages of providing new computational
efficiencies and structure that can only be obtained by moving to a higher-
dimensional regime. Two signature features of the project are: (1) design and
analysis of structured tensor decompositions that are efficient in terms of
computations and memory accesses, by using randomized matrix methods and the
algebraic structure of tensor decompositions; and (2) use of tensor models, and
a corresponding suite of structured decompositions, to exploit latent
multidimensional structure in model reduction and structured matrix
approximations. The research is expected to benefit numerous other applications
in science and engineering as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.