* 1821788
* SaTC: EDU: RUI: Enabling a New Generation of Experts by Finding and Fixing Students' Persistent Misconceptions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Peter Peterson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,984.00

The stream of high-profile computer security breaches resulting from errors
well-known to security experts provides an opportunity to improve cybersecurity
education to effectively prepar the next generation of cybersecurity
professionals. Students have deeply ingrained misconceptions about how computer
security ought to work, and students rely on this false intuition when reasoning
about security. The goal of this project is to develop a series of active
learning exercises, that use videos, and hands-on exercises, to address these
misconceptions. The learning modules will be validated in the classroom, and
then published using an open source license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will follow the iterative model created by Hestenes and Halloun, but it will be
applied to common misconceptions in the computer security knowledge of computer
science majors. Misconceptions will be identified through pre- and post-tests
and used to create a reusable security concept inventory (SCI). A large pool of
volunteer experts from industry and academia will be surveyed to determine their
ideas about misconceptions that non-experts have about cybersecurity. This will
result in a list of the most significant misconceptions in cybersecurity. Using
volunteer instructors at multiple colleges and universities, students will be
questioned about these topics resulting in a SCI that can be used to assess
understanding of these issues. Data generated from administering the SCI will be
used to create a set of open source active learning modules, where each module
will target a specific misconception identified in the
inventory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.