* 1821189
* Collaborative Research: Online Interactive Learning Platforms in STEM Education: A Study of Motivation and Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Breonte Guy, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,177.00

The low performance and retention of students in STEM classes are often
attributed to lack of engagement and motivation. Interactive online learning
environments have the potential to engage students and motivate learning, and
thus may contribute to increased performance and retention of students in STEM.
This project seeks to examine the efficacy of different configurations and
design elements in a course platform for interactive, online learning. This
platform, OneUp Learning, was previously developed by project team members. The
research study will measure the effects of the platform on the engagement and
academic performance of students in computer science and data science courses.
It is expected that results of this research will lead to better design of
online learning environments that support student motivation and contribute to
improving undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research design of this project will be guided by Self Determination Theory, a
well-validated psychological theory for understanding motivation and behavior
change. The project will pursue three objectives: 1) conduct a series of
empirical studies on the application of different elements of the OneUp platform
in different learning contexts; 2) extend the OneUp platform by adding new
elements to strengthen the platform's social dimension; and 3) develop
instructional materials to help faculty use the OneUp platform to develop
interactive modules for other courses at the participating institutions. To
disseminate the results of these studies, the project team will solicit active
community participation, through workshops, crowdsourcing, and related
strategies. The project is a collaboration between two institutions, one of
which is minority-serving. The partnership between institutions with different
student populations will enable exploration of the impact of various platform
features on diverse demographic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.