* 1821437
* Stratosphere-to-troposphere Ozone Flux and Surface Ultraviolet Radiation during Cold Climates and Impact on Tropospheric Oxidants
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 594,980.00

Improved understanding of the stratospheric response to very different climate
including the cold climate of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) will broaden the
perspective and provide insight when assessing the stratospheric response to
anthropogenically-induced climate changes in the 21st century. The spatial
distributions of stratospheric ozone, stratosphere-to-troposphere ozone flux,
and ultraviolet radiation reaching to the lower troposphere under various
climate states obtained from the project will become available to the
tropospheric chemistry modeling community. The research results will be
disseminated to the broader atmospheric and climate research community through
scientific publications. The proposal will support a Ph.D. student and a postdoc
and provide interdisciplinary training in atmospheric dynamics and chemistry to
the graduate student and postdoc. The research team is committed to public
outreach, including developing educational videos and other outreach materials
for grades K-12; giving public lectures on the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brewer-Dobson circulation (BDC) is the
stratospheric meridional circulation that links the tropics and pole in the
winter hemisphere. The BDC couples the troposphere and the stratosphere through
the transporting of ozone-depleting gases from tropical troposphere to the
stratosphere and then from the stratosphere to the troposphere in the mid- and
high-latitudes, influencing the lifetime of trace gases such as methane. By
transporting stratospheric ozone from the tropics where it is produced to the
poles, the BDC also determines the spatial distribution of the ozone column
abundance that is the primary control on ultraviolet radiation penetration into
the lower troposphere, playing an important role for driving atmospheric
chemistry. During the cold climate of the LGM, both temperature and Brewer-
Dobson circulation could be very different from the present day, because of
different concentrations of radiative and chemical constituents (e.g., CO2, H2O,
CH4, N2O, CFC), surface boundary conditions (colder sea surface temperatures,
larger latitudinal temperature gradients and large ice sheets) and tropospheric
circulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work using ice core observations
shows higher tropospheric ozone concentrations in cold climates relative to warm
climates, indicative of the potential importance of stratosphere-troposphere
ozone transport. However, there are very few studies on the BGC and ozone during
the cold climate and there is no study so far quantifying the stratosphere-to-
troposphere ozone flux and surface ultraviolet radiation during that time.
Motivated by the recent findings from ice core observations, this research
project will fill this knowledge gap by investigating the BDC and stratospheric
ozone and quantifying the stratosphere-to-troposphere ozone flux and ultraviolet
radiation and their impact on the tropospheric chemistry during the cold climate
of the LGM. They researchers will apply the most recent version of the Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model with interactive stratospheric chemistry, and
the ice age chemistry and proxy tropospheric chemistry-climate model to explain
the high concentration of tropospheric ozone in cold
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.