* 1821015
* S&amp;AS: COLLAB: Organization of the 2018 Smart and Autonomous Systems (S&amp;AS) PI Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,004.00

The objective of this award is to organize the inaugural Principal Investigators
(PI) meeting for the Smart and Autonomous Systems (S&amp;AS) program. As this is
a new program, the PI meeting will set the intellectual tone for and create a
community around this new NSF program, centered at intelligent physical systems
that are cognizant, taskable, reflective, ethical, and knowledge-rich. The PI
meeting will bring together researchers, companies, and program officers who are
actively engaged in S&amp;AS to provide cross-project coordination in terms of
common intellectual challenges, methods for education and training, best
practices in terms of transition of results, and a lasting repository
illustrating the research ideas explored and milestones achieved by the S&amp;AS
projects. The PI meeting will take place during April 5-6, 2018, in Washington
DC, and the format will include short presentations by all the attending PIs,
poster sessions, keynote speeches, and panel discussions. Invitations to the
meeting will include all PIs with active S&amp;AS grants, program managers
involved with related programs, as well as industry representatives and members
of the press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.