* 1821125
* Enhancing capacity for aquatic research  at the Cocha Cashu Biological Station in the Peruvian Amazon
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ronald Swaisgood, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 332,891.00

San Diego Zoo Global's historic Cocha Cashu Biological Station (CCBS) is an
interdisciplinary research and education center dedicated to understanding
biodiversity and the ecological processes that support it in Manu National
Park'a 4 million acre National Park and UNESCO World Heritage Center in the
Peruvian Amazon. Located on the shores of an oxbow lake that is part of a
largely unaltered watershed connected by a series of rivers and streams, the
potential of CCBS to advance scientific knowledge of tropical aquatic systems is
substantial. Yet, in contrast to the long legacy of research on terrestrial
systems at the station and in the surrounding Amazonian forests, few studies
have addressed the aquatic ecosystem on which the diverse animal and plant life,
as well as the local human populations, depend. This project will build
infrastructure, acquire research vessels, and adopt new technologies for
investigators to address this knowledge gap. Because the CCBS provides
unrivalled access to complex biological systems undisturbed by human activities,
there is great opportunity to pursue questions in aquatic ecology where
evolutionary processes are still much the same as they were before humanity
arrived on the scene. For the same reason, the CCBS can serve as a reference
landscape providing comparative data to understand the impacts of human
disturbance and environmental change. This project will engage a diverse
contingent of scientists from the United States, Peru and elsewhere to work
together under a collaborative umbrella to understand how this aquatic ecosystem
functions and how it can be maintained to serve the interest of biodiversity,
environmental quality, and human needs. The collaborative nature of this work
will also serve to build relations between U.S. scientists and emerging and
established Peruvian professionals and government representatives, and thus help
build local capacity in science, help build the careers of U.S. scientists,
support educational and training opportunities for U.S. and Peruvian citizens,
and create positive ties between the two countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the CCBS explores fundamental and unanswered
ecological questions of tropical ecology. Despite the field station's location
in the Amazonian floodplain between an oxbow lake and the Manu River, aquatic
ecosystem research has been neglected historically, contrasting with its strong
research record in terrestrial ecosystems. The paucity of data in this area
ensures the novelty of new research initiatives and the provision of sensors and
instrumentation will facilitate multi-disciplinary research that integrates data
collected on organisms and their abiotic environment, a fundamental objective in
ecology. Because terrestrial and aquatic systems are coupled, aquatic research
will inform the robust body of research conducted on land. NSF support will
allow cutting edge research performed at CCBS to grow into the 21st century and
expand into aquatic ecosystems of the Peruvian Amazon, thus providing
fundamental data for tropical ecosystems and exploring new directions that
inform global change biology. This expansion may include new studies on
hydroecology, flood plain dynamics, nutrient transport, ecological
characterization of migratory fish and birds, drivers of aquatic ecosystem
biodiversity, and emerging anthropogenic impacts on these systems and specific
species such as the giant otter and the black caiman. A successful expansion of
an aquatic research program at the CCBS requires that several obstacles are
addressed. To address these limitations, FSML funds will be used to purchase
three research vessels, fully equipped with sensors and specialized aquatic
monitoring equipment; construct a laboratory for storing and processessing
aquatic samples, and construct cabins for researcher accommodation. An expanded
aquatic research at CCBS will have significant conservation application, guiding
park management activities and informing conservation and restoration goals in
Amazonian systems, and directly increasing knowledge for the management of
conservation-dependent species such as the giant otter. Together, these
activities will help maintain a healthy aquatic ecosystem to support human and
natural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.