* 1821833
* Collaborative Research: Multimodal Affective Pedagogical Agents for Different Types of Learners
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Richard Mayer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

While most research on embodied pedagogical agents (adaptive virtual agents that
guide and mentor learners) explores cognitive features, this project
investigates the role of agent affect/emotion. This project examines how the
agent's affective state (e.g., seeming interested or concerned) impacts
different types of students (e.g., differing by knowledge level, gender,
underrepresented group status, interest in STEM fields, and personality profile)
when learning from online statistics lessons. The project integrates several
areas of research: a) computer graphics research on life-like and believable
representation of emotion in embodied agents, b) advanced methods and techniques
from artificial intelligence and computer vision for real-time recognition of
emotions, c) cognitive psychology research on learning from affective agents,
and d) education research on the efficacy of affective agents for improving
student learning of STEM concepts. Through experimental research the project
will advance the state of the art in agent design and implementation by
integrating findings on effective emotion regulation with algorithms that
support life-like expression of emotions in embodied agents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the multimodal design features of affective
pedagogical agents, the project has two main objectives: (1) research and
develop novel algorithms for emotion recognition and for life-like emotion
representation in embodied animated agents, and (2) develop an empirically
grounded research base to guide the design of affective pedagogical agents for
different types of learners. In one series of experiments the project will
determine evidence-based design principles to guide the development of agents
that demonstrate emotion/affect, including which kinds of affective states are
most effective for which kinds of learners. In a second series of experiments,
the project will implement a web-camera system to detect the emotional state of
the learner (e.g., confused, interested, content, or bored), adapting the
emotional state displayed by the agent in response. Of interest is whether
students learn the statistics lesson better when the pedagogical agent is
sensitive to the learner's emotional state than when it is not. In addition to
its scientific merit, the project will develop and make available a toolkit of
affective animated pedagogical agents that adapt to learner characteristics to
be used by learners of all ages, for education and training in a variety of
subject matters and settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.