* 1821012
* Water for the Future: Upgrading the Robinson Forest stream monitoring network to improve quality and accessibility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Christopher Barton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2020
* USD 166,140.00

The stream monitoring network at Robinson Forest (http://robinson-
forest.ca.uky.edu/) is one of the most valuable aquatic research resources in
the Appalachian region, and it provides critical information for understanding
impacts of surface mining and forest management on freshwater resources.
However, the monitoring equipment at this station is outdated and obsolete. This
project will provide critical equipment upgrades to the stream monitoring
network, which will improve both the quality and the accessibility of the
streamflow and water quality information collected by this network. This project
will also upgrade the existing Robinson Forest weather station and add another
weather station, which will improve the quality and accessibility of weather
data collected from this important facility. Better data quality will allow
researchers to perform more sensitive and powerful analysis regarding manmade
(mining, logging) and natural (insects, fire) impacts on freshwater resources.
Understanding these and other water quality issues is essential for the
protection and improvement of stream health, especially in Appalachia. In
addition, better data accessibility will make this valuable information
available for use by other researchers, state and federal agencies tasked with
water resource conservation and management and the general public. Over time,
this project will help reduce stream degradation and lead to the continued
development of improved watershed management guidelines, improving stream health
in Appalachia and beyond.

This project will upgrade the existing stream monitoring network at Robinson
Forest to enhance both data quality and data accessibility. Currently, the
monitoring equipment is old and technologically obsolete, and requires a
significant amount of upkeep time for data collection and processing. This
project will allow researchers to live-stream streamflow data online,
dramatically improving data accessibility for PIs and other investigators. The
project will also add conductivity and temperature sensing capability to the
network. Currently, these and other water quality parameters are collected on
only a weekly basis, which is relatively insensitive from a water quality
monitoring perspective. This project will allow collection of conductivity and
temperature data at 15-minute intervals, and will also allow live-streaming of
these data online. These upgrades will improve the quality and accessibility of
these data, improving utilization by both PIs at the University of Kentucky and
visiting and collaborating scholars and scientists from other institutions and
agencies. In addition to upgrading the stream monitoring network, the project
will upgrade the existing Robinson Forest weather station and add an additional
weather station. These stations will live-stream weather data online via the
Kentucky Mesonet platform, enhancing data availability for both UK investigators
and collaborators. These improvements will significantly enhance the ability of
existing investigators and potential new partners to investigate important
projects including understanding impacts of surface mining on Appalachian
streamflow and water quality (and associated aquatic and riparian wildlife),
developing forest management guidelines for minimal stream impacts, and
understanding reference quality streamflow and water quality in Appalachia.
Finally, these upgrades will make these data accessible in real-time for
students in relevant courses at the University of Kentucky and collaborating
institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.