* 1821664
* Examining Faculty Attitudes and Strategies that Support Successful Flipped Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2022
* USD 598,402.00

Flipped teaching is an educational approach that shifts lectures from class time
to out of class, by using other formats such as online video. This change frees
up class time for students to deepen their understanding through activities such
as team problem-solving, working with real-world data, and group discussions.
Despite growing evidence that active learning in flipped classrooms can increase
student learning and motivation, some faculty members have resisted this
approach. The resistance is due in part to lack of awareness about how to flip a
course and concerns about having enough time to prepare effective course
materials. This project will help address barriers to using a flipped class
format by supporting cohorts of faculty at Southern Illinois University at
Edwardsville and St. Louis Community College to develop and implement new
flipped courses across multiple STEM departments. Results obtained from research
on project activities will provide information about what is needed for broad
implementation of flipped courses, across different STEM departments, and at
different types of institutions. Successful implementation of flipped teaching
by 24 faculty members over the three years of the project is expected to improve
retention and success in STEM, including retention of students who are from
historically underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through rigorous
research, the project will examine faculty perceptions, attitudes, and
intentions about flipping their classrooms. The project's three overarching
research goals are: 1) How do faculty perceive and implement flipped teaching?
2) How does faculty implementation of flipped teaching at a four-year master's
university compare with faculty implementation at a two-year community college?
and, 3) What are the essential design principles for implementing a successful
flipped classroom at each type of institution? Six faculty from the community
college and six from the university will receive professional development in
flipped teaching and create pre-class assignments, in-class activities, and
learning assessments. The professional development is expected to increase
faculty confidence and skills in flipped teaching, enabling them to serve as
mentors to other faculty in the future. A robust set of quantitative and
qualitative data derived from surveys and interviews will enable the project
team to determine faculty decision-making during course redesign and their
perceptions of implementing the new teaching model, identify factors that
support and hinder implementation of flipped teaching, and explore which factors
are common to both institutions and which are specific to institutional type.
The research team will use descriptive and inferential statistics to analyze
pre/post surveys and thematic coding techniques to examine data from the
interview transcripts. Additionally, the team will examine student grades and
course completion rates, as well as student perceptions of the flipped teaching
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.