* 1821570
* I-Corps Teams: Programmable Nanotechnology Vaccine Platform for Rapid, On-Demand Production
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it offer
to standardize vaccines across a broad range of pathogens in an economical way.
Typically, depending on the type of pathogen, different vaccine development and
manufacturing processes must be employed, resulting in costly technological
fragmentation. Having a single technology that is applicable to all pathogens is
ideal, as it economically streamlines the development and manufacturing process.
The ability to rapidly produce vaccines on-demand and at scale is also
important. Conventional vaccine design and manufacturing methods take years to
develop and months to produce using cells or eggs. Vaccines that can instead be
produced by chemically-defined organic and enzymatic reactions in the absence of
any living systems is preferred as it avoids cross-contamination. Moreover, if
the components can self-assemble into vaccines upon mixing, the energy
requirements and costs are dramatically reduced. With such a technology, new
vaccines can be efficiently manufactured quickly to meet patient
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a platform
for a replicon payload inside the nanoparticle vaccine. The replicon, a large
mRNA, possesses the safety and flexibility of conventional mRNA, but is capable
of finite self-replication. Antigens specific to a particular disease are
encoded into the mRNA replicon. Thus, once injected, the replicon can
temporarily turn a patient's cells into a vaccine production factory. A second
merit is the delivery system innovation that enables the therapeutic deployment
of replicons as a vaccination tool: the dendrimer nanomaterial. Purpose-built
for replicons, it is a fully synthetic, chemically-defined system that solves
the decades-long challenge of safely delivering replicons intact into the
cytoplasm of a patient's cells upon injection. The vaccine nanoparticle
efficiently activates the cellular and humoral branches of adaptive immunity
without booster injections. A third merit is the ability to perform simultaneous
vaccinations. Because of the delivery system's large payload capacity, a variety
of different and unique replicons can be co-formulated to immunize patients
against multiple diseases at once. A fourth merit is that these vaccines do not
require adjuvants, thus improving both tolerability and safety.