* 1821628
* Collaborative Research: Expansion, Optimization, and Dissemination of Step-Based Tutoring Software for Linear Circuit Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Srividya Bansal, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,253,233.00

In this project, Arizona State University, in collaboration with Morgan State
University, Florida A&amp;M University, and the University of Texas at El Paso,
will evaluate the impact of a virtual tutoring system for circuit analysis. The
virtual tutor focuses on introductory linear circuit analysis, a key gateway
class required of students in all engineering disciplines. Personalized to
handle each student's needs, the tutoring system uses a step-based approach in
which the computer accepts each step of a student's work and automatically
evaluates the work, providing detailed feedback. This immediate feedback helps
to correct student errors early in the learning
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to augment, optimize,
disseminate, and evaluate the impact of a virtual tutoring system (Circuit
Tutor) for linear circuit analysis. Compared to similar systems, the Circuit
Tutor uniquely accepts and checks every step of a student's work to provide
immediate, detailed feedback, thus facilitating student learning and minimizing
student frustration. Offered in "open-source" mode, the tutoring system will be
freely available to students all over the world. Methods of optimizing the
pedagogical effectiveness of the system will be systematically explored by
studying transcripts of student work and by real-time observations of students
at work with Circuit Tutor. Instructors will be provided with an online
dashboard to inform them about the progress of individual students and common
learning difficulties. Introduction of "desirable learning difficulties" that
are believed to greatly enhance long-term retention will be explored.
Integration of theoretical computer-based instruction with hands-on learning
will also be studied. The software will be rigorously evaluated and results
widely disseminated to multiple institutions for use in their engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.