* 1821866
* Collaborative Research: Community-Engaged Student Learning for the Development of Empathy in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* David A Delaine, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 289,495.00

Research studies have shown that empathy is an important skill in engineering.
For example, increased empathy can contribute to communication, design
processes, professional success, ethics, and the overall culture of engineering.
However, development of empathy has not yet been recognized to be an important
component of engineering education. Likely as a result, engineers today
generally have less fully developed empathy skills, when compared to
professionals in other fields. Community-engaged student learning offers
opportunities for engineering students to develop empathy within community-
oriented partnerships built around mutual goals. This project will explore
community-engaged student learning as a platform inclusion of empathy
development in engineering curricula. Thus, it can provide engineering educators
with a mechanism to promote empathy as a key engineering
skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will use quasi-
experimental, mixed methods research to: 1) study how community-engaged student
learning may foster the development of empathy in engineers; and (2) develop
research-informed instructional tools to teach empathy and enhance learning
outcomes around empathy in engineering. In the first phase of the project, the
goal is to collect baseline data across seven community-engaged learning
activities, which include service learning, outreach, and volunteer-type
activities within the community. Student reflections, focus groups, and
interviews will provide qualitative insight, and quantitative measurements will
triangulate findings. The goal of the second phase of the project is to develop
instructional tools for empathy. In the third phase, these instructional tools
will be implemented in community-engaged student learning activities and data
collection will be repeated to determine the impact of the tools on empathy
development in engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.