* 1821065
* Modernizing the Flow and Imaging Cytometry Capabilities at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Stephen Archer, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 297,402.00

Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is awarded a grant to modernize the J.J.
MacIsaac Facility for Aquatic Cytometry (FAC) and acquire a multi-user, shore
and seagoing flow cytometric analyzer and imaging cytometer to support,
research, training and education in the field of aquatic microbiology. The FAC
at Bigelow Laboratory has been a multi-user research facility for over 30 years
to advance the study of aquatic microbes and algae in marine and freshwater
ecosystems. The primary structure of aquatic ecosystems is microscopic. Many new
types and function of aquatic microorganisms have been discovered using flow
cytometry (measurement of cells suspended in fluid flow). The majority of these
microbes remain uncultivable and are therefore largely unknown. The FAC
facilitates aquatic microbiology research to a broad research community allowing
for this vast, untapped reservoir of biodiversity in these environments to be
identified. It also provides training and education on both flow cytometry and
aquatic microbiology to a broad range of students, including, undergraduates,
graduate students and research scientists. The modernization of the FAC will
support a variety of aquatic research (freshwater and marine) as well as the
development of new aquatic flow cytometric applications. The instrumentation
will be a part of the FAC, a multi-user center for training and applications of
advance cytometric technology for the study of aquatic
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current instrumentation at the FAC is well
used and outdated. Advances in optical technology (fiber optics, imaging, and
fluorochrome detection) allow for flow cytometric instrumentation that contains
solid-state lasers and are available in numerous wavelengths spanning the UV and
visible light spectrum, some of which are better suited for aquatic biological
applications. The new instruments acquired by this project will facilitate the
ongoing primary research at Bigelow Laboratory and within the broader aquatic
science community, develop new approaches and applications using both flow and
imaging capabilities, and educate students and scientists in flow cytometric
methods and applications. The new flow cytometric cell analyzer has a number of
features that will enhance research capabilities, a 3-laser system for multiple
wavelength excitation with up to 17 detectors for scatter and fluorescence
particle detection, the ability to do volumetric counting, and includes a
universal sample loader in order to rapidly process samples. The new imaging
cytometer will provide a higher-powered laser and more sensitive detectors as
well as a snap-in-flow cell holder and an integrated auto-focus mechanism,
providing consistent higher resolution images. For more information about
Bigelow Laboratory and the FAC, please see the website:
http://www.bigelow.org/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.