* 1821110
* Planning for the long-term impact of the Dordt College agriculture stewardship center on basic research and education related to ecological sustainability in the rural Midwest
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Jeff Ploegstra, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 24,996.00

This award will provide support for planning the long-term impact of the Dordt
College agriculture stewardship center (DC-ASC) on basic research and education
related to ecological sustainability in the rural Midwest. The center is
strategically located in the heart of some of the most highly productive and
valued agricultural land and livestock production in the nation. The center is
undergoing major change with land acquisition, building changes, and the
construction of a new $4.8 million teaching and outreach center. There is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to direct and substantially increase the long-
term development and impact of the DC-ASC on basic research and education
related to ecological sustainability in the rural Midwest that will serve needs
of the 4-state region of Iowa, Minnesota, South Dakota, and
Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring together regional area
leaders in agriculture, education, governments of states and municipalities,
university extension, and businesses to develop a strategic plan for long-term
direction and development of the DC-ASC to best serve the needs of the region in
a responsible and sustainable manner. The project will address regional
ecological issues, future education endeavors, direction for future research of
high priority in the region and will provide direction for future infrastructure
development of the DC-ASC as a regional service center in service to the needs
developed in the planning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.