* 1821459
* Pencil Puzzles as an Inclusive Domain for Learning Computer Science Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ivona Bezakova, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 474,064.00

Computer science includes abstract, high-level concepts as well as concrete
details, such as the proper arrangement of code. As a result, teaching computer
science is particularly challenging. Pencil puzzles show promise for learning
computer science, as well as for promoting critical and computational thinking
and problem solving. This project builds on a previous analysis that
demonstrated the effectiveness of pencil puzzles in introductory computer
programming courses. It aims to aims to extend the assessment to multiple course
levels and to multiple institutions that have different characteristics and
student demographics. Pencil puzzles are diagrams that pose a problem that
humans solve through deduction, using only a pencil. Most pencil puzzles are
language and culture independent, giving them broad potential as a teaching and
learning tool. The use of pencil puzzles to teach computer science principles
has the potential to broaden participation in computing. This project seeks to
provide insights into the puzzles' effects on learning, engagement of diverse
populations, suitability for both K-12 and upper division computational thinking
courses, and value to instructors as pedagogical tools. The study intends to
include a population of deaf and hard-of-hearing students and aims to provide
insight into the suitability of the puzzles for this group of students. The
project aims to contribute to the growth and diversity of the national computing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an
understanding of how pencil puzzles can provide an effective context for
computer science education across populations. This project aims to investigate
four research questions. (1) Do pencil-puzzle-based assignments promote
measurable learning of computer science concepts and computational thinking
across a diverse student population and at various types of institutions? (2)
Are the engagement with and the grades on pencil-puzzle-based assignments
independent of prior computing experience, gender, and other demographics? (3)
Are pencil-puzzle-based assignments suitable for upper levels of collegiate
computer science education and for K-12 students learning computational
thinking? and 4) Are pencil puzzles valuable to a broad spectrum of educators,
including undergraduate educators (including faculty and teaching assistants)
and K-12 teachers? The PIs plan to collaborate with instructors at seven
different undergraduate institutions (ranging from research intensive to small
liberal arts institutions) as well as a middle school and a high school to
develop assignments suited to each institution's student body and course format.
The project intends to make the new assignments available through an existing
online repository (https://www.cs.rit.edu/~pencilpuzzle/#/). Assessments of
pencil puzzle effectiveness will take place at each institution and include
interviews with instructors and teaching assistants, student surveys, and
student grades. The project intends to include extended training of instructors
in the use of pencil puzzles to increase their impact on student learning and
demonstrate the utility and adoptability of the
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.