* 1821710
* Collaborative Research: Get the Facts Out: Changing the Conversation around STEM Teacher Recruitment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Douglas Ensley, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,512,620.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Development and
Implementation project seeks to dispel misperceptions associated with being a
teacher of physics, chemistry, and mathematics at the middle and high school
level. Recent research in STEM teacher preparation has identified strongly held
beliefs about the teaching profession, many of which are misperceptions. These
misperceptions discourage STEM undergraduates from exploring teaching as a
viable career option. Study results also suggest that many college and
university faculty in STEM departments either do not mention middle or high
school teaching as a career option or misrepresent the profession. Major
misperceptions include inaccurate beliefs: (1) that the salary gap between
teaching and private sector employment is very wide; and (2) about tangible and
intangible benefits of the profession. This "Get the Facts Out" project has
three aims. First, to change perceptions about the K-12 mathematical and
physical sciences teaching professions among faculty, students, and parents.
Second, to increase the frequency of faculty engaging in practices recommended
in the Get the Facts Out toolkit. Third to increase the numbers of mathematics,
chemistry, and physics majors who enroll in a teacher certification program.
This project builds upon prior work, which includes the development of an
instrument, Perceptions of Teaching as a Profession (PTaP), designed to probe
STEM students' attitudes and beliefs about teaching, a set of interactive
materials called "MythBusters," and a pilot study. Organizational partners
include the Colorado School of Mines, the American Association of Physics
Teachers, the American Physical Society, the American Chemical Society, and the
Mathematical Association of America, and several colleges and universities to
serve as study sites. The societies aim to leverage their connections with
disciplinary departments and engage change agents to implement a national
campaign through interactive dissemination and support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to develop and refine a "Get the Facts
Out" campaign toolkit to support local faculty champions in changing the
conversation about STEM teaching careers in their departments. The toolkit,
based on pilot interventions that show positive results in shifting perceptions
among students and faculty, and which have been shown to outperform traditional
recruitment efforts, will be designed to be customizable and adaptable to the
local situation. The materials and strategies will include both student-facing
and faculty-facing resources and a how-to guide for running interactive events,
including but not limited to slide decks, clicker questions, and handouts with
national survey data on retention, job satisfaction, and student loan
forgiveness. In addition, sample informational handouts on teacher salaries,
comparisons of teacher and faculty salaries, and retirement benefits, with
instructions on how to customize these with local data. Finally, the project
will create brochures and posters that incorporate tested messaging strategies,
and 60-second narratives and single-sentence "bulleted messages" that can be
used as conversation starters in emails or other resources designed by the
implementer. After funding ends, it is anticipated that the campaign will be
sustained by each society. To inform and improve national and local campaigns,
this project intends to conduct research to understand which of the strategies
in the "Get the Facts Out" toolkit are most effective, both in terms of impact
on faculty and student perceptions and faculty uptake over time. For this study,
large-scale quantitative data to provide statistically strong results will be
examined and qualitative data designed to enable a deeper understanding of
factors that influence outcomes will be gathered. To better understand the
effect of faculty and student perceptions on student career choice, the project
intends to look for correlations with department success in preparing
mathematics and science teachers and with institutional, departmental and
student characteristics. This unique project is designed to reach STEM majors in
a large fraction of all U.S. mathematics, chemistry and physics departments and
has potential to significantly address teacher shortages in these high-need STEM
disciplines. The IUSE: EHR program is a core NSF undergraduate STEM education
program that seeks to improve the effectiveness of undergraduate STEM education
for both majors and non-majors, including the undergraduate preparation of K-12
STEM teachers. This project has the potential to speak boldly regarding
misperceptions about teachers held by undergraduate STEM majors and the faculty
who teach them and to ultimately impact career decisions of future middle and
high school STEM teachers across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.