* 1821992
* Accelerated Dynamics of Surface Chemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/06/2018,08/31/2020
* Ramamurthy Ramprasad, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 241,246.00

1600218 PI: Ramprasad &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;Title: Accelerated Dynamics of Surface Chemical
Reactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface chemical reactions are ubiquitous in
natural phenomena and play a key role in several scientific disciplines, such as
heterogeneous catalysis, crystal growth, and electrochemistry. Achieving a
molecular-level picture of the mechanisms and dynamical detail of surface
chemical reactions though remains a daunting task. Current methods of inquiry,
be it empirical or computational, provide us with only a limited view of this
complex world. One way of achieving the requisite level of understanding is by
the use of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. These simulations can directly
monitor the progression of reactions at surfaces at the molecular level as a
function of a variety of relevant conditions. Nevertheless, significant gaps
remain in present-day MD capabilities: they are either fast (but not versatile
or accurate), e.g., those based on empirical force-fields, or they are versatile
and accurate (but not efficient), e.g., those based on quantum mechanical (or ab
initio) methods. The proposed work will exploit an adaptive machine learning
scheme that can both accelerate ab initio MD simulations as well as create
accurate force-fields (at no extra cost) on-the-fly. Timescales previously
unreachable using quantum mechanical simulations may be accessed using this new
paradigm (conceivably,milliseconds to seconds), while still preserving the
fidelity of quantum mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary reason ab-initio
MD simulations are slow is largely because of enormous redundancies that
permeate present-day paradigms. Energies and forces, the ingredients necessary
to perform MD simulations, are evaluated for every configuration that is
visited, regardless of whether a new configuration is similar to a previously
visited configuration. The basic premise underlying this proposal is that a
methodology based on machine learning can be used to eliminate the significant
effort involved in predicting atomic forces and energies of revisited or similar
states within a local minimum, and at equivalent multiple local minima, thus
eliminating an enormous amount of redundancies. Only when a truly new
configuration is encountered is an ab initio scheme necessary; otherwise, the
inexpensive machine learning algorithm is used to predict atomic forces and
energies. In the former instance, the learning algorithm is retrained to include
the new information, thus making the prediction scheme adaptive on-the-fly. The
specific goals of the proposed research are: (1) The development of stand-alone
force-fields just using the data accumulated during ab initio MD simulations;
and (2) Application of this development to important model surface science
problems, including surface adatom diffusion, surface oxidation, and surface
catalytic reactions. Several educational initiatives are also planned, including
new course offerings, workshops, online lectures, short courses, and symposia.