* 1821351
* Institutionalizing Undergraduate Research Education to Promote Student Engagement and Success
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jason Curtis, Cuesta College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 256,456.00

Research demonstrates that undergraduate research experiences help to develop
students' problem-solving skills, connect the classroom to careers, and improve
student motivation. Studies focused on students from historically
underrepresented groups show that participation in undergraduate research
experiences improves their persistence in STEM and helps to validate their
identity as scientists. Cuesta College, a two-year institution, will provide
undergraduate research experiences in multiple STEM disciplines. As suggested by
previous research, it is expected that participating in undergraduate research
will increase student engagement, improve their problem-solving skills, increase
retention, and improve their success after college. A multi-disciplinary Faculty
Inquiry Group will identify best practices and promote the value of
undergraduate research to faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to create a culture of undergraduate
research involving multiple STEM disciplines to increase student engagement and
better prepare students to succeed. The project will involve faculty from
biology, engineering, astronomy, chemistry, and math, who will incorporate
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) into their courses. A
Faculty Inquiry Group will build a knowledge base about how to offer effective
undergraduate research experiences and will use that information to recruit
other college faculty to incorporate CUREs into their courses. This core group
of interdisciplinary faculty innovators will develop and test research
experiences using different settings, modes, and methods. A successful CURE in
astronomy will serve as a model to other disciplines and faculty involved in the
astronomy CURE will assist CURE-developers in other disciplines. Economics will
join the team to connect the project to the social sciences. Measures of student
success will include scientific knowledge, understanding of research practices,
and sense of belonging to the discipline. The project will provide professional
development opportunities to all faculty to share knowledge about effective
CURES and to encourage participation. The Faculty will be trained to mentor
student researchers and to encourage them to publish or present their results.
College administration will address policies and procedures, such as
articulation agreements and faculty workload, to remove barriers to the
implementation of undergraduate research experiences. The concept of a robust,
college-wide undergraduate research program at a two-year institution is
innovative. The project will monitor changes in faculty perceptions and
attitudes about undergraduate research experiences and document challenges and
benefits of implementing CUREs, which may include affects on faculty workload,
advancement, and job satisfaction. Results of this project can provide insights
about the capacity of community colleges to implement and expand
CUREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.