* 1821766
* SaTC: EDU: CyCAD: A Virtual Platform for Cybersecurity Curriculum on Analog Design
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Swaroop Ghosh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,280.00

The understanding of the hardware security of digital systems has gained
significant maturity through research and curriculum development. However, most
cybersecurity curricula fail to cover these threats. This project will develop a
virtual platform for a cybersecurity curriculum on analog design (CyCAD). The
curriculum will feature hands-on learning through planned activities,
assessments, and projects on CyCAD test boards. Students will learn core
cybersecurity concepts using the CyCAD framework, which will be upgraded
throughout the project for future use as a self-contained audio-visual learning
package. By providing remote access to CyCAD, and the flexibility to personalize
experiments, the project will also address "Advance Personalized Learning," one
of the National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenges. This project will
promote K-12 and technical workforce education, cybersecurity awareness in the
society, and collaboration between computer science, electrical engineering and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features a strong K-12 outreach
component that includes a professional development workshop for teachers. A
well-thought out, and carefully designed, dissemination plan that employs
multiple approaches, including YouTube videos, will reach a broad range of
individuals. The project addresses a significant gap in cybersecurity education,
and that the comprehensive K-12 outreach component, coupled with the
multifaceted dissemination plan, will ensure that this project will have a
significant impact well beyond the limits of the host
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.