* 1821444
* Focus on Inquiry and Equity in Mathematics for Education Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Albert Cuoco, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 599,985.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Development and Implementation
project will address two questions: What is mathematics? and Who is successful
at doing it? Mathematics continues to be widely seen as a static body of
knowledge that gets delivered to students. This misperception limits the
potential for students to experience the real nature of the discipline,
including developing their own mathematical questions. Research shows that this
situation is often exacerbated for students of color, partly because the
scarcity of visible mathematicians of color can suggest to students that
mathematics is not achievable for students of colors. This project will develop
and test a model of a yearlong fellowship program for educators of mathematics
teachers to work with one another and mathematicians from the NSF INCLUDES
Mathematics Affiliates of Color (MAC) network at Iowa State University.
Improving the professional development of educators of mathematics teachers is
in the national interest as a mechanism to better prepare mathematics preservice
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the project is to use the
developed model to document why and how mathematics teacher educators shift
their thinking and instructional practice to incorporate inquiry and equity into
learning experiences for preservice teachers. The project's inquiry and equity
model will provide mathematics teacher educators with opportunities to: (i) ask
and investigate mathematics questions of their own with each other and with
mathematicians; (ii) reflect on the experience of asking and investigating those
questions with a particular focus on issues of status and equity; (iii)
strategize together about how to infuse their own existing courses with
opportunities for pre-service teachers to ask and investigate their own
questions, attending to status and equity; and (iv) work together, with project
staff, and with MAC mathematicians as they build and implement their own courses
for pre-service teachers with sharpened focus on inquiry and equity. Pre-service
teachers in courses taught by the Inquiry and Equity Fellows will have the
opportunity to ask and investigate mathematics questions of their own design.
Likewise, the pre-service teachers will enter the teaching profession with the
first-hand knowledge that expertise and creative work in mathematics is indeed
the domain of people of color. The twenty faculty Inquiry and Equity Fellows
will teach thousands of pre-service teachers over the course of their careers;
the pre-service teachers will in turn reach hundreds of thousands of students.
Research in the Inquiry and Equity Project will focus on Fellows' thinking and
course preparation, Fellows' implementation of the inquiry and equity practices
with their pre-service teachers, and the effects of the Inquiry and Equity Model
on pre-service teachers. This research will build insight into why and how
mathematics teacher educators shift their thinking and instructional practice to
incorporate inquiry and equity into learning experiences for pre-service
teachers within the context of current teacher education coursework. Finally,
the Inquiry and Equity Project will document and disseminate the model for
further replication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.