* 1821118
* Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum/Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference (TCORF/IHC); Miami, Florida; March 13-15, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The 2018 Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum (TCORF), the 72nd
Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference (IHC) will be held on March 13 -15, 2018
at Florida International University, in Miami, FL. Topics will include research
addressing operational imperatives, challenges in observing and forecasting
during the 2017 hurricane season, Joint Hurricane Testbed activities, and the
Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program. A meeting of the Working Group for
Hurricane and Winter Storms Operation and Research, which supports the annual
update of the National Hurricane Operations Plan, will be a part of the forum.
The Forum is sponsored by the National Science Foundation, NOAA National Weather
Service, and the Office of Naval Research.

Intellectual Merit: At the TCORF/72nd IHC, representatives from Federal agencies
and the academic research community will have the opportunity to discuss the
latest research into tropical cyclone observing, forecasting, and warning such
as: 1. 2017 hurricane/typhoon season challenges and the opportunities for
research that they offer; 2. Research priorities of the operational centers; 3.
Observations and observing strategies; 4. Tropical cyclone model development; 5.
Transitioning research to operations; 6. Advances in tropical cyclone forecast
and warning products and services.

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important to the Nation because it brings the
academic research community together with Federal agencies, to prepare for the
upcoming hurricane season and make improvements to the Nation's hurricane
forecasting and warning program.