* 1821657
* Implementing DNA Barcoding for Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* George Ude, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,973,924.00

A universal product code is a unique pattern of vertical lines that can identify
specific consumer product. In a comparable way, a DNA barcode is a unique
pattern of DNA sequence that can potentially identify specific species of living
things. Understanding and using DNA barcoding requires ideas from molecular
biology, genetics, evolution, systematics, ecology, and biodiversity, all of
which are key concepts in traditional introductory biology courses. Building on
the growing evidence that early exposure to research increases retention of
students in STEM disciplines, this project will enable DNA barcoding course-
based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) for large numbers of students.
This project will provide a series of summer workshops to train 80 undergraduate
faculty from around the country, so that they can teach students how to use DNA
barcoding to identify a diverse population of organisms. With a relatively small
investment of time, these students will have the real possibility of discovering
a new barcode and publishing it on GenBank, as practicing scientists do. By
participating in projects that track species through time and space, students
can contribute new knowledge about how plants and animals are responding to
their environment. DNA barcode research requires the "soft skills" of
collaborating, persisting, and presenting ideas, which any student would need to
succeed in his or her future career. The students will also develop expertise in
analysis, manipulation, and integration of data from different sources, as well
as visualization of data. These skills are especially relevant for the future
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced metabarcoding CUREs will be developed
in microbiome and environmental DNA analysis to introduce faculty and students
to next generation sequencing and data science. The goals of this project are to
introduce undergraduate educators to basic DNA barcoding technology and help
them develop the additional expertise needed to understand and use DNA
metabarcoding. DNA metabarcoding embodies the conceptual transition of modern
biology from single gene to massively parallel genome analysis. The project
objectives are to: 1) Develop technology to reduce costs and barriers to
classroom implementation of DNA barcoding and metabarcoding. 2) Train faculty in
DNA barcoding and metabarcoding technology, data science, and effective methods
for scaling CUREs to reach large numbers of students. 3) Provide mentoring and
extended collaborative support to faculty as they implement CUREs and extend
their expertise to data science. 4) Evaluate the program and provide unified
measures of the impact of barcoding research experiences on student self-
efficacy and persistence in STEM. An ambitious evaluation program will attempt
to determine which of the key elements of CUREs (engaging in scientific
practices, collaborating, examining relevant problems, exploring questions with
unknown answers, and re-iterating experiments) most closely correlates with
positive student outcomes. The project will integrate three levels of
investigation: fieldwork, in vitro biochemistry, and in silico bioinformatics.
The bioinformatics analysis of barcodes provides students with an increasingly
sophisticated repertoire of data science skills and statistical
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.