* 1821736
* CAREER: Taming Uncertainties in Reliable, Real-Time Messaging for Wireless Networked Sensing and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Hongwei Zhang, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 79,174.00

Message passing in wireless networked sensing and control systems must be
reliable and in real-time. Such design challenges require new models and
distributed protocols for messaging that can handle interference locally and
accurately, given the basic problem of computing probabilistic path delays is
NP-hard. Focusing on single-hop transmission scheduling and multi-hop spatio-
temporal data flow control, this project makes novel contributions by proposing
two major research tasks: 1) investigation of control-theoretic approaches to
online model instantiation, based on the physical-ratio-K (PRK) interference
model, and addressing the challenges of large interference range as well as
anisotropic, asymmetric wireless communication; 2) developing a lightweight
approach to computing probabilistic path delays followed by a multi-timescale
adaptation framework for real-time messaging. In particular, the PRK
interference model integrates protocol model's locality with physical model's
high-fidelity, thus bridging the gap between the suitability for distributed
implementation and the enabled scheduling performance. By controlling network
operations at the same timescale as the corresponding dynamics, the proposed
multi-timescale adaptation framework ensures long-term optimality while
simultaneously addressing short-term dynamics. Additionally, this project
includes an integrated, multi-level, multi-component education plan. The
education activities will raise public awareness, improve student retention and
participation of underrepresented groups in computing.