* 1821780
* SaTC-EDU: PHIKS - PHysical Inspection and attacKs on electronicS
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Navid Asadi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 308,000.00

The hardware security community has grown significantly over the past decade.
However, research on the most advanced topics such as reverse engineering,
physical attacks, and counterfeit detection remains stuck in the early stages of
investigation and/or development. First, owning and maintaining the required
instrumentation is too prohibitive for academia, thereby limiting research to a
few focused labs in industry and government. Second, the knowledge and expertise
needed to fully understand these topics and to address their challenges lies at
the intersection of multiple non-overlapping scientific fields including
microscopy, physics, material science, and computer engineering. Third,
electronic hardware spans multiple levels (device, chip, printed circuit board,
and system), which are each subject to unique attack modes and requirements.
Although some book chapters and surveys have attempted to bridge these gaps,
they only introduce the basic concepts to academic researchers, students, and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a
course that exposes students to advanced topics in hardware security.
Specifically, ten educational modules will be created that cover (1) the
background and motivation for destructive and non-destructive reverse
engineering, invasive and non-invasive probing, fault injection, and counterfeit
detection; (2) the fundamentals of inspection/attack equipment including optical
microscope, scanning electron microscope (SEM), focused ion beam (FIB), photon
emission microscope (PEM), and X-ray microscope (XRM); and (3) an introduction
to the image processing, machine learning, and classification techniques needed
to make sense of microscopy data in the context of hardware security. The
components of each module will include one or more lectures, an interactive
equipment demonstration, an archetypal data set, and multiple forms of
assessment (quiz, lab experiment, and exam). Data sets and demos will be
generated based on prior research experiments as well as new experiments using
the world class instruments available at University of Florida. By making the
educational materials available to the academic community, this project will
have a significant impact on education and workforce development in
cybersecurity, failure analysis, and electronics
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.