* 1821088
* New Technologies for expanding the scale of research at the Mpala Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Dino Martins, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,741.00

Technology is transforming the scale and scope of environmental research. Just
as smartphones and social media have transformed the way people interact and
acquire their news, breakthroughs in image processing, GPS satellite and
wireless animal trackers as well as DNA and stable isotope analytical tools are
emboldening scientist to solve old ecological and environmental problems in new
ways and to design new studies that ask and answer questions that were
inconceivable only a few years ago. At the 22,000 ha Mpala Research Center in
central Kenya, US scientists from over a dozen US universities and Institutes
supported by 14 NSF and NIH grants, resulting in 197 publications in the last 5
years, study the ecology of a 20,000 Km2 semi-arid ecosystem that sustains the
second most diverse array of wildlife in Kenya as well as supporting livelihoods
of commercial ranchers, pastoral herders and farmers who share the landscape
with this wildlife. It is a model system that supports large scale experiments
that are difficult to do within the continental US. Moreover, the Mpala,
Research Center, especially with the new modern lab envisioned, continues to
serve as an educational laboratory that teaches US undergraduate and graduate
students of all ethnicities and walks of life how do real, important, relevant
and transformative science. In addition, their interactions with students,
faculty and PIs from Kenya and around the world provide a diversity of
perspectives that will make them broader scientists able to work within
different cultures. In this way, Mpala is training the next generation of
environmental leaders, some of whom will practice science, but others of whom
will shape science policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Mpala, research generally
focuses on the biogeochemistry as well as the population, community and
behavioral dynamics of the animals and plants inhabiting the ecosystem. But as
strong as the research has been to date, advances in DNA and genetical
analytical techniques will transform science, allowing more in depth looks at
the diets, the competitive and mutualistic relationships of animal species
comprising food webs as well as the population genetics of species spread across
expansive spatial and temporal scales. Similar advances in stable isotope
analytical tools will enable novel and more detailed investigations into the
functioning of the ecosystem, closer examination of water use by plants that
drive and limit photosynthesis as well as those of animals that shape their
movements, habitat uses and overall decision-making, and the paleoecology of
many extinct species, including our human ancestors. These new tools will also
provide important insights underlying interactions among wildlife and people,
thus helping reduce conflict that accompanies human population growth and
expansion. In order to carry out this research, the new analytical tools must be
purchased and a new 'clean' building that isolates the equipment form the harsh,
dusty and hot tropical climatic elements of central Kenya must be constructed.
This new facility will propel the NSF and NIH supported scientists and their
students to uncover new rules shaping environmental patterns and processes that
were impossible to study before the emergence of these new technological
advances. What is learned in Kenya where biodiversity is high and the land is
shared between people and wildlife easily applies to similar ecosystems, species
and problems found in the western and southwestern states in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.