* 1821650
* Collaborative Research:  What Difference does Early-Career Faculty Development Make? A Research Study of Multiple Models
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Laura Watkins, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 85,729.00

High impact instructional practices in college STEM teaching have been shown to
significantly improve student outcomes including performance, student confidence
and interest, and retention. Thus, helping faculty implement high-impact
practices could improve STEM education. However, because faculty development
programs can be time-intensive and expensive, it is important to know if such
programs are effective in changing college teachers' practices. In this project,
researchers will investigate the results of teaching-focused professional
development on early-career mathematics faculty. The research team will
collaborate with the Mathematical Association of America's Project NExT (New
Experiences in Teaching) and the American Mathematical Association of Two-Year
Colleges' Project ACCCESS (Advancing Community College Careers: Education,
Scholarship, and Service). Both Project NeXT and Project ACCCESS are similarly
structured, "high-touch" early-career, teaching-focuses professional development
programs. The project researchers will collect data to understand how the
teaching practices of faculty participating in these programs change and how
those changes relate to their professional development experiences. Since these
programs are supported by major professional societies, they are examples of a
model that is common across many STEM disciplines. Thus, results of similar
professional development programs for early career mathematics faculty may be
relevant across other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed methods
study will use valid measures of teaching practice to examine the impact of
early-career teaching-focused professional development programs on teaching and
leadership in STEM fields. The research design includes four sub-studies that
together provide an in-depth examination of participants' development as
teachers, scholars, and leaders because of their participation in early-career
teaching-focused professional development programs, and to understand how these
outcomes arise from program design. The study uses surveys, classroom
observation, and course artifacts, triangulated with interviews and student
surveys, to document changes in teaching practice. It will identify other career
outcomes relevant to the new faculty role. Studies of current early-career
teaching-focused professional development program cohorts will gather pre/post
survey data and observations from large samples, to compare with data from
individuals who applied but did not participate. A qualitative study will
document program activities and explore how these activities may explain
outcomes. Separately, retrospective survey measures will compare longer-term
outcomes for program alumni vs. non-participating applicants. While Project NExT
and Project ACCESS share many goals, differences in their models will enable the
team to discern differences in the nature and depth of outcomes and to identify
what early-career teaching-related professional development features are
important in what ways. The Mathematical Association of America's Early Career
Mentoring Network offers comparison to a third "light touch" mentoring model
that supports new faculty but does not offer a specific intervention around
evidence-based instructional practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.