* 1821942
* I-Corps: A novel diagnostic method of detecting eye diseases using a smartphone
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jo Woon Chong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
development of smartphone-based eye disease detection technology for potential
clients and partners. Potential commercial clients for the technology include 1)
ophthalmologists and eye clinics, 2) medical centers, 3) customers living in
rural or suburban areas with limited medical services, 4) senior living and
retirement communities, 5) health insurance companies, and 6) ophthalmic
instrument manufacturers. Eye diseases are usually detected in clinics with
ophthalmic devices, e.g. optical coherence tomography, corneal topography and
slit lamp, which are large, expensive and not portable, and need to be operated
by trained technicians. However, our proposed smartphone-based eye disease
detection method is small, affordable, portable, and it can be operated by
patients in a convenient way, which will overcome the limitations mentioned
above. The proposed algorithm can detect eye diseases or monitor eye healthiness
in a proper and timely manner, and it can share the monitoring information with
ophthalmologists. Hence, eye diseases can be detected in the earlier stage with
our technology. Moreover, ophthalmologist can focus more on severe treatments or
surgeries. A 5- to 10-fold lower cost is an added potential benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore the commercial potential
of a new eye disease detection technology using a smartphone and make it broadly
available for scientific discovery and medical applications. The project further
develops a smartphone-based eye disease detection technology that is more
accurate and convenient using image processing and machine learning techniques.
The proposed smartphone-based eye disease detection technology makes use of
panoramic images or short video recordings of the eye at different angles. The
recorded eye images are divided into iris, lens, sclera, and cornea components
using automatic image cropping techniques. Each divided component is then
analyzed using shape detection and color matching techniques to recognize the
shape and to detect the abnormality of each component, respectively. Preliminary
finding shows that the proposed technology detects keratoconus with more than
90% accuracy from 30 subjects. To detect diverse types of eye diseases and to
increase the accuracy of eye disease detection, we will collect additional eye
data from patients and normal subjects to form a larger database, and apply
machine learning techniques to the accumulated database. Bringing these
innovative capabilities to the commercial market will significantly improve
discovery output in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.