* 1821589
* Collaborative Research: Building a Culture of Active Learning through Course-Based Communities of Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Robert Sachs, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,745,118.00

This project aims to improve undergraduate STEM teaching for more than 20,000
students and help develop models that can improve learning in programs across
the country. The primary goal of the project is to develop and support a
university culture that values the incorporation of active learning practices in
undergraduate STEM courses and programs. Teams of faculty, graduate students,
and undergraduate students will be brought together to form course-based
communities of transformation that will support these changes. Over the course
of the project, communities will be created in four STEM departments that teach
thousands of students in targeted gateway courses in Mathematics, Physics,
Biology, and Computer Science. These multi-generational communities will receive
training on active learning techniques. Using this knowledge and with support
from a network of learning communities, they will develop materials and
assessments that emphasize active learning and student engagement. Community
leaders will receive additional training on grassroots leadership and
organizational change in higher education. These leaders will demonstrate the
value of active learning techniques, encouraging faculty who are more hesitant
to make changes in their courses. Engaging a large number of faculty members,
along with administrators who can promote these efforts more widely, will help
change teaching norms throughout the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate how course-based communities of transformation can be
used to develop a culture of active and inquiry-based learning in STEM. A
significant body of research has shown that active and inquiry-based learning
improves student attitudes, retention, and understanding, particularly for
underrepresented groups in STEM. Nevertheless, motivating faculty to change
their teaching practices remains a challenge. Course-based communities of
transformation in the Mathematics, Physics, Biology, and Computer Science
Departments will lead instructional changes in specified high-enrollment
undergraduate courses. Learning communities that span departments and include
key university leadership will support the course-based communities and provide
top-down efforts to complement the bottom-up course-focused change. Through
analysis of interviews, surveys, course materials, and other key documents, the
project will examine how the culture change process unfolds at the faculty,
department, and organizational levels. Analysis will also focus on the
relationship between department-level change and organizational learning.
Combined with a better understanding of organizational change within the
university setting, the multi-generational community of transformation model
will help other institutions succeed in efforts to change their own campus
teaching cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.