* 1821089
* A resilient, wireless, mesh network for the Black Rock Forest field station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2020
* William Schuster, Black Rock Forest Consortium, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2020
* USD 317,787.00

All biological field stations need modern communications and information
networks tailored to their situations to optimally support ongoing research and
education programs and facilitate new lines of research. Researchers need access
to environmental data, sensors and sensor stations, remote access to field sites
and equipment, access to the internet and servers, and the ability to
efficiently upload and transmit data from remote locations via standardized data
schemes. This project will update and expand an existing radiotelemetry network
at the Black Rock Forest field station (http://blackrockforest.org) in New York.
The expected impacts will be greater research productivity, increased future
research capacity, expanded opportunities for collaboration through data
sharing, and substantial broader community impacts through education and
outreach. The new network will enable expansion of connectivity and data
transmission in the more remote portions of the forest where new research
efforts will be initiated. These long-term enhancements to the Black Rock
Forest's infrastructure will create opportunities for teaching and learning,
dissemination of environmental information to a broader audience including the
public, and for increasing the involvement of the diverse groups who interact
with the field station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improvements will consist of a
new off-grid wireless mesh network, extending the old network with more than
twenty new, self-powered wireless access points (store and forward mesh data
nodes), two new transmission towers, an application programming interface (API)
to support all users, and a new research-dedicated web portal. Based on open
source software, this installation will simplify aggregation of a variety of
sensor types and management of different data streams for use by a wide range of
researchers and institutions. The system is designed to be simple and expandable
through the use of foundational modules applicable to forest environments
anywhere. The new network will enable expansion of connectivity and data
transmission in the more remote western side of the forest where new research
efforts have been proposed. It will contribute to increased science literacy and
understanding of the natural world among the 13,000 students who visit Black
Rock Forest each year, increased STEM training and college preparation,
increased participation particularly of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM activities, and increased activity in BRFC public and citizen science
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.