* 1821976
* Collaborative Research: Development of a novel way for understanding ancient Earth atmospheres and marine sulfate using the stable isotope of Oxygen (17O) in marine barite.
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 76,424.00

Marine sediments contain a record of climate evolution and how Earth's surface
has changed over the last 125 million years. Part of this story is locked up in
marine barite (BaSO4), a mineral that precipitates from seawater and contains
sulfur and oxygen. Through studies of the stable isotopes in seawater sulfate
(SO4), changes in biogeochemical processes and variations in other chemical
cycles that are important for life on Earth have been determined. However, due
to the properties of this sulfate and its ability to incorporate information
from processes as diverse as climate, microbial metabolism and weathering,
interpretation of traditional oxygen isotope (18O/16O) and sulfur isotope
(34S/32S) measurements commonly result in interpretations that are not unique.
This research explores a new, independent means for unraveling the information
stored in marine barite via the addition of a previously difficult-to-measure,
and hence generally overlooked, isotope of oxygen: 17O. Only recently, with the
development of increasingly sensitive mass spectrometers and new laboratory
methodologies, have these measurements become possible. The 17O signal locked
inside marine barite has the potential to identify the oxygen/carbon dioxide
ratio of the atmosphere as well as the intensity of biospheric activity and how
these parameters have changed over time, important knowledge for understanding
present atmospheric compositions and processes related to global warming. This
pilot study analyzes barite in the core tops of ten marine cores to
quantitatively evaluate whether barite is a faithful recorder of marine sulfate.
To further validate whether 17O can provide a reliable proxy for unraveling the
influences of various environmental processes, analyses of samples from
additional cores and down core of the those analyzed in the core top study will
be carried out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research further develops and
explores the potential of using marine barite to construct a reliable record of
the 17O fingerprint of seawater sulfate over the last 125 million years (i.e.,
from the Cretaceous through the Cenozoic). If successful, the work, in
combination with the results of more commonly measured oxygen (18O/16O) and
sulfur (33S/32S and 34S/36S) isotope ratios, has the potential to provide
insights into the O2/CO2 composition of the atmosphere over time and activity of
Earth's biosphere. Although previously 17O measurements of marine barite were
difficult to make and had high uncertainties, this limitation has now been
overcome by advances in mass spectrometry and the development of laboratory
procedures that are tuned to increase the analytical precision of 17O. Goals of
the research are to measure 17O in carefully selected barite samples from
sediment cores collected from the floor of the Pacific Ocean and quantify the
offset, if any, between modern core-top barite and contemporaneous water column
sulfate. It will also measure down core variations of 17O to examine variations
in the isotope signature with time and compare these with the results from co-
existing pore waters to examine possible diagenetic effects. The result will be
validation of this new proxy in the marine record. Samples of barite will be
extracted from sediment from the tops of ten cores, using acid leaching and
other separation techniques to remove all oxygen-bearing phases but barite. The
resulting barite will be checked for purity using techniques including scanning
and analytical electron microscopy. Preparation of samples for isotope work will
include fluorination and analysis on a high resolution isotope ratio mass
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.