* 1821969
* Support for the 2018 North American Summer School on Logic, Language, and Information (NASSLLI); June 2018, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Mandy Simons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The 2018 North American Summer School in Logic, Language, and Information
(NASSLLI) will be held at Carnegie Mellon University from June 23-June 29, 2018.
This program has been providing outstanding interdisciplinary educational
opportunities to graduate students and advanced undergraduates in logic,
linguistics, computer science, cognitive science, and philosophy since it was
launched as a biennial event in 2002. NASSLLI brings these disciplines together
with the goal of producing excellence in the study of how minds and machines
accomplish the tasks of representing, communicating, manipulating and reasoning
with information. NASSLLI represents a community which recognizes that advances
in modeling and analyzing the performance of these tasks, as well as automating
them, requires the contributions of multiple inter-related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NASSLLI 2018 will feature a set of intensive
introductory courses offered over the initial weekend of the summer school,
followed by a variety of weeklong courses and workshops in five parallel
sessions: Logic and Epistemology; Logic and Computation; Computational
Linguistics; Semantics and Pragmatics; and Explorations. The weeklong courses
will range from high level introductions to a topic to more specialized courses
for students with appropriate background. These combined offerings expand beyond
those typically offered at academic institutions, and offer students exposure to
new topics and approaches. The teaching faculty are all accomplished
researchers, coming from top institutions in the United States and overseas.
Attendance at NASSLLI thus provides students with the opportunity of interacting
with faculty doing work at the cutting edge of the fields represented at the
school. The summer school also provides students with the opportunity to present
their own work at daily poster sessions. All of these opportunities make NASSLLI
a unique venue for training the next generation of researchers in the areas of
logic, language and information, providing them with the requisite tools to
conduct innovative and groundbreaking research, and creating connections among
them. Funding will provide fellowships for selected graduate student
participants to defray the costs of accommodation and
travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.