* 1821545
* The Mathematical Inquiry Project: Faculty Instructional Change for Enhanced Student Learning and Success in Entry-Level Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* William Jaco, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,999,632.00

Policymakers, professional organizations, and educational researchers have cited
the importance of widespread adoption of inquiry-oriented, student-centered
instruction across all levels of undergraduate mathematics. The Mathematical
Inquiry Project (MIP) at Oklahoma State University aims to achieve that goal by
fostering a statewide collaboration among mathematics departments at the 27
public institutions of higher education in Oklahoma. The MIP focuses on
increasing the use of three elements of mathematical inquiry: active learning
techniques, incorporation of meaningful applications of mathematics, and
development of academic success skills. To achieve this transformative change in
undergraduate mathematics instruction, the project will develop a community of
practice to provide the needed professional support, mentoring, instructional
activity development, and community development. By fostering sustainable,
effective implementation of mathematical inquiry at large scale in Oklahoma, the
MIP aims to enhance the effectiveness of hundreds of mathematics faculty and
improve the learning of thousands of entry-level mathematics students across the
state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, the MIP will conduct
Initiation Workshops to prioritize the concepts and skills for College
Algebra/Precalculus, Quantitative Reasoning, Modeling, Calculus 1, and Academic
Success Skills. Following these workshops, Collaborative Research and
Development teams will develop instructional modules for each of the priority
topics defined by the Initiation Workshops. Subsequently, Regional Workshops,
led by the members of the relevant Collaborative Research and Development team,
will help faculty learn to how to use these modules in their courses and provide
continuing peer mentoring during implementation of the instructional modules.
Throughout the project, project personnel will examine the evolution of the MIP
community of practice, the evolution of individual faculty, and the impact of
MIP on student success. This analysis will be used to produce a refined model
for developing and sustaining an effective system-wide faculty community of
practice. The MIP model for building a community of practice around inquiry-
oriented mathematics, refined through the project research and evaluation, can
inform mathematics faculty professional development and mentoring throughout the
nation, potentially exerting a transformative impact on undergraduate
mathematics teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.