* 1821045
* Planning for the ByWater Biological Field Station at Carmichael Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Amy Lesen, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,995.00

This project supports the development of a five-year strategic plan for a
biological field station at a Tulane University facility in New Orleans, LA. The
ByWater Biological Field Station lies in an eight-acre forest tract in the City
of New Orleans, contiguous with a larger 5,000-acre bottomland hardwood forest
on the city's southern margin. The site offers wide range of opportunities for
experimental and applied research, education, public engagement and science
communication, and interdisciplinary collaboration. The scientific importance of
the site lies in its experimental value for the development and refining of
urban ecosystem management techniques, and additionally in the site's proximity
to and embeddedness in important regional deltaic processes and related policy
development. Further, the ByWater Field Station is already utilized as an
environmental education and arts integration facility for the region. Strategic
planning will be undertaken to compliment these uses with a rigorous scientific
program that aims to support partnerships with diverse stakeholders in the
region. The ByWater Biological Field Station represents a key opportunity for
scientific practice and community engagement in Louisiana and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project for the ByWater Biological Field
Station will produce a five-year strategic plan for a new peri-urban field
station situated at the nexus of vulnerable ecosystems and communities. Research
at the Station has the potential to significantly contribute to use-inspired
urban, forest, coastal, and riverine science ongoing in the region and growing
nationally. The human and biophysical factors shaping forest dynamics in and
around the Station represent a locally important and globally relevant setting
for scientific research and land management policy development. Strategic
planning for the field station will enable an impactful, novel research program;
increased education and training opportunities; prospects for groundbreaking
cross-disciplinary and cross-sector collaborations; new possibilities for
improving science literacy and engagement; and enhanced research and education
infrastructure in Louisiana and on the Gulf Coast. The region is in need of
improved education and STEM training and learning outcomes, and the planning
process will fulfill a major need in an underserved region of the U.S. More
details on the existing facility can be found at
https://www.astudiointhewoods.org/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.