* 1821794
* SaTC: EDU: Cybersecurity Education Using Interactive Storytelling with Social Robots
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Tia Barnes, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,998.00

Children ages 8-12 spend an increasingly large amount of time online consuming
digital media on computers, tablets and smartphones. Educating children at an
early age of the dangers that exist online is critical for safeguarding against
such dangers and helping children become responsible digital citizens. This
project will develop and implement a promising approach to cybersecurity
education that utilizes interactive stories to advance children's learning of
online safety, privacy and security. The project will deliver these stories on a
social robot, which can autonomously interact with students through a set of
rules. The use of social robots as learning companions will provide students
with an interactive experience and will promote greater engagement and interest
in cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four goals driving this work:
(1) iteratively design a collection of interactive stories addressing key
cybersecurity concepts; (2) prototype the stories on a social robot; (3)
increase student knowledge of key cybersecurity concepts, understanding of the
importance of cybersecurity, and potential interest in cybersecurity careers;
and (4) create instruments for monitoring project goals and participant
outcomes. The work will be situated in schools and community-based
organizations, serving a diverse population, including students who are
traditionally underrepresented in computing. Ongoing research as well as
formative and summative evaluation will help identify insights and lessons
learned for advancing cybersecurity education and broadening student
participation in computing. Given the wide attention on cybersecurity in the
workforce, this work will serve as a model for promoting changes in K-12
education in a manner that supports students' learning by using cutting edge
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.