* 1821697
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Research-based Instructional Methods to Enhance and Reform STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Ming-Tsan Lu, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2024
* USD 634,612.00

This project is a collaboration between the University of Colorado at Boulder,
the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Front Range Community College, and
the University of Nebraska/Methodology and Evaluation Research Core Facility.
The project aims to address the challenges institutions face as they seek to
improve undergraduate education in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. To this end, the project will implement and investigate a
comprehensive approach to transforming instruction and institutional culture.
The project aims to increase the adoption of learner-centered, research-based
instructional strategies through the Learning by Design professional development
program. The Learning by Design program was developed through a previous
Widening Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence-Based Reforms award.
Project components include a professional development program focused on course-
design principles and research-based instructional strategies, with follow-on
mentoring, roundtable discussion, course improvement awards, and research and
evaluation activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is
to move undergraduate STEM instructors away from traditional teacher-centered
lecture-based instruction, toward learning-centered active learning-based
instruction. The secondary goal is to create, test, and implement different
versions of the Learning by Design program in ways that are sensitive to
differences between institutions and their varied missions and contexts. The
project team proposes to develop models for sustainability that will enable
these versions to persist beyond the life of the project. Applying grounded
theory and correlational analyses, the multiple-case study research study (mixed
qualitative and quantitative methods) is designed to address the primary
research question: How can evidence-based instructional methods and professional
development programs be effectively propagated in different institutions of
higher education to support STEM instructor implementation of learner-centered
instruction? The design/implementation and research components of the proposed
effort are grounded in the organizational change literature, primarily through
the theoretical and practical work of Kezar (e.g., research-based principles of
organizational change, change strategies, change foci, change models, and change
outcomes). The project is designed to provide multiple ways by which faculty,
academic departments and other units, institutions, and institutional consortia
can support broader implementation of effective instructional
strategies/practices, and thus improve undergraduate STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.