* 1821145
* Data-Driven Computation of Lagrangian Transport Structure in Realistic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Traian Iliescu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Forecasting the spread of contaminants in the ocean, floodwaters, or atmosphere
in a timely manner is of critical importance. Accurate prediction of the
contaminant location at a later time requires a realistic model of the
underlying fluid flow, as well as knowledge of where the contaminant was
initially located. Furthermore, to aid decision-makers, the fluid simulations
must proceed sufficiently rapidly. The movement of the ocean and atmosphere,
like that of other fluids, creates certain patterns whose shape is influenced by
special regions, known collectively as the Lagrangian transport structure, or
LTS (named after the mathematician and fluid mechanist Joseph-Louis Lagrange).
LTS is a template that organizes how the fluid moves: some structures are
surfaces that attract nearby fluid, some repel nearby fluid, and some form
meandering jet pathways or vortex-like structures. Focusing on the LTS helps
alleviate the dependence of contaminant forecast on its initial location, as
contaminants tend to follow these key organizing features. Furthermore,
incorporating these structures into a faster, approximate model, the fluid
simulation itself can be sped up. However, despite its potential usefulness --
to predict the spread of hazardous material, debris, or missing individuals in a
search-and-rescue scenario -- LTS is not currently used because of the high
computational cost. This project aims to develop a new framework to make
possible real-time, robust LTS computation on mobile platforms, to inform real-
time decision-making (for instance, directly onboard the manned or autonomous
vehicles doing reconnaissance and sensing). Such effective, timely computations
for realistic aquatic and atmospheric environments can provide information to
prevent the loss of lives, mitigate environmental damage, and avoid enormous
financial cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a novel Lagrangian
data-driven reduced-order modeling and spatial filtering framework for fluid
transport simulation. This new framework in intended to decrease the
computational cost of current algorithms by orders of magnitude and yield LTS
approximations that are accurate and robust with respect to the numerical
inaccuracies that are inherent in realistic flows. Progress will be made by
developing several intertwined approaches in computational fluid mechanics and
nonlinear dynamics -- the mathematical theory underlying chaos theory. The main
novelty of the project is bridging Eulerian algorithms (used in the velocity
field computation) and Lagrangian algorithms (used in the LTS computation). This
makes possible the development of novel Lagrangian data-driven reduced-order
models (ROMs) and spatial filters. The new Lagrangian data-driven ROM is based
on a novel Lagrangian inner product that makes possible the accurate and
efficient approximation of average LTS. In contrast, standard Eulerian ROMs
produce inaccurate LTS results. A novel Lagrangian data-driven spatial filter
for LTS computation on coarse realistic meshes is also studied. This new filter
is stable, accurate, efficient, and robust with respect to the numerical
inaccuracies that are inherent in realistic flows. While the work will focus on
environmental flows, the results are expected to apply to a wide variety of
fluid applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.