* 1821258
* Collaborative research: Gaussian Process Frameworks for Modeling and Control of Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Gramacy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Quantitative models for decision making under uncertainty continue to attract
intense effort across natural sciences and engineering. With the advent of ever
more sophisticated models in applications, computational demands continue to
outpace what is feasible and the premium on efficient numerical approaches
remains high. The investigators will explore synergies between the latest
machine learning techniques and control paradigms, arising in applications as
diverse as finance, energy storage and security, and the epidemiological
modeling of infectious diseases. The developed "smart" algorithms will deliver
performance upgrades essential for using simulations in tackling large-
scale/complex settings. The project will also contribute to inter-disciplinary
training in mathematical sciences across undergraduate, graduate and post-
doctoral levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will investigate
statistical learning techniques for modeling, analysis and control of nonlinear
dynamic stochastic systems. Through developing algorithms and statistical models
for complex stochastic simulators, and active learning strategies for autonomous
data acquisition, the project will achieve enhanced capabilities and efficiency
in mathematical analysis of dynamic random phenomena. The approach hinges on the
use of high fidelity approximate Gaussian Process surrogates to adaptively
allocate computing resources in order to maximize the learning rate of the
input-output relationship for modeling objectives or of the input-control map
for dynamic programming. By connecting stochastic simulation with machine
learning and non-parametric statistics, and integrating with the computational
implementation, the project will enhance knowledge discovery in large-scale
simulation and optimization settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.