* 1821764
* Student Support for the 2018 ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD-2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Parth Nagarkar, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides support for about 16 students from U.S.-based institutions
to attend the 2018 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, to
be held in Houston, TX, USA (https://sigmod2018.org/) from June 10 to June 15,
2018. The provided support enables the students to attend the conference and
discuss and disseminate their work. The conference also provides an opportunity
for the students to interact with other students and senior researchers and form
future national and international scientific collaborators. One of the SIGMOD
goals it to broader participation of underrepresented students in database
research and an effort will be made to have a diverse group of the supported
students.

The SIGMOD conference, which was established in 1975, has a dynamic and
comprehensive program for publication, education, and interaction, including
research papers, tutorials, panels, industrial papers, technical demonstrations,
and undergraduate research papers. The program includes publications relating to
all aspects of data management defined broadly, and particularly encourages
publications on topics of emerging interest in the research and development
communities. The program also includes workshops on topics relevant to current
data management research and development, industrial exhibits, and keynote talks
by leaders in academia and industry. All these activities provide a unique
opportunity for students to share their knowledge, experience, and research work
with internationally recognized researchers from both academia and industry. In
recent years, more than 600 researchers attended SIGMOD, and the same is
expected this year. SIGMOD Proceedings will be accessible via the ACM Digital
Library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.