* 1821853
* Probing the mechanical properties of the crust and upper mantle in the Himalaya and Southern Tibet region
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 464,713.00

This project will investigate the laws that govern how continents deform, build
mountain ranges and plateaux and the associated seismicity. The research will
focus on the context of the India-Asia collision. The research team will analyse
and model deformation that followed the Mw 7.8 Gorkha earthquake in the Himalaya
of Nepal. They will also use lake level variations since the last glaciations to
better understand the total deformation of the region. This topic is of broad
interest in geology and geodynamics: it will help understand how continents
support surface loads due to the topography, hydrology or glaciations; it also
has implications for seismic hazard in the Himalaya-Tibet region. The work will
collaborative effort with scientists in Nepal and will work with the National
Society of Earthquake Technology to update building code in Nepal. The project
will support a graduate students and postdoctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance our understanding of the
mechanics of continental deformation and the seismic cycle along the Himalayan
front. The work will model postseismic deformation following the Mw7.8 Gorkha
earthquake in the Himalaya of Nepal. This analysis will inform fault friction
laws and viscoelastic properties responsible for short-term post-seismic
relaxation. They constrain the viscous properties of the crust and upper mantle
based on the surface deformation response to load variations induced by
continental hydrology. They use the response to lake level variations at the
Holocene time scale, using the deformation of paleoshorelines, and modern
decadal time scales, as well as at the decadal time scale by analysing the
response to modern lake level variations and to long-wavelength variations of
surface loads measured by GRACE. These investigations will give insight on fault
frictional properties, the temperature-dependent non-linear viscous flow laws
governing distributed deformation of the crust and upper mantle and the possible
need for a transient viscous rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.