* 1821578
* Collaborative Research: Using Low Cost Desktop Learning Modules to Educate Diverse Undergraduate Communities in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2025
* Bernard Van Wie, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2025
* USD 2,515,118.00

This project is a collaboration between Washington State University and Campbell
University that aims to create more experiential, effective, and engaging hands-
on interactive learning environments for educating engineers. The project will
develop lab units called Desktop Learning Modules, which are hands-on
miniaturized equipment representing real industrial processes. They are
portable, can be used outside of class, and significantly assist students in
learning about fluid mechanics and heat transfer, both of which are fundamental
transport concepts in engineering. The goal of the project is to transform
teaching and learning in foundational engineering courses through national
dissemination of fluid mechanics and heat transfer Desktop Learning Modules.
Training workshops and community development will be provided through five
regional hubs to be established to help disseminate the Desktop Learning Module
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior use of hydraulics Desktop Learning Modules
have shown that 70% of students achieved competency on concepts tested, on
average, compared to 39% in control groups. Also, in fluid mechanics,
participants have shown significant learning gains. In preliminary studies, the
transferability of Desktop Learning Modules to other institutions has been
demonstrated. For example, after using a Desktop Learning Module, the University
of Kentucky observed a 50-100% improvement in post-tests on topics such as
hydraulic loss. In this project, a mixed methods research study will be used to
test the hypothesis that definitive changes can occur in student learning and
interest when Desktop Learning Modules are used in a team-oriented, hands-on
learning environment. A faculty support framework will be used to foster changes
in engagement with the novel pedagogy, thus enhancing instructor ease of
adoption and implementation. It is expected that the project will have
significant impact on the learning of difficult engineering concepts and
increase diversity in engineering by accommodating of a range of student
abilities and learning preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.