* 1821150
* STTR Phase I:  A Fully-Digital Transceiver Design for mmWave Communications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Aditya Dhananjay, PI RADIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 224,493.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project covers a myriad of
domains including wireless health-care, remote education, supply-chain
management, public safety, anti-poverty initiatives, market-places, and
entertainment. However, a more immediate work product from this effort is a
powerful fully-digital mmWave software defined radio (SDR) platform that will be
made available to academic researchers at very affordable rates; this will spur
further research and make mmWave testbed experimentation within the reach of
lightly-funded academic research groups. The ambitious goal of making this
transformative technology the reference design of future mmWave radios
represents a massive commercial opportunity which is not limited to the cellular
ecosystem (base station, tablets and smartphones), but rather extends to new
connected players such as cars, drones, virtual reality (VR) headsets and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project focuses on the development of millimeter-wave (mmWave) radio
technologies for next generation wireless systems. The mmWave frequencies of
above 28 GHz are necessary to alleviate the spectrum crunch in the traditional
cellular bands, and to make ultra-fast 5th Generation (5G) cellular a reality.
However, the uniquely challenging propagation characteristics at these
frequencies necessitates the use of transceivers that not only operate over low
power budgets, but also deliver the robustness that the cellular ecosystem
demands. While existing transceivers allow the radio to look (i.e., transmit or
receive) in only one direction or a small number of directions at a time, the
proposed transceiver design allows the radio to look in all directions
simultaneously. While seemingly simple, this unique ability - combined with a
top-down implementation ? will provide enormous benefits to cellular systems at
reasonable power budgets. The proposed technology forms the key technological
bridge between the theoretical promise of mmWave and actually achieving it in
the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.