* 1821028
* 2018 APS Intersociety Meeting - Comparative Physiology: Complexity and Integration Travel Award Program, New Orleans, Louisiana, October 25-28, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award funds travel expenses for undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and early career investigators, in particular individuals
from underrepresented groups, who present research results at the American
Physiological Society (APS) Intersociety Meeting, Comparative Physiology:
Complexity and Integration, in New Orleans, Louisiana, October 25-28, 2018. The
meeting will be a venue for the presentation of significant advances in
understanding the integrative physiology of organisms, including humans and
other animals. This meeting is an opportunity for comparative physiologists to
report their newest research discoveries and to develop collaborations that
spark scientific innovation. Broader impacts of the meeting include: significant
advancement of knowledge about organismal physiology; greater participation of
individuals from underrepresented groups in comparative physiology research;
development of a globally diverse and more collaborative research
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 APS Intersociety Meeting, Comparative
Physiology: Complexity and Integration, seeks to promote the exchange of ideas
and development of future collaborations of comparative and evolutionary
physiologists internationally, and to encourage trainees, early career
investigators, and individuals from underrepresented groups to pursue research
careers in this discipline. The conference includes plenary lectures, symposia,
contributed oral and poster presentations, and workshops on career development
and technological/educational advances. In order to achieve the conference
objectives above, APS will administer a travel grant program offering travel
awards to trainees (undergraduate/graduate students and postdoctoral fellows)
and early career investigators, in particular individuals from underrepresented
groups (women, racial/ethnic minorities, and disabled persons), who submit
abstracts to be presented at the meeting. Travel awards resulting from this
award will be directed to individuals working in the research areas supported by
the NSF Division of Integrative Organismal Systems. The project will contribute
to broadening the participation of young scientists, with an emphasis on members
of under-represented groups, exposing them to cutting edge physiological
research and providing unique opportunities for professional development and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.