* 1821362
* EAGER: Computer Science for All: Researcher Practitioner Partnerships Workshops (CS for All: RPP), Chicago and Los Angeles
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Nichole Pinkard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Northwestern University proposes to provide logistic and travel support for two
workshops (one in Chicago, the other in Los Angeles) that will give technical
assistance on designing and implementing effective researcher-practitioner
partnerships (RPPs) that aim to bring sustainable, scalable and equitable
computer science (CS) education to preK-12 schools. Participating teams will
include education researchers and preK-12 practitioners (teachers,
administrators, and counselors), possibly augmented with other community,
foundation, policy, and industry partners. Through the course of the workshop,
they will begin to co-design the goals, metrics, and implementations, that they
will need to strengthen the capacity of their schools to produce successful CS
education outcomes for diverse groups of students, educated by different
teachers from varied organizational contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator, directs the Office of Community Education Partnerships
(OCEP) in the School of Education and Social Policy at Northwestern University.
OCEP will handle all the event logistics for 160 participants, including but not
limited to website design and hosting, registration, arranging meeting room
space, catering, and A/V support, and conducting reimbursement for travel costs
for participants. The content and delivery of the workshop will be planned and
delivered by the Research + Practice Collaboratory centered at the University of
Washington.