* 1821829
* SaTC: EDU: A Formal Approach to Digital Forensics and Incident Response Investigations
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Vassil Roussev, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,998.00

The goal of this project is to develop a platform for digital forensics and
incident response (DFIR) education. The platform will be built based on an
existing proof-of-concept prototype called Nugget. The resulting platform will
be tool-agnostic and will support different pedagogical approaches. The platform
will provide the ability to formulate and apply forensic queries over different,
and potentially large, data sources in an easy to understand manner. The project
will make it possible for domain experts, such as cybersecurity and law
enforcement analysts, to learn and perform forensic investigations. A set of
hands-on materials, that utilize the platform, will be developed to support a
two-course sequence in digital forensics and incident response.

The platform will provide a formal and unifying conceptual framework for all
DFIR analytical techniques, and will enable different approaches to DFIR
education. This will allow courses from introductory to research-centric
graduate courses, to use the same conceptual framework, and will enable
instructors to focus more clearly on concepts rather than specific tools. The
associated runtime environment will allow the separation of the specification of
a query from its implementation. This project will result in a tool that
provides the means to incrementally integrate advanced forensic capabilities,
such as SaaS forensics, data analytics, and eventually deeper AI techniques into
cybersecurity curricula. The platform will provide the means to acquire and
analyze data from popular cloud services, such as cloud drives and online
collaboration, and will also integrate with security monitoring/incident
response systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.