* 1821144
* CDS&amp;E: Efficient and Robust Recurrent Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Deep neural networks have emerged over the last decade as one of the most
powerful machine learning methods. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are special
neural networks that are designed to efficiently model sequential data such as
speech and text data by exploiting temporal connections within a sequence and
handling varying sequence lengths in a dataset. While RNN and its variants have
found success in many real-world applications, there are various issues that
make them difficult to use in practice. This project will systematically address
some of these difficulties and develop an efficient and robust RNN. Computer
codes derived in this project will be made freely available. The research
results will have applications in a variety of areas involving sequential data
learning, including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language
processing, financial data analysis, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
in other neural networks, training of RNNs typically involves some variants of
gradient descent optimization, which is prone to so-called vanishing or
exploding gradient problems. Regularization of RNNs, which refers to techniques
used to prevent the model from overfitting the raining data and hence poor
generalization to new data, is also challenging. The current preferred RNN
architectures such as the Long-Short-Term-Memory networks have highly complex
structures with numerous additional interacting elements that are not easy to
understand. This project develops an RNN that extends a recent
orthogonal/unitary RNNs to more effectively model long and short term dependency
of sequential data. Through an indirect parametrization of recurrent matrix,
dropout regularization techniques will be developed. The network developed in
this project will retain the simplicity and efficiency of basic RNNs but enhance
some key capabilities for robust applications. In particular, the project will
include a study of applications of RNNs to some bioinformatics
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.