* 1821560
* SaTC: EDU: Improving Student Learning and Engagement in Digital Forensics through Collaborative Investigation of Cyber Security Incidents and Simulated Capture-the-Flag Exercises
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,999.00

The need for professional cybersecurity experts is well established. To address
this need, students must have exposure to the various forms of digital forensics
training materials, before being exposed to the complex world of cybercrimes.
Current approaches used to teach digital forensics lack practical
considerations. This project will develop a collaborative learning platform to
enhance cybersecurity pedagogy, promote an understanding of how to defend
against cyberattacks, and explore effective incident response techniques to
address cybersecurity incidents. Deliverables of the project include
instructional modules along with hands-on experiences and tutorial videos on
recent digital forensics cases and cyber incidents. The goal of the project is
to increase the number of professional individuals, students, and educators who
are interested in cybersecurity knowledge and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance cybersecurity education by: 1) Creating an online
repository of cybersecurity learning resources and open-source tools with a
focus on digital forensics and security incidents. 2) Developing a number of
instructional modules along with hands-on experiences and training videos for
open-source digital forensics tools. 3) Implementing a collaborative educational
capture-the-flag tool with the capability of continuous creation and integration
of cyber incidents scenarios. 4) Including a set of cyber-attack scenarios based
on recent real-world incidents that leverage the use of puzzles in the capture-
the-flag tool. This project will advance cyber security education by directly
impacting the way digital forensics is taught by introducing hands-on
experiences, course modules, and tutorials for publicly available and open-
source security tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.