* 1821725
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Emergence of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 25,175.00

Archaeology's focus on long-term transformations in society provides a unique
perspective to understand the rise and development of political and economic
power and its effects on different groups of society. Comparative archaeological
analyses of complex societies have demonstrated that there is a high degree of
variability in the expression of such complexity, as well as in the processes
that led to its emergence around the world. Within this broader context, this
study focuses on household economy in order to gain insight about the sources of
political and economic power, and reveal other forms of organization that may
differ from top-down norms. The results will inform about social and political
complexity, domestic and community economy, and occupational differentiation.
This project represents an opportunity to collaborate with Costa Rican heritage
authorities and the National Parks system to promote public outreach, education,
and conservation of cultural heritage. Student participants will receive
mentorship, training, and experience in archaeological theories and field and
laboratory methods. The project will integrate Latina women as field supervisors
and crew in order to broaden their participation as an underrepresented group in
science. The results of the project will be shared globally as well as with
local communities and National Parks officials through workshops, talks and
field visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University at Albany-SUNY doctoral student,
Yajaira Núñez-Cortés, supervised by Dr. Robert Rosenswig, will investigate how
the development of economic and political power had an effect on household
economies from all segments of the social hierarchy. During AD 800-1500, the
appearance of monumental centers in Costa Rica indicates a reorganization of
social, political and economic relationships. Such changes coincide with an
amplification of interregional exchange and chiefly interaction for Central
Costa Rican polities. These large-scale developments are best measured by their
impacts in all levels of society, but especially by their impact on the smallest
and remote residential units. This study will evaluate previously held
assumptions about the relationship between elite power and control of resources
and valuable objects by studying household economic differentiation, activity
organization, and access to exchange networks at Lomas Entierros site. The
researchers will analyze domestic assemblages in combination with house
architecture in order to characterize manifestations of wealth, power, and
material culture usage. Data from house structures located in the main core of
the site and humbler edifices on its periphery will provide contrastive examples
from higher and lower social status contexts. This project also incorporates
LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) data to understand the settlement system and
spatial organization of the site. The results will contribute to the debate
about sources of political and economic power and will inform anthropological
models on political and household organization in the ancient
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.