* 1821521
* Collaborative Research: Scaling the Early Research Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Christine Alvarado, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 740,179.00

Enrollment in computer science (CS) programs across the nation is higher than
ever, yet two critical problems persist. First, despite these high enrollments,
relatively few U.S. students are continuing on to graduate school. Maintaining
and improving the health of the domestic Ph.D. pipeline is a concern of
universities, companies, and government agencies. Second, the population of
students pursuing CS degrees is not representative of the diversity of people in
the U.S., with women and other groups persistently underrepresented. The Early
Research Scholars Program (ERSP) aims to address issues of increasing the Ph.D.
pipeline and broadening participation in computer science fields. ERSP is an
academic-year, team-based research apprenticeship program that places special
emphasis on mentoring women and underrepresented groups in the second year of
the CS major. ERSP's mentoring framework includes the research mentor and the
ERSP central mentoring team, providing multifaceted support for each student. In
addition, it is structured to engage a large number of early CS students in a
productive, positive CS research experience without imposing undue work on
individual research advisors. By engaging students in early research, ERSP aims
to increase their retention at the undergraduate level and recruitment into
graduate programs. The project has been running successfully at University of
California San Diego for four years. This project will expand ERSP to other
universities, including Stanford University, the University of California, Santa
Barbara, and the University of Illinois at Chicago. The project will also study
the outcomes of ERSP on the student and faculty participants at all
institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project has two parts: expansion of
ERSP and evaluation of the impact of ERSP on participants. Initially, ERSP will
be implemented at three research-intensive schools with a range of undergraduate
admission criteria. Each implementation will be tailored to the specific context
of the institution, providing a range of implementation structures as models for
how ERSP might be successfully implemented. After this initial expansion phase,
the project plans to partner with two additional schools to explore how ERSP
could be implemented at less research-intensive universities (e.g., masters
institutions). The second part of this project is research on the long-term
impact of ERSP on student participants. Specifically, the project seeks to
assess whether ERSP promotes the following among participants: a sense of
connection with the computing community, short-term and long-term engagement in
research, CS knowledge, and persistence in computing. Evaluators at the Center
for Evaluating the Research Pipeline will use their national survey
infrastructure to collect experiential data from ERSP students vs. non-ERSP
students, as the students progress through college and after they leave college.
These evaluators will also conduct interviews with ERSP program leaders, faculty
mentors, and students, and control faculty and students who are not
participating in ERSP. These interviews will supplement the survey data, and
help the ERSP team better understand ERSP impact, as well as identify new
challenges and opportunities for program improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.