* 1821884
* NNA - EHR-Polar DCL 2017: Collaborative Research: Researching apun: Students Using Local, Traditional, and Science Knowledge Bases to Investigate Arctic Snow Processes
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kerri Pratt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2023
* USD 247,615.00

The Arctic is warming more rapidly than elsewhere on Earth, and the community of
Utqiagvik, AK, the home of the Inupiat people, has a unique perspective from
which they are observing this profound change. This collaboration between the
University of Michigan (U-M) and Ilisagvik College, located in Utqiagvik, will
support the development of a course-based research experience for undergraduates
at Ilisagvik College and will also support basic research on Arctic snow. The
project will yield three main products: 1) a significant advance in
understanding how students navigate multiple ways of knowing when engaging in
science research activities; 2) a culturally responsive curriculum incorporating
course-based undergraduate research investigating Arctic snow processes; and 3)
Arctic snow physical and chemical composition data. The students and the local
community, including Elders, will be involved in the curriculum development,
course activities, and data collection related to snow research. The project
will yield a greater understanding of how course-based undergraduate research
curricula can be best designed to support science learning of diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ilisagvik College is the only tribal college in
the Alaskan Arctic. This project provides a significant opportunity for students
to participate in authentic research. The project will support research
opportunities for three undergraduate students at Ilisagvik College, in addition
to the participation of about forty-nine undergraduates in the classroom
setting. Two Ilisagvik College students will be nominated to participate in the
U-M Chemistry Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) summer program and
two students will present their research results at the annual Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) or
American Chemical Society (ACS) national meetings. The projects will also
involve one U-M PhD student who will focus their dissertation on educational
research component of the project. The project will involve the Ilisagvik
community at every stage and contribute to the incorporation of traditional
knowledge in the research. As part of their engagement in the research project,
participating students will interview community members and Elders to gain
traditional knowledge about snow, including words for various types of snow.
Students will sample snow, determine its chemical and physical properties, and
correlate these properties to the different types of snow. Students will present
their research results to the community and will document feedback to identify
future research directions. Snow data will be archived through the NSF Arctic
Data Center for future research and educational use by the public and scientific
community, including future course offerings at Ilisagvik College. Traditional
knowledge documented through the project will be reported to the Alaska Native
Knowledge Network. This award is supported by the Division of Undergraduate
Education and the Office of Polar Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.