* 1821154
* Statistical Inference for Molecular Landscapes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Amarda Shehu, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

Advances in biomolecular modeling and simulation have yielded massive amounts of
biomolecular data, exposing the myriad of forms/structures assumed and leveraged
by a biomolecule to modulate its biological activities in the cell. These
structures are embedded in the energy landscape, which organizes structures by
their energetics and underscores the inherent nature of biomolecules as dynamic
systems interconverting between structures with varying energies. In principle,
the landscape contains all the information needed to expose and characterize
biomolecular dynamics and link it to (dys)function, molecular mechanisms, and
our biology. The objective of this project is to advance research on statistical
inference of geometric features of protein energy landscapes as an essential
means of understanding and predicting the phenotypic/functional impact of
protein sequence variations on dynamics and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
cope with the flexible shape of geometric features, nonparametric approaches are
adopted in the proposed inferential framework, where challenges are tackled by
synergistically integrating statistics with differential geometry and Morse
theory. Novel methodology will be investigated to test the statistical
significance of stable structural states (anti-modes) on molecular landscapes,
and study asymptotic behaviors in the estimation of optimal paths (integral
curves) between stable states to support stochastic optimization research on
constructing molecular landscapes. A computationally-feasible goodness-of-fit
test will be developed for basins (level sets) on landscapes. The project will
also establish asymptotic distributional results of surface integrals on the
boundary of basins, which are quantitative descriptors of the topological and
geometric information of the landscapes that support in-silico discoveries on
the functional impact of protein sequence variations. The proposed activities
will make a direct contribution to modern statistics, molecular biology and
molecular modeling by linking the statistical inference of energy landscapes to
(altered) molecular dynamics and (dys)function. The activities will additionally
support fields where geometric features in spatial data are of interest, such as
geology, cosmology, neuroscience, remote sensing, and atmospheric
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.