* 1821902
* Conference: Multiscale Plant Vascular Biology, June 16-22, 2018, Mt. Snow, VT.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Barbara Lachenbruch, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/28/2019
* USD 32,400.00

This award will support about 15 early-career scientists to participate in two
linked conferences on the specific mechanisms used by plants for productivity,
at scales from below the cell all the way up to the landscape. The conferences
themselves focus on two factors that are tightly associated with plant growth
and survival: water and photosynthate (sugars produced by plants during
photosynthesis, that are used for building plants and that are the basis for all
food consumed by all organisms on Earth). Most participants already work on the
transport of one or both of these factors, but they usually only work at one or
two of the following scales: gene transcription, cell physiology and
development, wood or inner bark physiology or development, whole plant size and
shape, or function of communities or entire landscapes. This conference provides
an important venue to bring together researchers working on these different
scales. The smaller conference is for early-career scientists, and the larger
conference has special activities designed to help early-career scientists make
meaningful relationships with more established scientists. The organizers expect
that all scientists will benefit from these relationships, and so the
conferences will not only move the fields of plant biology forward, but will
enrich the worker-base to ensure continuing advancements in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the travel and registration
costs of about 15 early-career scientists for two linked conferences, the five-
day Gordon Research Conference (GRC), and the two-day Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) in the area of Multiscale Plant Vascular Biology (target sizes 200
scientists, and 50 early-career scientists, respectively). It is increasingly
recognized that knowledge of water and photosynthate movement through systems
gives much information about how that system functions, from the levels of
subcellular parts up through landscapes. That same information may be used to
understand how robust a system is to perturbation, and the basis for that
robustness, which can be used in predictions and management for applications
such as development of suitable plants for future conditions, understanding the
links between plant physiology and climate-change-induced ecosystem shifts, and
linking community transpiration to ground and atmospheric water stores. The GRC
will focus on plasticity in these systems to help predict what is possible, and
may show how the variability stabilizes or destabilizes systems at multiple
scales. The GRS will provide a forum for early-career researchers in these
fields to identify knowledge gaps in the role of vascular transport on climate
change and that can be addressed through multidisciplinary collaborations. The
conferences have three broader impacts. 1) Learning opportunity for a range of
scientists, with an emphasis on early-career and participation of under-
represented groups. The GRC will have four activities to encourage mixing and
mentoring. The GRS has an agenda to facilitate peer interaction. The meetings
are being advertised broadly through scientific societies and organizations that
work to increase diversity in biological sciences. 2) Advancement of science,
the elaboration of which may ultimately help ensure our continued existence on
Earth given the importance of primary producers (plants) and the many risks to
their health and productivity. 3) Development of community in a fragmented
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.