* 1821475
* Developing Integrated Teaching Platforms to Enhance Blended Learning in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 597,529.00

In most college courses, students use multiple online tools to support
collaboration and learning. However, little is known about how students navigate
and integrate their use of online tools, or about the collective impact of using
a specific set of online tools. This project aims address this knowledge gap by
developing an open platform to collect, integrate, and analyze data from
students' use of multiple online tools. This platform, called Concert, will
actively track student progress, and allow instructors to identify students'
help-seeking and collaboration behaviors. It will also enable research to
develop a model of how students use the online resources that are available to
them. It is expected that results of this project will increase understanding of
students' help-seeking behaviors, study behaviors, and social relationships
within classes, and how these behaviors and relationships affect student
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using open application programming
interfaces, the Concert platform will gather data from commonly used systems,
such as the Piazza forum, Jenkins Automated Grader, the GitHub submission
system, MyDigitalHand, and Moodle. It will integrate data from these online
tools and provide a single student interface for notifications and help seeking,
as well as a single instructor interface for data analysis and student
evaluation. It will monitor students' use of the online tools and their study
habits, and respond with automated guidance. Although the project will initially
focus on computer science courses, it is designed to support students in any
other STEM field. The Concert platform will collect large sets of detailed,
anonymous data about students' online actions and class performance, providing a
rich dataset to support further educational research. If successful, this
project has the potential to empower STEM students and broaden participation by
reducing the complexity of selecting and using online tools, thus supporting
increased student engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.