* 1821909
* Using Multilayered Interventions to Improve Undergraduate Transfer Student Success in Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Stiller, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,987.00

An increasing percentage of students at four-year universities have transferred
from another institution. Transfer students, particularly those in STEM fields,
frequently receive lower grades and drop out at higher rates than traditional
university students. Improving the success of transfer students will help
diversify the STEM workforce and improve the STEM pipeline, since many of these
individuals are from groups underrepresented in STEM, first-generation, and/or
low income. The reasons for this lower success rate include both academic and
social factors. Thus, a comprehensive approach is necessary to increase the
retention and success of transfer students. East Carolina University (ECU), in
partnership with Pitt Community College (PCC) will offer the Pre-transfer
Interventions, Mentoring, and Experience with Research (PRIMER) program, to
determine how to better support and retain Biology transfer students. This
program will include dual enrollment courses, held at both ECU and PCC, and dual
advising, to build relationships with transfer students before they transition
to the ECU campus. The overall goal of PRIMER is to identify interventions that
promote transfer student success in Biology, resulting in higher academic
achievement, increased retention and persistence in STEM fields, and a greater
sense of belonging to the community at ECU. Over time, the project has
intentions to expand successful PRIMER interventions to other STEM departments
at ECU, to other community colleges, and to other four-year institutions. The
impact of these interventions will be shared through a pre-existing, annual,
regional Transfer Student Summit, as well as through national presentations and
publications. Presentations and publications will focus on identifying the
interventions which provide the greatest benefit, and for what demographic
groups of students, with the goal of helping institutions focus their limited
resources on interventions most likely to produce their desired outcome. This
information has the potential to guide any university trying to improve transfer
student success, which, in turn, can aid in increasing the number of students
who graduate with STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two primary objectives
of this project include: 1) A facilitated transition for biology students
between PCC and ECU, and 2) Increased transfer student use of known best
practices at ECU. Strategies to meet the first objective include increased
exposure of transfer students to ECU academic life while still at the community
college, through dual enrollment courses, enhanced knowledge of the transfer
process through dual advising, and increased social supports for students before
transfer through cohort classes and inclusion in ECU events. Strategies to meet
the second objective include the implementation of a mentoring program and
targeted research experiences specifically for ECU Biology transfer students. By
testing these interventions in isolation and combination, and contrasting
treatment groups to comparison groups, the potential interactive effects of
these best practices will be better understood. The outcome of the project's
interventions will serve as a test of the expansion of Schlossberg's Transition
Theory to transfer student transitions. This theory describes four S's
(situation, self, support, and strategies) that are necessary for successful
transitions. In addition, the success of our interventions will provide a test
of Astin's theory of involvement, in which students' backgrounds and experiences
at university influence a student's ability to achieve academic
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.