* 1821511
* Collaborative Research: Establishing a New Model for Research-Based Curriculum Development in Physics Aligned with Dual-Process Theories of Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Andrew Boudreaux, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 139,706.00

The development of reasoning and critical thinking skills is possibly the most
important outcome of college physics instruction, as these abilities extend to
all STEM disciplines. They are integral to many non-STEM professions as well.
However, research has shown that students who demonstrate correct conceptual
understanding and reasoning on one task often fail to use the same knowledge and
skills on related tasks. Observed inconsistencies can be accounted for by dual-
process theories of reasoning. These theories assert that human cognition relies
on two thinking processes. The first heuristic process is fast, intuitive, and
automatic. The second analytic process is slow, effortful, and deliberate.
Students get incorrect answers when their analytical process fails to reject an
incorrect intuitive response. This project will develop classroom activities
that give students opportunities to slow down, examine intuitively appealing
responses, and recognize instances of biased reasoning. Becoming aware of one?s
own thinking paths and reasoning approaches is a critical step toward more
expert-like reasoning in physics and beyond. Improving education in introductory
physics is important to the nation because these courses are foundational to
understanding physics, chemistry, geology, many life sciences, and most fields
of engineering. Our country needs well-prepared workers in these fields to
increase our economic competitiveness, improve our national security, and
provide quality employment opportunities for the next generation of
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year collaborative project will
integrate findings and models from cognitive science into research-based
curriculum development efforts in physics to maximize their efficacy by
improving student reasoning skills. The project will first develop and document
instructional interventions that improve student reasoning. Secondly, it will
identify specific mechanisms by which such interventions help students reason
productively. Thirdly, the project will establish a framework for curriculum
development explicitly aligned with dual-process theories of reasoning. Central
to the project will be the development of a portfolio of illustrative examples
of research-based instructional materials (along with instructor resources) that
attend explicitly to the dual nature of human thinking. The materials will adapt
or supplement existing interventions and thus improve their impact. In addition,
this project will help researchers gain greater insight into: (1) the reasoning
approaches employed by novice physics learners, (2) the factors and
circumstances contributing to intuitive student ideas, and (3) strategies by
which students mediate their intuitive thinking. Finally, the project will
establish a comprehensive framework for developing or enhancing instructional
materials that draw upon dual-process theories of
reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.