* 1821060
* VIERS the next 50 years:  rebuilding resilient research infrastructure at the Virgin Islands Environmental Resource Station (VIERS)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Richard Nemeth, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 245,000.00

The Virgin Islands Environmental Resource Station (VIERS) is located in the
heart of the Virgin Islands National Park (VINP), owned by the University of the
Virgin Islands (UVI) (located on St. Thomas). VIERS has a 50 year legacy of
serving generations of scientifically literate citizens, educators, and
researchers. Research at VIERS provides one of the longest running insights into
the changes affecting Caribbean reefs. Of central importance in the legacy of
VIERS is its unique location in a US National Park in the eastern Caribbean, and
the novelty of a fully-protected watershed. These benefits have been recognized
by NSF through ongoing support of coral reef research, including most recently,
efforts to quantify hurricane effects through RAPID grants. VIERS provides
critical access to science infrastructure for underrepresented groups (Caribbean
islanders) through a significant HBCU (i.e., UVI). Specifically, these
advantages accrue through: (a) the global benefits of ensuring the longevity of
an historically important field station at a time when such facilities are
critically needed, (b) sustaining the capacity to mentor and train the next
generation of biologists through real-world natural history experiences, (c)
supporting research of national importance to the US to manage coral resources
in one of the only areas of coral reef with MPA status in US waters, and (d)
provision of education, research, and training opportunities for US Caribbean
islanders that are chronically under-represented in science and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Damage caused by two Category 5 hurricanes (Irma
and Maria in 2017) severely impacted the capacity to conduct research and
education in St. John, US Virgin Islands. Many cabins and related buildings were
displaced, flooded through, and severed from electrical and plumbing
infrastructure. A two-phased restoration plan has be developed. Phase 1, to be
supported by this grant, will construct new visiting scientist housing and work
space in a location directly adjacent to the laboratory building which survived
the storms. Phase 2 will be to restore the cabins damaged by the hurricanes,
rebuilding them and re-setting them on their foundations. The investment in
Phase 1 will restore research activities as quickly as possible. Once Phase 2 is
complete and the damaged infrastructure is replaced, this new structure will
represent an expansion over previous housing capacity, serving researchers that
need 24-hour access to the marine environment. This will put VIERS on a renewed
trajectory of grown into research on the ecology of coral reefs, forecasting the
future, and training scientists for the 21st Century. For more information on
VIERS, visit http://www.islands.org/viers/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.