* 1821488
* Collaborative Research: Reducing Student Resistance to Active Learning: Applying Research Results to Faculty Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 676,104.00

This collaborative project involved investigators at the University of Michigan
(Award DUE-1821488), Bucknell University (Award DUE-1821036), the University of
Texas at Austin (Award DUE-1821092), and the University of Oregon (Award
DUE-1821277). Replacing lectures with "active learning" in college and
university STEM classrooms is a proven means of increasing students'
understanding of concepts and their persistence in STEM studies. Yet it remains
a challenge to spread active learning approaches widely because both faculty
members and students tend to resist change in their habits of teaching and
learning. This project focuses on student resistance as a barrier to the
adoption of evidence-based teaching practices such as active learning. Student
resistance is one of the most actionable and least studied barriers to STEM
instructional change. The investigators' prior research, which focused primarily
on engineering education, identified strategies that instructors can use to
reduce student resistance to active learning. In this project, they will design
and test a workshop to educate instructors in different STEM disciplines about
using strategies to reduce student resistance. They will conduct research
studies to examine how student resistance influences instructors' plans to use
active learning in future classes, and to test whether their previous findings
apply to other institutions and student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this effort, at least 90 STEM
instructors, representing a broad set of two-year and four-year institutions
with diverse student populations, will be equipped to use evidence-based
strategies to reduce student resistance to active learning. The changes in their
attitudes and practices will be studied to understand the effect of this
professional development on student resistance and on the sustained adoption of
active learning. The investigators' primary research questions are: (1) To what
degree does the carefully designed faculty development workshop promote the use
of explanation and facilitation strategies to reduce resistance? (2) To what
extent does instructor motivation (i.e., self-efficacy and value) for adopting
active learning moderate the effect of the workshop on instructors' behavior? To
what extent do other course-level and institution-level variables moderate the
effect of the workshop on instructors' behavior? (3) What is the effect of
instructors' use of strategies to reduce student resistance on student affective
response and on student resistance to active learning? To what extent does
student resistance vary with the individual instructor's experience using active
learning? (4) Does student affective response mediate the effect of instructor
use of strategies on resistance? (5) To what extent does student resistance to
active learning influence instructors' plans to continue using active learning
in future course offerings? The investigators intend to disseminate the
materials and results from this project via publications in scientific and
science education journals, and presentations at science education and
professional development conferences that reach a large number of STEM faculty
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.