* 1821020
* I-Corps Teams: Photonic Crystal Enabled Thermophotovoltaic Portable Power Generator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable a
new portable power source with unprecedented energy density, which could have
transformative effects on military and commercial portable/autonomous systems.
For example, a portable power generator for soldiers using the proposed
technology would result in a 50-75% weight reduction on a 72-hour mission,
meaning soldiers could bring more water and ammo or reduce chance of injury due
to weight. The proposed technology could also extend the operation of drones and
other unmanned vehicles on land, air, and water. Currently these applications
are almost exclusively powered by batteries, despite hydrocarbon fuel being 60
times more energy dense. The proposed technology could also be used in a number
of commercial applications from emergency response and disaster relief, remote
sensing, and energy access in emerging markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is a new approach to thermophotovoltaics, using a photonic
crystal selective emitter, that enables practical fuel to electricity conversion
in the 1-100 W range. The technology works by converting fuel to electricity
using heat and light as intermediaries. Specifically, hydrocarbon combustion
heats a photonic crystal emitter to incandescence, leading to thermal radiation
which drives specialized photovoltaic cells to generate electricity. Currently,
there is no effective power source for applications requiring 1-100 Watts of
electricity for extended duration, a space where demand is burgeoning. This
technology would enable ultraportable, reliable, and silent energy generation,
particularly for applications that do not have access to conventional power
sources.