* 1821071
* Collaborative Research: Solar Neutrino Science with Borexino: The Quest for CNO Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Robert Vogelaar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2023
* USD 260,000.00

Solar neutrino research has already discovered massive neutrinos and flavor
mixing and is moving into an era where precision measurements can provide a
unique probe of the structure and composition of the Sun. The carbon-nitrogen-
oxygen (CNO) cycle is one of the fusion reactions by which stars convert
hydrogen to helium, releasing electron-neutrinos. The CNO neutrino flux depends
on the abundance of carbon in the core of the Sun. A measurement of the CNO flux
would be the first direct measurement of the solar metallicity (the abundance of
elements other than hydrogen or helium) in the core of the Sun. It could test
the fundamental assumption of homogeneity in the Sun and provide crucial
information regarding opacities in the solar interior that are important for
helioseismology. Such studies could thus have a great impact on our
understanding of the Sun, stellar astrophysics, the link between planetary and
stellar formation, as well as basic neutrino physics. Borexino is a liquid
scintillator detector, located at the Gran Sasso National Laboratory in Italy,
with a unique sensitivity to solar neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Borexino
research program has involved many undergraduate and graduate students.
Mentoring and training young researchers at the collaborating institutions and
other schools has always been a high priority. The three groups will continue to
involve undergraduate students in this research and disseminate research to the
broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded here plans to
measure neutrinos from the catalytic reactions on 12-C and 15-N which convert
four protons to 4-He, producing neutrinos from the beta decays of 13-N and 15-O.
The CN neutrino flux depends directly on the abundance of 12-C and 15-N in the
core of the Sun, and their measurement would be the first direct measurement of
the metallicity (elements heavier than 4-He), in the core of the Sun. This
result will be far reaching because the solar composition is the basis for many
important topics in astrophysics, including stellar structure, stellar
evolution, and stellar atmospheres, to name a few. In addition, it will address
the 'solar composition problem', the apparent disagreement in metallicity
determined from recent advances in analysis of solar photospheric optical
spectra, which favors a low metallicity, and advances in helioseismology, which
favors high metallicity. Since modifications of the Standard Solar Model to
explain a non-uniform solar composition have not been very successful, the
'solar composition problem' remains an unexplained flaw in the Standard Solar
Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.