* 1821757
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Curriculum to Broaden Participation in Cybersecurity for Middle School Teachers and Students (CyberMiSTS)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Laurin Buchanan, Applied Visions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nigamanth Sridhar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,804.00

The Curriculum to Broaden Participation in Cybersecurity for Middle School
Teachers and Students (CyberMiSTS) project will develop and pilot summer
workshops that provide middle school Career and Technical Education (CTE)
teachers with the knowledge, skills, and tools they need to actively engage
their students and expose them to cybersecurity concepts and careers. Bringing
in cybersecurity expertise from a variety of sources, the CyberMiSTS curriculum
will be accessible to middle school students and teachers because it will
emphasize the important role of humans in cybersecurity. Teachers will learn
from cybersecurity researchers, engage in hands-on activities, and customize
cybersecurity course materials for their own classrooms. The CyberMiSTS
curriculum will focus on key concepts and big questions to encourage
participation from a broad and diverse set of students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a design research methodology to develop the
training approach, with teachers from the first cohort sharing their experiences
and mentoring a second cohort, the project team will study what CTE teachers
need to be successful teaching cybersecurity in a middle school classroom. The
project builds on lessons learned from a previous SaTC EDU project by
incorporating Comic-BEE, a novel online system for creating educational,
branching web comics. Branching stories provide opportunities to explore cause
and effect. The comic style is engaging to middle school students who are
disinclined to read long texts, and can incorporate culturally relevant pedagogy
with the potential to reach more students. After the summer workshop, teachers
will the materials in their classrooms, and measure student learning and
interest in cybersecurity careers with instruments provided by the project team.
In the future, workshop materials and curriculum will be offered as an online
continuing education course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.