* 1821724
* Examining The Roles of STEM Teaching Faculty in Advancing the Use of Evidence-based Teaching Practices at Research Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kimberly Tanner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,184,551.00

Recognizing the importance of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) fields to the future of our nation, recent reports have called for
changes in existing educational practices to increase the quality, number, and
diversity of STEM graduates. These calls have resulted in development of
evidence-based teaching practices that have been shown to improve student
outcomes. One major question now is, how can we spread the use of these teaching
practices on a larger scale? This project examines the intersection of two
national issues relevant to research-focused universities: (1) The need for
improvement in undergraduate STEM teaching and learning through the use of
evidence-based instructional strategies; and (2) the hiring of tenure-track
teaching-focused faculty whose responsibility is teaching undergraduate courses
that improve undergraduate STEM teaching, learning, and scholarship. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the degree to which Lecturers with
Security of Employment (LSOEs, who are tenure-eligible teaching-focused faculty)
act as effective change agents within their departments, thus contributing to
improving STEM teaching at research-focused institutions. The research team
hypothesizes that the hiring of LSOE faculty will act as a major catalyst for
increasing the adoption and sustainability of evidence-based instructional
strategies by departmental colleagues. To examine the two national issues
relevant to research-focused universities, the research team will use multiple
analytic approaches, including a quasi-experimental two way fixed effects model
to control for variations in students and courses, an innovative observation
technique that documents and assesses classroom behaviors, graph theoretic
analysis of the structure and characteristics of teaching networks within
research sites, and transcript analyses of interview data on beliefs about and
approaches to teaching. Through these analyses, the research team aims to
identify whether the LSOE model can be a mechanism implemented in research-
intensive institutions across the country to transform STEM faculty teaching
practices and improve student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.