* 1821862
* Support for US Astronomers to Attend International Scientific Conferences and the 30th IAU General Assembly
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Kevin Marvel, American Astronomical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 03/31/2023
* USD 382,500.00

Astronomy is a fully international endeavor; we all share the same sky. To
participate in the international scientific community, American researchers must
meet and collaborate with researchers from around the world. Every three years,
the International Astronomical Union has a General Assembly accompanied by
topical symposia, joint discussions, working groups, and business meetings. The
next such meeting will be held in August 2018. In order to ensure a vigorous
participation by the US astronomical community, this award will fund small
travel grants to enable approximately 150 US astronomers to attend the General
Assembly. This award will also provide small travel grants to approximately 50
US astronomers per year to attend various international meetings over the next 3
years. Preference will be given to early-career astronomers and astronomers from
less-endowed institutions. Scientists supported by this program will come from a
wide range of educational institutions, museums, planetariums, etc. The
experiences they gain from this meeting will be shared with a broad segment of
the US population, exposing them to the global nature of astronomy and the
importance of international collaboration to the advancement of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The small travel grant program will be
administered by the American Astronomical Society (AAS), the principal
professional organization for US astronomers. They have very successfully and
economically administered similar programs in the past, and the proposed
procedures ensure that these funds will provide the maximum benefit to the
astronomical community at minimal cost. The AAS will solicit proposals, select
awardees, issue funds to be used for airfare only, collect receipts and meeting
reports from the grantees, and prepare a final assessment and report on the
entire program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.