* 1821618
* Collaborative Research: Scaling Design Critique Through Novel Interactive Systems for In-Class Peer Feedback
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Steven Dow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 262,986.00

With funding from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program,
this project will investigate how digital, in-class peer feedback systems can
improve project-based learning in technical fields. It will also investigate how
such feedback systems scale to various class sizes. This project focuses on the
growing need to train American workers for jobs that need problem-solving
abilities. It also addresses the need to actively engage students who avoid
participation, due to social barriers such as discomfort with public speaking.
Effective feedback is an important part of project-based learning. This project
will support feedback activities in the classroom, where students can learn from
the shared environment. In the system, both the author and reviewer are
anonymous. This a feature may mitigate social barriers to participation and
promote unbiased evaluation. This project will enhance an existing web-based,
in-class peer feedback system. Specifically, it will add functionality so that
the author of a project can ?review the reviewer? by providing the reviewer with
feedback about the quality or usefulness of the review. Initial studies will
occur at Carnegie Mellon University and the University of California San Diego.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore several unanswered
questions about in-class peer feedback: how to improve the quality of in-class
peer feedback using reflection activities; how to increase engagement with the
peer feedback process using social factors such as emotional expressiveness and
a sense of connection to peers; how data logs generated by a digital feedback
application (PeerPresents) can help instructors with assessment and with
implementing new class activities or pedagogies; and how in-class peer feedback
might work differently in classes of different size. PeerPresents will be used
as a platform to develop interventions, and to study student engagement in and
the effectiveness of reciprocal peer feedback. Activities include deploying the
system in classrooms, interviewing students and instructors, evaluating the
quality of feedback provided, and analyzing system logs. The work has the
potential to inform the design of future peer feedback systems, as well as to
improve peer feedback practices within college
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.