* 1821029
* International Workshop on Bio-Inspired Geotechnics; Pacific Grove, California; May 19-22, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Jason DeJong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2020
* USD 90,125.00

This award funds a workshop on Bio-inspired technologies in the general field of
geotechnical engineering. The workshop will be held in Pacific Grove,
California, on May 19-22, 2019. The rapidly emerging discipline of
biogeotechnics is comprised of both bio-mediated and bio-inspired technologies.
Bio-mediated technologies, such as microbially induced calcite precipitation
(MICP) to cement sands, have been the primary focus over the past decade and
have seen exponential growth. Active research in the field now exists in more
than 15 countries, companies have been founded, and national research centers
have been established. A new workforce has been created, with graduates working
in the biogeotechnics field in both and industry. Bio-inspired geotechnics, the
complimentary aspect of biogeotechnics, however, is in its infancy. This field
is at a critical, formative stage. The basal definition and scope of the field
is being defined. Specific areas that hold exceptional promise for research are
being identified. Understanding and filtering through the broader field of bio-
inspired engineering and design (or biomimicry), which itself has largely become
established in only the last decade, is underway. Conversations with the
geotechnical industry regarding what might be practically possible are just
beginning. The bio-inspired geotechnics field is at a time when an
international, interdisciplinary workshop could accelerate growth and define
future directions. Therefore, the objectives of the workshop are to begin
building interdisciplinary collaborations, identify research priorities and
possible funding sources, engage with industry regarding implementability, and
identify and address the educational needs of researchers entering the field and
engineers entering the workforce.

This workshop will bring together approximately 55 individual experts from
academia and industry who are technically and demographically diverse, and
collectively cover expertise in fields from geotechnical engineering to biology
to soft robotics. The workshop participants will include established senior
investigators through assistant professors and underrepresented graduate
students. The workshop will be held over a period of three days at an inclusive
meeting facility that will facilitate continuous planned formal workshop
activities as well as informal interactions. The workshop has been carefully
designed in a structure that will scaffold, or gradually build, from developing
a mutual foundation of discipline understanding, to sharing current research and
brainstorming new opportunities, to identifying the necessary "action items" or
developmental steps required to mature this field. An informal environment that
fosters discussion, brainstorming, free sharing of ideas, and development of
collaboration relationships has been incorporated into the workshop agenda.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.