* 1821785
* IISA 2018: From Data to Knowledge, Working for a Better World
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Sanjib Basu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports a four day 2018 international conference titled "IISA 2018:
From Data to Knowledge, Working for a Better World" which will take place at the
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, from May 17 - May 20, 2018. This
conference will bring together statisticians from diverse areas of
statistics/biostatistics, probability and data science in a collaborative
setting to discuss and foster the latest developments of statistical theory,
methods and tools for making accurate inference from complex and noisy data
sources. The grant funding will be used to cover partial costs of a number of
doctoral students and young researchers who will present their research at this
conference.

The theme of the conference is to discuss and foster the cutting-edge
developments of statistical theory, methods and tools for making accurate
inference from complex and noisy data sources. Plenary speakers for this
conference include Montserrat Fuentes (Virginia Commonwealth University), Hira
Koul (Michigan State University), and Cyrus Mehta (Cytel Inc). In addition,
seven researchers will be giving Special Invited Talks. A number of junior
researchers will be given the opportunity to present in invited sessions.
Doctoral students will have an opportunity to give oral presentations on a
competitive basic. A student poster competition will also be arranged. For
further details, please visit the conference web-site:
http://iisa2018.biostat.ufl.edu/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.