* 1821965
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Assessing Educational Simulations to Enhance Cyber Security Learning in Computer Science Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Xiaohong Yuan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Cybersecurity education is increasingly critical to national and personal
security. College and universities need to prepare students for the computer and
network security challenges they will encounter, and the workforce of the future
needs to have additional cybersecurity skills to best protect the interests of
the nation. Computer simulations have been successfully used in many areas of
education to engage students and measure their learning. Although many
simulations are available to increase cybersecurity awareness, most either
target high school students or require high levels of knowledge to use. As a
result, it is hard to find serious simulations for college students that focus
on advanced security topics. However, the education community needs this type of
tool to help motivate and engage students in learning difficult security
concepts. This engagement is especially important for attracting and retaining
students to the field of cybersecurity. This collaborative project of Winston-
Salem State University and North Carolina A&amp;T State University, both
historically black universities, aims to develop three educational computer
simulations with built-in assessments that effectively teach key cybersecurity
concepts. The project will directly benefit students at the two participating
universities, by enabling the students to be both developers and users of the
simulations. This project will contribute to the knowledge base of effective
teaching in cybersecurity and better prepare graduates for the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to: 1) Develop
three educational simulations with built-in assessments to effectively teach
cybersecurity concepts involving access control, network vulnerabilities, and
buffer overflow. 2) Integrate the simulations into the existing computer science
curriculum at both universities. 3) Develop and implement assessment methods to
measure the effectiveness of the simulations. The simulations will be designed
with different levels of difficulty to target undergraduate students at all
levels, from first-year students to seniors. Assessment of the simulations'
effectiveness will use a quasi-experimental design together with both
quantitative and qualitative data to answer two research questions: 1) Is the
simulation more effective than a lecture for achieving learning outcomes, a
quality learner experience, and influencing student attitudes and motivation?
and 2) Is the simulation more effective than other experiential learning
approaches (e.g., case study; lab) for achieving learning outcomes, a quality
learner experience, and influencing student attitudes and motivation? The
simulations and research findings will be publically available through the
project website and other on-line venues, and will be disseminated to faculty
via conference presentations, journal publications, and a summer faculty
workshop. This project will strengthen the North Carolina A&amp;T State
University's Center for Cyber Defense, a Center of Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance Education designated by the National Security Agency and
the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.