* 1821032
* Next Generation Research-Based and Research-Validated Instructional Materials for Teaching Physics in Different Instructional Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Lillian McDermott, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,747,627.00

To sustain a robust STEM workforce and a STEM-literate population, the Nation
faces a critical need for improved science education. Our country needs well-
prepared workers in STEM fields to increase our economic competitiveness,
improve our national security, and provide quality employment opportunities for
the next generation of citizens. As a result, colleges and universities must
graduate students who are effective in conducting scientific investigations and
designing solutions to our most pressing problems. They must also graduate
students who can assess scientific facts and arguments, make judgements about
the value of scientific inquiry, and communicate ideas effectively. Thus,
students must learn not only scientific concepts and principles but also the
practices, applications, and ways of reasoning in science. Significant
improvements in science education have been made, but a great deal more remains
to be done. This four-year project will develop curriculum that not only has a
proven effect on improving student learning and reasoning, but will also develop
and test resources that help instructors implement and adapt the instructional
strategies in their own classrooms. The focus will be on physics, but the
findings will be applicable across all science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. An additional underlying goal is to identify
core science concepts and reasoning skills that are taken for granted in
standard introductory physics courses, but that are difficult for students who
lack strong preparation in science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although there is a
consensus that active engagement is necessary for learning, it is not
sufficient. It is also necessary to use topic-specific strategies that guide
students to construct scientific concepts and models so that they can apply them
to situations not explicitly studied. Through systematic, ongoing research, the
Physics Education Group at the University of Washington has developed research-
based and research-validated materials that embed such strategies in courses for
K-12 teachers and in introductory physics courses for math, engineering, and
physics majors. The goal of this project is to extend this body of work by
identifying additional concepts and reasoning skills that many students find
difficult when learning physics, and to use those results to guide instruction.
The primary outcome will be sets of curricular materials that have a
demonstrated impact on student learning when used in different instructional
settings, including large lectures, small-group sections, and online. It is
intended that the materials will be effective in supplementing lecture-based
courses, as well as supporting instruction in 'flipped' classrooms. The project
will also respond to increasing awareness of differences between students in
introductory algebra-based physics courses and calculus-based physics courses.
The students in algebra-based courses are typically life science majors. Those
in the calculus-based courses are typically physical science and engineering
majors. Simply developing effective instructional materials is not enough.
Consequently, the materials will be accompanied by detailed online guides to
help faculty adapt the materials for their individual goals and institutional
constraints. The project will also develop a User Community that aims to provide
faculty with access to enhanced support. Research on the needs of faculty and
the effectiveness of mechanisms to support them will guide the design of the
User Community. The project will also provides professional development for up
to 100 current and future faculty through seminars and workshops. Finally, this
project will provide broad dissemination through articles and presentations at
national and local meetings. This dissemination strategy will ensure that
instructors have access to advances in knowledge about how people learn. In
addition, through the involvement of postdocs and graduate students, the project
will develop capacity for ongoing improvements in STEM education on a national
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.