* 1821933
* Workshop on the Convergence of Materials Research and Multi-Sensory Data Science
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Rickman, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 58,453.00

The creation of large data sets in materials research is transforming the way in
which work is done in the materials research field, making data science one of
the essential tools in the discovery of new materials and in the elucidation of
structure/processing/property correlations. At present, many materials problems
of technological relevance are inherently data-intensive. Lack of adequate
frameworks to process complex raw data into sound scientific knowledge hinders
progress in crucial fronts, such as the correlation of grain-boundary character
distribution of materials microstructures, along with its many degrees of
freedom, with thermo-mechanical properties; and the identification of mechanisms
controlling both normal and abnormal grain growth to engineer bulk, nanograin
materials, amongst others. Lack of available frameworks often results in
acquired data being discarded, given the poor current understanding on how to
process and analyze big data. In short, materials scientists are inundated with
multi-dimensional data from many sources, both experimental and computational,
and vast amounts of data are under-utilized or thrown out completely.
&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this workshop is to build the needed framework by
assembling four seemingly disparate platforms: Human Computer Interactions, Data
Analytics, Fundamental Research in Materials, and New Tools. &lt;br/&gt;This
workshop proposes a genuine convergence approach merging two NSF Big Ideas,
where the pursuit of harnessing data through improved human-machine interaction
presents a new framework for materials discovery. Outputs to this workshop
include a roadmap to guide the framework, as well as the nucleation of
transdisciplinary collaborations amongst participants and several education
opportunities, including recruitment, early-community building, and publicly
available education materials suitable for university courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.