* 1821104
* RAPID: Storm-related sediment export during hurricanes Irma and Maria along the northwestern insular shelf of St. Croix, US Virgin Islands
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Dennis Hubbard, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Hurricane Irma and Maria, both category 5 storms, that struck the Caribbean in
the summer of 2017 caused severe damage to many islands not only destroying a
significant amount of civil infrastructure but also impacting many shallow
submarine environments. This research project collects time-critical, ephemeral
data consisting of observations of erosion, sediment redistribution, and coral
reef structure damage at Cane Bay on St Croix in the US Virgin Islands. This
location was picked because it was at or near the center of both Hurricane Irma
and Hurricane Maria when they were at their maximum strength. It is also the
location of another major hurricane strike (i.e., Hurricane Hugo) in 1989. Data
like that collected for the present project were also collected for Hurricane
Hugo, allowing comparisons to be made and comprehensive modeling of the impact
major storms have on carbonate production, bioerosion, and sediment export in a
modern reef system. Land and marine photographic images, as well as other data
will be collected to provide high quality measurements of sediment removal by
each storm. These data, as well as historical data from Hurricane Hugo, will be
used to model storm related sediment transport in the area over the past
century. Broader impacts of the work include partnership with researchers at the
US Geological Survey, production of an educational video based on overcoming
reef-building misconceptions, and improving knowledge of the impacts of major
storms on coral reefs which will help inform and improve reef
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonate production and carbonate cycling in
modern reefs is due to a balance between the secretion of calcite by corals and
coralline algae and the breakdown and removal of the physical structure of the
reef by biological and physical means. While the biologically related components
of this equation have been intensively studied, a missing part of the equation
is sediment export, a parameter that is presently poorly understood and
quantified. A key set of data documenting sediment export in a reef system was
collected in Cane Bay at St. Croix in the US Virgin Islands just after Hurricane
Hugo. Additional data was collected during fair weather conditions on the island
for comparison. This new project collects similar data to that collected after
Hurricane Hugo. It will allow a quantitative comparison between the various
storms and an assessment of sediment export. Goals will be to characterize
sediment removal from the northwestern insular shelf of St. Croix. Modeling, to
be carried out by a collaborator from the US Geological Survey, will be focused
on determining the relative roles of bottom shear versus storm surge during
major storms in exporting sediment from coral reefs in tropical carbonate
systems.