* 1821619
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Success in Undergraduate Mathematics through Graduate Teaching Assistant Training
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Irena Lasiecka, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 892,649.00

Mathematics is critical for student success in all Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Furthermore, undergraduate
success in mathematics courses is an increasingly critical piece of the growing
national need to train the next generation of STEM professionals. Difficulty in
completing mathematics courses often prevents undergraduate students from
reaching their goals of obtaining a STEM degree and entering the STEM workforce.
This collaborative research project at the University of Colorado Denver, Auburn
University, and the University of Memphis aims to improve the completion of
undergraduate mathematics courses by enhancing the instructional preparation of
Graduate Teaching Assistants (GTAs) in the Mathematical Sciences. Providing an
effective model of GTA training that encompasses a wide variety of evidence-
based approaches has the potential to improve GTA classroom practices, which in
turn may increase undergraduate learning in the classes the GTAs teach. This
project will investigate this possibility by examining how improvements to GTA
training affect undergraduate student learning, particularly in lower-division
undergraduate mathematics courses that are often required for STEM majors. In
addition, teaching undergraduates is a significant part of the professional
responsibilities of mathematics faculty, regardless of their range of
appointments from community colleges to large research universities. Thus, this
training will also result in a cadre of mathematical sciences faculty who are
better prepared to use effective practices to increase undergraduate student
success in early college mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
conduct a multi-part, three-institution research study, with the intended
purpose of investigating the effects on GTAs during and after the time they
complete their multi-component, enhanced instructional and pedagogical training
at the University of Colorado Denver, Auburn University, and the University of
Memphis. The project will use and refine several components initially developed
by the CU Denver Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences GTA
preparation program. These components include providing participating GTAs with:
(1) a deep understanding, grounded in relevant literature, of pertinent issues
in undergraduate mathematical sciences instruction; (2) opportunities to be
mentored by peers and faculty; (3) opportunities to provide peer-mentoring of
other GTAs; (4) outreach opportunities to local K-12 students in order to gain a
broader understanding of their future students' academic trajectories; and (5)
participation in a cross-institutional "Critical Issues in STEM Education"
seminar. Research will include the analysis of data on undergraduate student
performance and success, retention and satisfaction, a longitudinal qualitative
and quantitative analysis of observations of GTA classrooms, an examination of
how the training program impacts GTA perceptions of mathematics teaching and
learning, and a qualitative analysis on the ways the peer-mentor relationship
affects inexperienced and experienced GTAs, both in and out of their classrooms.
The diverse contexts of the participating institutions will provide the
opportunity for rich comparisons and greater insight into mechanisms that can
facilitate broader adoption of project components at other institutions around
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.