* 1821248
* Exploring Past Investment in Learning through Grant-funded Undergraduate Advanced Technology Education Centers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Alan Peterfreund, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 10/31/2021
* USD 214,287.00

NSF has made significant investments in ATE centers to promote the scaling and
sustainability of advanced technological education at community colleges.
Several centers were supported for many years over multiple funding cycles,
often starting out as regional centers before scaling up nationally. During the
life of the centers, much was learned through third-party evaluation,
participation in the annual ATE program data-collection effort led by EvaluATE,
and annual project reports. This project aims to study the impact of the centers
in the post-award period. This study has the potential to identify those
consequences that are most associated with scaling and sustainability. The
lessons learned will be shared with the ATE community, and the NSF more
generally, such that it will inform future Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore the legacy of ATE centers by investigating which ideas,
innovations, knowledge, and products developed by the center continue to evolve,
to be used, and to influence technician education programs. Additionally, given
that the centers are no longer funded, Principal Investigators (PIs) may be more
willing to share missteps and lessons learned than they were while funded. Thus,
the study will include PI reflections on the challenges the centers faced in
maximizing their impact. It is expected that project outcomes will benefit: 1)
current center PIs learning from their predecessors about how to scale and/or
sustain elements of their centers and other elements that they may need to
consider as they try to impact technical education; 2) proposers of new centers
may gain a greater awareness of planning for scale and/or sustainability; 3)
reviewers of ATE center proposals may be better equipped to judge the proposals;
4) NSF and other organizations that may want to adopt a center model may be more
aware of the potential impact and possible limitations of a center-based
approach to education; and 5) developing a model for post-funding reporting may
support others looking to evaluate impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.