* 1821514
* 2018 Crystal Engineering: Progress in Crystal Engineering - Design, Properties, and Function
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Leonard MacGillivray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new
materials to meet technological goals of society as related to topics that range
from energy storage, waste remediation, sustainability, and medicine is
increasingly important. Such materials are developed by scientists with diverse
backgrounds including chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering.
Approaches to develop novel materials are created by teams of such scientists,
where interactions between experts and younger generation researchers are
critical to not only stimulate collaboration, but also set a course for the
future. The Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Engineering will bring
together leading and emerging scientists in Crystal Engineering to enable
presentation, networking, and overlap that will serve to meet future materials
challenges in a changing world where cost for infrastructure and personnel are
at a premium. NSF's Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Materials
Engineering and Processing program in the Engineering Directorate acknowledge
the importance of the Crystal Engineering Gordon Research Conference and
corresponding Gordon Research Seminar by supporting stipends for registration
fee and/or travel support for some young researchers, including students and
postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 Crystal Engineering Gordon Research
Conference, themed ?Progress in Crystal Engineering ? Design, Properties, and
Function?, is dedicated to knowledge and understanding by experts in the field
on how to design and control the assembly of molecules and ions to form
crystals. The Gordon Research Seminar, themed ?Applications and Interfaces in
Crystal Engineering?, will provide a forum for graduate students, post-docs, and
other scientists with comparable levels of experience and education to present
and exchange new results and cutting edge ideas in crystal engineering.
Knowledge and understanding in crystal engineering is needed to develop advanced
materials for applications ranging from magnetism, energy storage,
pharmaceuticals, and chemical synthesis. The 2018 conference will highlight the
breadth of crystal engineering as it spans fundamental topics of crystal design
to opportunities for commercialization. The conference, with support from NSF's
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Materials Engineering and
Processing program in the Engineering Directorate, will gather leading
scientists from academia, industry, and government labs that represent the major
areas in crystal engineering. The scientists will interact with the next
generation of researchers to promote broader outreach within the crystal
engineering community. Progress in prediction, engineering, assembly, and
application of crystalline materials will be addressed by a diverse group of
experts to push forward the goal to construct tailor made materials with
designed function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.