* 1821824
* The Genetic Basis of Phenotypic Plasticity in Meiotic Recombination Rate
* BIO,MCB
* 08/31/2017,07/31/2019
* Nadia Singh, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,480.00

In eukaryotes such as animals and plants, physical exchange (recombination)
between chromosomes during production of gametes can produce novel sets of
genetic information, thus yielding new and potentially useful traits. The goal
of this project is to understand how certain environmental conditions affect the
rate of recombination and, ultimately, the acquisition of new traits. These
studies may lead to novel strategies for breeding in agricultural settings,
since the goal of such strategies is to produce plants and animals with new and
beneficial traits. The project will provide hands-on research training of future
scientists, including a graduate student and number of high school students
during the summers. In addition, this project will serve as a launching point
for presentations to local K-12 schools to promote understanding of genetics and
evolution and to spark enthusiasm for scientific inquiry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic plasticity, the capacity of a single genotype
to produce different phenotypes in different environments, is pervasive in
nature. In spite of its ubiquity the genetic and molecular bases of phenotypic
plasticity remain unknown. In particular, the extent to which genes underlying
individual traits are the same genes underlying phenotypic plasticity in those
traits remains controversial, in part because there are precious few examples
for which the underlying genetic architecture of both the trait and any
associated plasticity in that trait have been clearly worked out. Recombination
rate is an important example of a plastic phenotype. Using meiotic recombination
rate as a prototypical plastic trait, this project will test the hypothesis that
phenotypic plasticity for a trait is mediated by the same genes underlying
population-level variation in that trait. Using Drosophila melanogaster as the
genetic model, experiments will include sequencing whole genomes, characterizing
which genes are expressed and in what amounts, and association mapping to
discover relationships of genotypes to phenotypes. The experiments will provide
two sets of data, one identifying genetic loci associated with within-organism
variation in recombination rate and the other identifying genetic loci
associated with between-population variation in recombination rate. If the same
loci are identified in the two data sets, this result would provide important
new insights into the genetic basis of phenotypic plasticity.