* 1821288
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collaborative Social-Ecological Models for Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Julia Klein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2022
* USD 17,972.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will advance understanding of
collaborative management and the benefits of conceptual and computer simulation
modeling by examining the kinds of learning that occur when models of
interactions between humans and the environment are used to support
collaborative environmental decision making. This project will provide new
insights and information regarding the ways in which local and scientific
knowledge can improve the capacity of managers to understand, learn about, and
respond to environmental change. By quantitatively measuring the cultural and
cognitive changes that occur when public participants engage with different
kinds of scientific models, this project will inform analysis and management of
resilient socioecological systems by further connecting learning outcomes to
concepts of adaptive capacity and collective action. Project results will be
disseminated through academic and non-academic outlets to support science
literacy and decision making. Project methods and findings will be adaptable for
a broad range of settings in which linked human and natural systems with shared
resources are experiencing rapid social and ecological change. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling increasingly is used by academics and
development experts to encourage collaborative management among resource users,
policy makers, researchers, and conservation practitioners, yet little research
has been conducted to measure the impacts of this process on collective action
outcomes, local ecological knowledge, and related cultural models that consider
the beliefs, norms, and values surrounding human-environment relationships. The
doctoral student will seek answers to the following sets of questions: (1) How
do resource users, decision makers, and researchers understand the causes and
consequences of invasive shrubs in the study region, and how do those types of
knowledge relate to one another? (2) To what degree can collaborative social-
ecological models facilitate social learning, and how does it impact both
individual knowledge and shared cultural knowledge? (3) What proposed management
strategies arise during the collaborative modeling process, and how do these
compare to strategies originally identified by different stakeholder groups? The
student will use three modeling paradigms of increasing complexity to understand
the sociocultural dimensions of the system (conceptual modeling), the ecological
niche and invasion process of the invasive shrub (species distribution
modeling), and the potential future scenarios and management options for the
area (agent-based modeling). The learning process will be assessed using
interviews and cultural consensus analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.