* 1821136
* Developing Evidence-based Best Practices for Broadening Participation in Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Burcin Tamer, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,820,526.00

The demand for a motivated and capable computing workforce continues to grow.
However, efforts to address this demand continue to fall short of expectations.
This project aims to provide potential solutions, based on scientific evidence,
to address our nation's need to expand the computing talent pool. The project
team will analyze student and department-level data, and track students over
time. The project team expects that results of this analysis will identify ways
to help students of all backgrounds persist in computing. The project aims to
understand departmental practices that support or discourage students'
persistence in computing career tracks. In doing so, this project has the
potential to aid broadening participation efforts in computing, and by extension
in all STEM fields. This project plans to support computing departments through
consultations and workshops, and encourage social and cultural change within
computing environments. The project expects to disseminate evidence-based best
practices through an established website devoted to disseminating tips for
teaching computer science, customized reports to departments, media outlets,
workshops, and academic venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the
potential to stimulate social and cultural change in the computing education
community through intervention-style consultation and workshops, and the
dissemination of evidence-based best practices built upon research developed
through this project. Department-level data will be collected through three
mechanisms: faculty surveys, faculty interviews, and department website data.
Department-level characteristics representing education practices within the
computing community will be obtained from the data. The analysis of one-on-one
meetings and workshops for faculty and department chairs in computing will
measure strengths and weaknesses of department cultures. Customized actionable
strategies will be developed through the CSTeachingTips initiative. In addition,
national, longitudinal survey data will be collected from students in computing
departments across the United States. These data will track changing experiences
over time and identify potential linkages between students' persistence and
departmental practices. These data will represent various demographic groups'
learning experiences and persistence in computing career paths. The combined
data collection infrastructure and CSTeachingTips have the potential to result
in an influential longitudinal research program. The project team will work with
an advisory committee to translate research findings into a set of best
practices for computing departments, with a focus on preparing and retaining a
broad, diverse student population to work in computing and STEM fields. The team
will actively disseminate those best practices through the team's professional
network of leaders in the computing education community, conferences that bring
together key stakeholders, other relevant academic venues that reach STEM
education audiences, and customizable reports and tip
sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.