* 1821666
* SaTC: EDU: Microlessons to Build Readiness in the Cybersecurity Workforce
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Louise Yarnall, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Cyber threats to U.S. businesses and governments challenge both national
security and industry competitiveness. Better solutions are needed for training
the cybersecurity professionals who protect these networks, particularly the
mid-career professionals who lack the time and resources to take courses. This
research will develop and test the feasibility of using a smartphone application
to deliver concise learning content, microlessons, in a user-tailored, coherent,
and flexible way to support workplace learning about new cyber threats and
ethical hacking procedures. This work advances learning scientists'
understanding about the curriculum design processes required to convert long-
form, technical lesson content into brief lessons and quizzes designed for self-
directed adult learners. It also contributes to computer scientists' methods of
using artificial intelligence to track learners' progress and make
recommendations on the next steps in the learning process.

The research will have three main phases. First, researchers will select and
transform existing online cybersecurity learning materials used in community
college certification programs into a collection of 1- to 4-minute microlessons.
The researchers will organize the content, ensure it is consistent with industry
standards, and provide in-app badges. Researchers will also create set of
intelligent lesson recommendations that guide learners through the reasoning
that hackers use to stage attacks and that defenders use to detect, diagnose,
monitor, and mitigate attacks. Lesson recommendations will adjust according to
each learner's needs, existing knowledge, and past experience. Second, the
research will deliver a test set of microlesson sequences on a smartphone
platform called PERLS (Pervasive Learning System). This initial set of lessons
will include between 200 and 350 different microlessons, quizzes, self-
reflections on learning, and guided hands-on experiences with cybersecurity
tools, as well as intelligent, personalized content recommendations. Third, the
research will culminate with a pilot test of the prototype with up to 15 working
professionals seeking to update their cybersecurity skills. This pilot will
track tool usage frequency and learning progress as measured through quizzes and
learners' self-reflections. The results will be shared through cybersecurity
education and professional associations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.