* 1821483
* The Role Of Population Movement In The Origin Of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Meradeth Snow, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 161,924.00

Societies change and grow due to a variety of different reasons. In certain
locations, it seems that this process is due to a local shift and
intensification in specific resources and technologies. In others, an outside
influence, potentially through migration, can catalyze growth and change. Clear
shifts in material culture can be identified in the archaeological record, but
the reasoning behind them may not be quite as obvious. The archaeological site
of Paquim, in Chihuahua, Mexico, is a site that underwent a dramatic
fluorescence around 1200 A.D. The reasons for this change have been suggested to
be an aggregation of local populations into the city center, or perhaps due to
an influx of migrants from the southern civilizations in Mexico. Using ancient
DNA studies, this research will contribute to understanding the role of
migration in the Greater Southwest and specifically in the Casas Grandes area,
which can be extended to other regions where migration potentially influenced
the development of social complexity and worked as a catalyst for significant
changes in established cultural fabrics. Outreach will include the introduction
of methods related to the STEM sciences to K-12 students. Also, a summer program
will allow for hands-on training for interested university students. A doctoral
student will also be funded to aid in their degree completion. Migration is a
fundamental human act. How it may influence populations, and in particular spur
creative and economic growth, is something one can better understand by looking
at human history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will utilize some of the
most recent technologies to collect genetic data from different time periods to
detect changes in the occupancy of the Paquim region. In particular, does
genetic data suggest that migration was a potential reason for the significant
shift in the Casas Grandes region? Or does genetic homogeneity between
populations during different time periods suggest a local impetus for the
cultural fluorescence?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.