* 1821775
* SaTC: EDU: Game-Based Cyber Security Education on Anonymous Communication
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ye Zhu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,977.00

Anonymity networks, networks that allow users to remain anonymous, are becoming
increasingly popular. It has been reported that Tor, a second the second
generation anonymity network, has about 1.2 million regular users. Although
research efforts have generated important results regarding anonymous
communication, and that anonymity networks are widely adopted by Internet users,
the education on anonymous communication is very limited. This project will
develop and implement a curriculum that will teach students the basics of
anonymity networks using game-based learning. Students completing the
curriculum, will have an extensive knowledge of anonymous communication, and
will be able to apply this knowledge to combat a range of cybersecurity attacks
when they enter the workforce. Given the increasingly pervasive nature of
computing and communication settings and the increasing popularity of anonymity
networks, protecting communication privacy, privacy of various Internet
applications such as VoIP telephony, and privacy in cyber-physical systems (CPS)
is of great societal importance. Corporations, governments, and security
agencies need to understand the capacity of existing anonymous communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curriculum that will be developed through
this project will be based on information theory and will provide a solid
scientific foundation by understanding and analyzing the complex relationship
among quality of anonymity networks, usability of anonymity networks, and the
amount of network resources needed for different anonymizing approaches. Student
assignment and projects will be developed to provide extensive hands-on
experience with anonymous communication. This project will enhance cybersecurity
education through: (1) curriculum development; (2) developing projects using
GENI networks for easy replication; (3) utilizing game-based learning; and (4)
providing students with the opportunity to do research on anonymous
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.