* 1821843
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Evaluating thermo-electro-adsorption mechanisms for waste-heat driven ion-separation processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Marta Hatzell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 263,006.00

In the case of a natural disaster, drinking water quality may be significantly
compromised. Remote areas may not have access to centralized water treatment. A
low cost, modular water treatment device that operates using only electricity
powered by renewable energy would address these concerns. Many current modular
water treatment devices require elevated temperatures and pressures, which are
not well suited for remote applications. In contrast, capacitive deionization is
an electrochemical technique to desalinate water that uses only electricity and
operates at ambient conditions. This project seeks to advance the energy
efficiency of capacitive deionization to enable easily deployable water
treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The premise of this work is to measure and
evaluate through theory and experiments how thermal energy generated within a
capacitive deionization cell and applied external to the cell (through waste
heat) affect electric double layer salt removal dynamics. We intend to probe
local electric double layer properties through performing in situ analytical
measurements (calorimetry, coulometry, microscopy, scattering). Complimentary
bulk (system level) experiments will be used to evaluate the energetics
associated with electric double layer based separations in dilute aqueous
systems (brackish water treatment). Ultimately, the aim is to better understand
how waste heat can be best utilized, to aid ion packing and maximize
desalination performance. This is fundamental to many fields of
electrochemistry, colloid science and an emerging issue in water treatment. This
approach will also provide a new benchmark for studying these electrochemical
separation technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.