* 1821319
* Engaging Non-Science Majors in Authentic Research through Citizen Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Meyer, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,385.00

The nation's welfare depends on the ability of people to understand scientific
information and make sense of data. Introductory science courses are often the
last formal science course taken by undergraduate students who are not majoring
in science. In many of these introductory science courses, students gain little
insight into what scientists do and how science works. It is therefore important
for introductory courses to provide opportunities for students to better
understand how science works, and to gain skills using and analyzing data. In
this project, curricula will be developed and tested for introductory astronomy,
biology, and geoscience courses to involve students in citizen science research
projects. Students will actively participate in the online citizen science
platform, Zooniverse, and conduct group research projects of their own design.
The Zooniverse platform allows scientists to work with amateur volunteers on
authentic research. It contains over 80 active citizen science projects on a
variety of topics and provides quality curated data with user-friendly data
analysis tools. This project aims to create opportunities for students to carry
out work to support scientific discovery and reach evidence-based conclusions.
Through these experiences, it is expected that students will improve their
scientific knowledge and scientific thinking skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop, implement, and assess citizen science research
experiences in introductory science courses for non-science majors. Curricular
materials will be developed for introductory astronomy, biology, and geoscience
courses at five different types of institutions. The proposed materials will
engage students with in-class activities and group research projects. These
activities will use the Zooniverse online platform to engage students in
classifying data, assessing data reliability, and using scientific approaches to
explore the data in a real-world context. Materials developed in this project
will be informed by evidence-based practices associated with course based
undergraduate research experiences. The effort will build on the project teams'
prior work to integrate Zooniverse-based research experiences in introductory
astronomy courses. The team will assess ease of use and implementation of the
research experiences across the disciplinary content, institutional contexts,
and course structures. The impact on students' learning and attitudinal gains
will be assessed using pre/post surveys, coded assignments, interviews with
students, and embedded assessments within the Zooniverse platform. The outcomes
that will be assessed include changes in science self-efficacy, science
identity, ability to make claims and reason with evidence, and potential for
lifelong science engagement. Project results will be widely disseminated, and
all materials will be publicly available via
classroom.zooniverse.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.