* 1821389
* SNM-IS: Scalable Biomineralization of Functional Oxide Nanoparticles and Nanostructures for Environmental and Energy Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/09/2017,08/31/2023
* Bryan Berger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,499,624.00

This research project seeks to create a scalable, green, continuous process for
biomineralization of nanoparticles directly from aqueous solutions at room
temperature and to create structured catalysts for automotive and other
industrial applications. Biomineralization is the process by which biological
systems produce inorganic minerals, which display nanostructured features that
are otherwise difficult to achieve. Nanostructured minerals are essential
components in a number of industrially-important processes and products, in
which control over the particle size is key to performance. As one example,
certain nanostructured minerals, such as ceria, are used in automobile emission
control, to remove carbon monoxide and other environmentally harmful exhaust
gases. Current industrial methods for nanostructured ceria production often
require high temperatures, high pressures and toxic solvents, thus limiting
their utility. This research project involves studying methods to overcome these
limitations by engineering enzymes as biocatalysts for the large-scale
production of nanostructured ceria. The researchers on this project collaborate
with researchers at Cerion, an industrial partner, to understand industrial-
scale production issues. This project provides a unique, cross-disciplinary
educational opportunity for U.S. graduate and undergraduate students to gain
training in synthetic biology, nanoparticle manufacturing and catalysis. It also
provides opportunities to partner with leading international institutes such as
the Cardiff Catalysis Institute which will enable U.S. students to learn state-
of-the-art production and characterization methods. This project will lead to a
new, environmentally-friendly process to produce high-value materials and
demonstrate their enhanced performance in consumer products such as automobiles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a robust, green
and flexible platform for the high-yield enzymatic synthesis of size-controlled
ceria and ceria-zirconia nanoparticles directly from aqueous solutions at room
temperature, and to integrate these materials into structured catalyst
platforms. The approach is to study and develop engineered silicatein, the
enzyme responsible for silica mineralization in sea sponges, to control
mineralization of both ceria and ceria-zirconia in a size range, less than 2 nm,
that enables functional superiority in primary catalytic applications as
compared to conventional chemically-synthesized nanoceria. The fundamental
technical barriers to scalable, green nanomanufacturing of these materials are
overcome by using directed evolution in engineering enzymes with enhanced
nanoceria synthesis rates and integrating them into immobilized enzyme
biocatalysts for large-scale nanoceria production. The unique advantages of
biomineralization enables the synthesis of smaller, more homogeneous
nanoparticles and the direct, enzymatic synthesis of nanomaterials on structured
support materials for their integration into catalytic nanosystems. Ultimately,
the ability to produce nanoceria directly from aqueous solutions and to control
particle size will create the next generation of these important classes of new,
emergent nanomaterials at a cost and scale compatible with the needs of
industry.