* 1821134
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct-write Printed Electronics on Textiles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Hasan Shahariar, Funxion Wear
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the commercial feasibility of a manufacturing platform for functionalizing
textile materials with smart functionality such as for wearable smart garments
developed out of the NSF funded ASSIST Engineering Research Center for Self-
powered Wearable Nanosystems. Smart garments have been touted as the next
sensing platform for acquiring biometrics such as electrocardiogram, heart rate,
or heart rate variability. However, mass adoption has been difficult due to the
high production cost, leading to a small market segment within the greater
wearable technology market. As demonstrated by our customer discovery through
the NSF I-Corps program in Fall 2016, the biggest barrier to adoption is the
production cost. This project seeks to decrease the cost by 5x and decrease
production time by 36x, enabling this market segment to grow for applications in
health &amp; wellness, healthcare, and beyond. By employing high-throughput
direct-write printing and deposition of functional dielectric and conductive
materials from the printed electronics space, high-value data generating devices
such as smart garments can be manufactured in a single step bridging established
practices within the textile and electronics industry resulting in automated
textile electronics. Novel materials will be explored to impart functionalities
on existing textiles with our manufacturing platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project is to create a single manufacturing platform that
marginalizes the cost of production for textile electronics such as smart
garments and demonstrate minimum viable product (MVP) solutions for stakeholders
within the value chain of smart textiles. The proposed innovation combines
developments from 3D printing, printed electronics, and textile science to
create disruptive advancements in the emerging field of smart textiles and
textile electronics, creating new knowledge and commercial innovations. Lastly,
manufacturing within the USA has seen a resurgence due to value-added technical
textiles manufacturing being brought back. An ancillary broader impact of this
project is to serve as a driver for value-added smart garment manufacturing
technologies to be employed for USA manufacturing. Success of this project's
vision will allow for low-cost smart textiles to usher in a paradigm shift for
the textiles industry, allowing for a multitude of use-cases and innovative
business models to proliferate, ultimately increasing the well-being of billions
of people around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.