* 1821932
* Military Origins in Middle America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Thomas Garrison, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 137,575.00

Dr. Thomas Garrison, of Ithaca College, together with a multidisciplinary team
of American and Guatemalan scholars, will undertake archaeological field
research aimed at developing a better anthropological understanding of the
contexts, causes, and outcomes of intra- and intercultural conflicts. Warfare
and violence between civilizations of diverse religious and cultural backgrounds
continue to shape the societies immersed in these antagonistic interactions. By
looking to the past, archaeology has the ability to reveal complex examples of
ancient aggression, giving insight into the long-term effects of large-scale and
endemic violence on human societies. While it would be easy to focus on the
negative aspects of warfare, which are prevalent and varied, there are also
contexts in which warfare has acted as a stimulus for cultural florescence. The
present project builds upon the sensational discovery of multi thousand new
ancient Maya structures in the Guatemalan jungle, detected by laser-based, lidar
remote sensing technology, to investigate just such a case. The multi-layered
conflicts seen between Maya city-states, as well as contemporary foreign
cultures, are reminiscent of the complex conflicts that affect different areas
of the globe today, and archaeology can inform upon the long-term societal
impacts caused by these clashes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Garrison and his team
will focus their investigations on the newly discovered, ancient fortress of La
Cuernavilla. Situated between the great Maya city-state of Tikal and the smaller
neighboring kingdom of El Zotz, the fortress appears to date to the late 4th
century; the very beginnings of Classic Maya civilization (AD 300-900).
Preliminary studies indicate a link between La Cuernavilla and the foreign,
central Mexican city of Teotihuacan, which invaded and conquered Tikal in AD
378. Using a combination of archaeological, environmental, and chemical analyses
the researchers will conduct field and laboratory investigations to unpack the
complex cultural milieu present at La Cuernavilla and in its surrounding
landscape. Studies of local environmental conditions in the past, as well as
available ancient dietary resources will show to what degree the site was a true
fortress, able to withstand long-term attacks and advance a political and
military agenda. Archaeological investigations will discern the complex cultural
sequence that involves two Maya cities at war during the time of a foreign
occupation. These analyses and comparisons with other case studies will be used
to interpret to what degree places like La Cuernavilla contributed to the rise
of cultural complexity and the florescence of Maya civilization, hopefully
serving as a model for understanding similar situations across time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.