* 1821242
* Collaborative Research: Design and Analysis of Data-Enabled High-Order Accurate Multiscale Schemes and Parallel Simulation Toolkit for Studying Electromagnetohydrodynamic Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Dinshaw Balsara, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Various magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) approximations have served scientists and
engineers well for studying problems in astrophysics, space physics and
engineering such as tokamaks, plasma propulsion, and plasma instability in
engineering devices. Even so, the limitations in this approximation have now
become evident. Especially when dealing with dilute plasmas, charge separation
cannot be accommodated in MHD. To match the full range of observational data and
experiments, it is imperative to provide the plasma physics community with a
capability that goes beyond the MHD approximation. The work aims at developing
high-order accurate, efficient and easy-to-use numerical methods for simulation-
driven discoveries related to multiscale electromagnetohydrodynamic problems on
complex geometry. Indeed, the methods developed will actually offer high-order
accuracy and extremely robust performance for any conservation law beyond
electromagnetics or elasticity applications. Therefore, several other fields of
great importance in science and engineering, and indeed of great importance to
the NSF mission, will be directly benefited by the methods developed here.
Training a new generation of computational scientists capable of conducting
interdisciplinary research is one of the central activities of the work. Courses
relevant to the research such as numerical partial differential equations,
advanced scientific computing, uncertainty quantification and machine learning
have been introduced by the investigators and will be renovated by incorporating
outcomes from the project into course materials. The specific objectives of this
project are to develop, analyze and evaluate data-enabled high-order accurate
and robust computational modeling tools for simulating multiscale high energy
density plasma flows containing both continuum and rarefied regimes in complex
geometry. Both new high-order divergence-constraint-preserving central
discontinuous Galerkin (DG) scheme on overlapping unstructured grid cells for
simulating continuum plasma coupled with Maxwell's equations, and asymptotic
preserving central DG scheme for solving Vlasov-Maxwell-Boltzmann (VMB)
equations to model the dilute plasma flow will be developed. An innovative data-
enabled stochastic concurrent coupling algorithm combining these schemes will be
also devised for multiscale simulations. In this coupling algorithm, a novel
data-enabled stochastic heterogeneous domain decomposition method to exchange
statistical distribution at the interface of continuum and rarefied regimes will
be developed. This will be the first attempt to stochastically couple continuum
and kinetic plasma flow models. There is no current capability that integrates
these unique advances, and the investigators will be the first group to deliver
such a forward-looking capability to the plasma physics community. All numerical
simulations will be validated by advanced data-enabled uncertainty
quantification method developed in this project. A large-scale parallel code
with these capabilities will be developed and released to the plasma physics
community. It will not only enable the plasma physics community to carry out
transformational simulations for new discoveries related to the multiscale
electromagnetohydrodynamic physics for the first time but also lower the
threshold for new computational scientists to use the new cutting-edge numerical
methods for other applications such as nonlinear optics. Simulations will be
used to explain new observations such as enhanced electron transport, which are
difficult to study experimentally in a harsh plasma environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.