* 1821031
* Lake Erie College Research and Educational Center Planning Grant
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Johnathan Tedesco, Lake Erie College
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,589.00

Lake Erie College (LEC) and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) have partnered to
engage in regional research and educational opportunities. A part of this
partnership involves renovating a building on TNC's Grand River Campus at Morgan
Swamp to serve as a hub for research, professional development offerings for
STEM teachers, and educational opportunities for students and community members.
The region in which this facility, the Lake Erie College Research and
Educational Center (LECREC), will reside faces under-funded and under-performing
school districts, particularly in the STEM fields, as well as low levels of
environmental awareness and literacy amongst community members. We intend to
provide the space and resources to address these needs, to support the
development of local research collaborations, and to encourage future
generations of scientifically literate and aware individuals. In addition,
activities conducted at this site can serve as models for other areas of the
country suffering from similar challenges in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To inform the development of the LECREC, LEC and
TNC a planning conference designed to gather information that highlights the
needs of regional constituents will be conducted and a strategic plan will be
developed to address those needs. There is currently little interaction between
educational, research, industrial, community, and government organizations in
the region. To that end, the focus of this conference will be to assemble
representatives from each category to facilitate communication between groups,
understand the needs for the LECREC of each group, and foster collaboration
between groups to better serve the region to ultimately produce a strategic plan
to guide the renovation planning of the existing building to meet those needs.
The strategic plan will be distributed to school districts, community
organizations, industries and government organizations throughout the region by
LEC and TNC public relations channels. In addition, the strategic plan,
subsequent updates to the renovation process, and activities offered at the
Grand River Campus will be publically available at www.lec.edu/tnc in order to
provide continued collaboration and sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.