* 1821061
* Improving Ocean Access for Research and Teaching at the Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Andrew Pershing, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/29/2020
* USD 95,561.00

The intense annual cycle and strong tides make the Gulf of Maine ecosystem
incredibly productive, and it supports a high biomass of fish, whales, and
seabirds. This ecosystem has historically been home to highly productive
fisheries, including the fishery for Atlantic cod that was critical to the
founding of the nation. This ecosystem is now warming at four times the global
average rate, and this warming combined with generations of overfishing has led
to the collapse of the region's iconic cod fishery. The Gulf of Maine Research
Institute (GMRI) is the only institution dedicated to understanding the Gulf of
Maine ecosystem. Scientists at GMRI conduct integrated, interdisciplinary
research across the food web, from plankton to people. Beginning in 2019, this
team will include students participating in a new NSF REU program. Much of
GMRI's field research involves collecting fish ranging in size from juvenile
alewife a few centimeters long to 2 meter-long bluefin tuna. These standard-
sized chest freezers are now scattered throughout the building, creating an
inefficient use of space and energy.

While GMRI is located on the waterfront in Portland, ME, the institute does not
have direct access to the water. Furthermore, as the pace of sampling has
increased, GMRI has had to add additional capacity to store frozen specimens.
This project will fund the construction of a 12'-by-24' floating dock to provide
safe access to the water for scientists, students, and marine educators. It will
also fund acquisition of a large (8'-by-20') walk-in freezer to provide
efficient storage of frozen specimens for research and teaching. The two
projects supported by this funding were identified as part of a comprehensive
strategic plan.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.