* 1821329
* Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Teaching and Learning in Mathematics With Open Software and Textbooks
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Judson, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2023
* USD 95,745.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Development and
Implementation project aims to address challenges in the undergraduate STEM
curriculum, particularly the need to promote student learning and the
development of mathematical and computational skills. Specifically, this project
focuses on open source mathematics textbooks that are available in free online
versions. It seeks to understand two interrelated questions: "How do instructors
and students use textbooks?" and "How can we develop textbooks that better
support teaching and learning?" To answer these questions, the project will
complete a comprehensive educational research study that includes gathering data
from multiple classrooms in a variety of settings, and subsequent analysis of
that data. The development portion of the project will focus on PreTeXt, a
publishing system designed to encourage the creation of free, open source
textbooks. The project will examine the use of existing books created with
PreTeXt, and from these observations further develop the PreTeXt platform, so
that open source textbooks can have increased effectiveness. The integration of
research and development activities is designed to create a continuous cycle of
innovation between the research and development activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education research component of this project will
study 49 courses taught at two-year colleges, and four-year colleges and
universities. These courses include first-year calculus, second-year linear
algebra, and upper-division abstract algebra. The research study will
investigate the work of instructors in planning and teaching lessons drawn from
an online textbook and the work of students as they use the same textbooks to
learn the material. In addition, the study will contrast such work with the work
that instructors and students do when using less dynamic resources, e.g., a PDF
or bound copy of the same material. PreTeXt is a new authoring platform that
enables authors to easily fashion a textbook for both print (static) and online
(dynamic) formats, including both computational and interactive components in
the online version. The project will continue the development of PreTeXt and the
technical underpinnings to create high quality online versions of textbooks,
while only requiring authors to concentrate on their content. The accessibility
features for readers with disabilities will be further improved. The inherent
technical structure of online PreTeXt books will allow automated collection of
student textbook usage data, organized by individual reader, with resolution to
the minute and at the level of individual components, such as viewing a video.
This interplay between research and development activities will produce large
amounts of high-quality data about students' use of their textbooks. The Open
Textbook Initiative at the American Institute of Mathematics will continue and
expand its leadership in vetting and recommending quality free and low-cost
textbooks, and help other STEM disciplines to adopt its successful evaluation
criteria. Workshops for instructors, authors, and software developers will blend
dissemination, professional development, editorial review, and software
development. A novel feature of these workshops will be teaching test-site
instructors how to contribute to the improvement of the open source textbooks
that they are using in their courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.