* 1821445
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Context: Propagation and Effectiveness of the Concept Warehouse in Mechanical Engineering at Five Diverse Institutions and Beyond
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christopher Papadopoulos, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 115,740.00

An increase in the number and diversity of graduates in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields is important for the nation's
competitiveness. Concept-based active learning strategies have been shown to
improve students' academic performance and increase the number who choose to
stay in STEM programs. However, scientific proof that these strategies are
effective is not enough to make sure instructors use them in courses. It is also
necessary to understand and find ways to get instructors to adopt proven
practices. In this project new online concept-based materials for mechanical
engineering courses in Statics and Dynamics will be developed. The project team
will study why instructors decide to use the materials, and how factors at five
different types of institutions affect these decisions. The project will help to
show how circumstances at different institutions affect both instructor adoption
as well as student learning and motivation. It will help inform ways to support
widespread use of the evidence-based instructional practice. Thus, it will also
help more students stay in and graduate from engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the
adoption of concept-based active learning throughout undergraduate engineering
programs. It builds upon the project team's previous success in developing the
web-based Concept Warehouse instructional resource for chemical engineering. The
resource contains hundreds of short questions to engage students in concept-
oriented thinking, to assess their conceptual knowledge, and to provide
extensive concept-based active learning tools. The project will expand Concept
Warehouse to include content in mechanical engineering. Participating
institutions include research-intensive and Hispanic-serving institutions, as
well as a two-year college. A systems approach will be used to examine how
elements of the educational context, such as size and departmental culture,
influence instructor uptake and the resulting student learning. A mixed-methods
research design will include the use of data analytics, instructor interviews,
student focus groups, observations, classroom video, and pre/post concept
inventory scores. The research plan will also address ways in which student
backgrounds and demographics (e.g., underrepresented minorities; first-
generation status) interact with institutional settings to affect student
learning and engagement. Workshops and faculty community building activities
will be used to promote propagation of the enhanced evidence-based instructional
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.