* 1821023
* Transforming STEM Education at a Research 1 University through Multi-Level Action Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Marguerite Brickman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,998,335.00

A well-prepared workforce in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) is a national priority that underpins progress in science, the
advancement of national health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in
an increasingly technical economy. To educate this future STEM workforce,
colleges and universities need to accelerate the adoption of effective teaching
and learning practices at scale. This project at the University of Georgia aims
to implement the University's new core commitments to designing high-quality,
more effective educational experiences for STEM students by: developing clear
and measurable learning outcomes, basing educational decisions on evidence,
collaborating on undergraduate education, fostering continuous teaching
improvement, and promoting inclusion and diversity. To achieve these goals, this
project will develop teams to design and implement the necessary changes at the
course, department, and institutional levels. If successful, this project could
provide an example of how to make sustainable institutional change that
increases the quality undergraduate education, and broadens the success of
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in social cognition and
cultural change theory, this project will develop and coordinate action teams at
the three organizational levels: the course level, the department level, and the
institutional level. At the course level, instructional action teams, involving
84 faculty in biology, chemistry, physics, engineering, mathematics, and
statistics, will revise courses to achieve foundational learning outcomes. At
the department level, a leadership action team, involving twelve department
heads, will meet regularly to reconsider department policies and practices,
including the way that departments evaluate and recognize teaching for promotion
and tenure. At the institution level, strategic action teams comprised of
faculty, department heads, and deans will work to revise institutional
practices, such as the teaching evaluation system, which currently interferes
with the quality of education at the University. Longitudinal data will be
collected from all action team participants to investigate the extent to which
the multi-level action teams produce shifts in assumptions, values, and beliefs,
and result in new policies and practices. Data sources will include interviews,
surveys, teaching observations, course-based assessments, audio-recordings of
action team meetings, and artifacts revealing departmental and university
policies. All data will be analyzed according to standard qualitative and
quantitative protocols. Results will be disseminated through publications,
conferences, press releases, and other avenues, with attention to situating the
project results in context of related findings from other research-intensive
institutions. This strategy can enhance the potential that similar institutions
will be able to adopt or adapt successful institutional change models to
accelerate improvement of their learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.