* 1821533
* Collaborative Research - The Bean Beetle Microbiome Project: A Research-Education Collaboration
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Nicole Gerardo, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,182,010.00

Recent national reports call for undergraduate laboratory courses to be
transformed so that all students have research experiences. Course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) have proven to be a successful
educational innovation for enabling more students to do research. The biological
context for this education research project is a CURE that is based on the gut
bacterial microbiome of the bean beetle, Callosobruchus maculatus. College and
university faculty from a range of institutions and geographic locations will
attend workshops as a part of this project to learn how to work with bean
beetles, study their microbiome, evaluate microbial community data, and
implement bean beetle microbiome CUREs in their courses. Working with bean
beetles will allow student researchers to readily manipulate factors that might
affect gut bacteria in ways that would not be possible with vertebrates or other
insect model systems. Students will have the freedom to design their own
experiments and to develop their own research questions, as practicing
scientists do. The project is designed to examine the importance of student
autonomy (i.e. choosing their own research questions) in the context of course-
based research classes, and to guide science educators as they change the way in
which science is learned and taught. This project has the potential to benefit
students at a range of institutions including minority serving and two-year
colleges by increasing the retention of students in science and fostering
interest in pursuing STEM careers or graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to determine the importance of student autonomy
in a discovery CURE across diverse institutions. This goal will be achieved by
disseminating, implementing, and assessing a data-intensive bean beetle
microbiome CURE that will simultaneously advance our understanding of insect
host-microbe interactions. The first objective is to examine the importance of
student autonomy in a discovery CURE. Student outcomes will be assessed using a
mixed methods approach with surveys, structured interviews, and focus groups.
The second objective is to foster research on insect host-microbe interactions
using experimental approaches with the bean beetle model system. The third and
fourth goals are to develop faculty expertise with hands-on workshops in
research protocols for examining microbial communities in bean beetles, and in
data science for bioinformatics and microbial community analyses. The fifth
objective is to foster the implementation of data-intensive course-based
research at diverse institutions. Faculty from the hands-on workshops will
implement a bean beetle microbiome CURE in two different semesters. The project
is designed to increase the number of minority and two-year college students who
participate in CUREs, stay engaged in science, and pursue graduate degrees in
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.