* 1821964
* Wolbachia 2018 Conference Support:    June 17-22, 2018, Salem Waterfront Hotel, Salem MA
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Barton Slatko, New England Biolabs
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,750.00

Many bacterial species are in precise relationships with hosts with whom they
interact, termed "symbiosis". Symbiosis is a major force of evolutionary change,
influencing virtually all aspects of biology, ranging from population ecology
and evolution to genomics and molecular/biochemical mechanisms of development
and reproduction. Understanding the nature and mechanisms of these associations
is thus of interest from many perspectives. The most common symbiotic bacteria
in the world are called Wolbachia, present in up to 70% of insects and other
arthropods such as spiders, mites and crustaceans and also in roundworms causing
human diseases of river blindness and elephantiasis and heartworm in
domesticated animals. For all these scientific endeavors, we need to more fully
understand how Wolbachia are able to influence their hosts' biology, their
interactions with their ecology and environment and their biology in natural
populations. It is here that the 10th biennial international Wolbachia
(Wolbachia2018) meeting enables interactions from multiple scientific
perspectives and approaches. Over 100 of the world's experts on Wolbachia (and
related symbionts) from academia and industry gather to present and discuss
their recent findings. The small, informal nature of the meetings enables
involvement of graduate students, postdocs, scientists in the beginning of their
careers, and participation of under-represented groups in science, providing
opportunities for them to present their work. The multidisciplinary nature of
research interests of participants fosters interactions from diverse fields of
biology bringing together participants who likely would not be able to meet as a
group at other conferences due to their individual disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The obligate intracellular alpha-proteobacteria symbiont
Wolbachia, widespread in arthropods, is best known for reproductive manipulation
to enhance transmission through the female germline, leading to cytoplasmic
incompatibility, parthenogenesis, feminization or male-killing. Wolbachia alter
core host cellular and developmental processes and also have a dramatic impact
on the composition of insect gut microbiome. They can protect their arthropod
hosts against insect viruses and can benefit their hosts under times of
nutritional stress and they can influence human pathogenic levels in mosquito
vectors of malaria, Zika, Dengue, West Nile, and yellow fever viruses. It is
possible to drive and maintain anti-pathogen strains of Wolbachia in mosquitoes
in natural populations, enabling a reduction of the frequency and titer of these
viral pathogens. Wolbachia are also present in most human filarial nematodes
which cause parasitic diseases of elephantiasis and river blindness. Here they
are obligate for worm development and reproduction, triggering worldwide
projects screening for anti-Wolbachia drugs. The 10th biennial Wolbachia
conference is focused around topics including: reproductive manipulation
(cytoplasmic incompatibility and other mechanisms); cell biology; genomics,
biochemistry and molecular biology; Wolbachia as tools and targets of
disease/pest control in insects and filariae; facultative symbiont diversity,
ecology and evolution; sex-ratio distortion systems and other symbiont species
in arthropods. The meeting will promote the latest research findings about
mechanisms driving these core host cellular and development processes and
provide insight into the evolutionary origins of the intracellular lifestyle of
endosymbionts and many pathogens. Presentations by graduate students, postdocs
and beginning scientists and under-represented groups is
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.