* 1821867
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Writing in Tracing Social Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Stephen Houston, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,594.00

Writing is more than a visual medium for communicating information - it is also
a cultural practice that must be understood in context. Researchers studying the
transmission or spread of cultural practices in the ancient past rely largely on
material and physical remains. Archaeology is especially well-suited to address
these questions because it combines a critical engagement with material culture
with a concern with change and interaction over time and space. In this context,
writing presents an ideal case for exploring cultural transmission because of
the material traces that it leaves and because its physical aspects are often
ignored at the expense of its more abstract message. Mallory Matsumoto (Brown
University) will undertake dissertation research to understand the production
and transmission of writing. In addition to fostering interdisciplinary
collaboration between archaeology, epigraphy, and anthropology, this work will
demonstrate how interaction in one cultural context may affect another, an issue
relevant to understanding both the past and the present. In addition to
contributing to current understanding of pre-Columbian Maya civilization, the
results will be especially relevant to contemporary Maya communities given their
current efforts revive the hieroglyphic script as a symbol of identity and
cultural heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research will examine
if and how the networks through which writing is transmitted overlap with other
contexts of cultural exchange. Its case study will be the ancient Maya
hieroglyphic writing system, which was used for over 1500 years in areas of what
are now Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and Honduras. Critically, the writing system
was shared among pre-Columbian Maya communities who were not only separated by
space and time, but also were never politically unified. Although the
decipherment of Maya hieroglyphs has advanced significantly in recent decades,
scholars still do not understand how the writing system developed and spread.
The investigator will analyze the form of Maya inscriptions and the hieroglyphs
they contain to reconstruct which settlements were sharing which writing
techniques, how these patterns changed over time, and how they related to
interactions in other contexts like politics, warfare, or
trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.