* 1821881
* NSF Workshop:   Enabling biological discovery through innovations in imaging and computation; MBL; April/May, 2018
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Daniel Col√≥n-Ramos, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 04/30/2020
* USD 98,008.00

Our ability to image live cells, organs, and whole organisms has been
transformed by recent improvements in light microscopy and computational
methods. These important advances have also underscored three critical needs in
the neuroscience and broader biological community: 1) interdisciplinary, team-
based approaches in developing new imaging technologies; 2) fast, accessible,
and responsive deployment of technological innovations; and 3) the need for
related training opportunities at the interface of biology, physics, and
engineering. This workshop convenes interdisciplinary experts and trainees to
brainstorm innovative and integrated approaches that create a positive feedback
loop between instrument developers, computational experts, and biologists to
transform the way imaging technologies are developed and deployed. The workshop
is focused on discussing approaches that 1) increase access and training
opportunities in cutting-edge imaging instrumentation as it is being developed;
2) foster interdisciplinary collaboration and training between microscopists,
computational imaging specialists, and biologists to advance innovation and
discovery; and 3) promote the development of complementary platforms that enable
unprecedented imaging across scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2-day workshop is
held at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, bringing together
national and international key players, who work at the interface between
biology, engineering, physics, and computation. The workshop includes keynote
speakers, special sessions on "Building and disseminating new microscopy
methods", "Computation for generating image data and their analysis", "Centers
for interdisciplinary collaborations and training," and a podium discussion on
the creation of new centers that increase access and training in cutting-edge
imaging instrumentation as it is being developed. With the goal of engaging the
next generation of scientists and engineers working at the interface between
several disciplines, a poster and additional discussion session will provide
opportunities for graduate students and postdocs to present their work and give
input on components that are currently missing or underrepresented in their
training and that can be met by interdisciplinary imaging centers. As diversity
is key to the success of the workshop, participants include established as well
as early career investigators and trainees from different nations, as well as
genders and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.