* 1821841
* SaTC: EDU: Curricula and CTF Exercises for Teaching Smart Fuzzing and Symbolic Execution
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Wu-chang Feng, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 279,448.00

It is estimated that a security flaw occurs in in every 100 lines of code
written, which makes it difficult to develop secure, and trustworthy software.
Given the lack of a sufficient number of developers, the computing industry is
turning to smart fuzzing and symbolic execution tools that automatically
discover and patch vulnerabilities in computing systems. While these techniques
are becoming widely used in industry, few academic programs include these
concepts in their educational programs. The project will develop curricular
materials that will teach students these emerging techniques that are
revolutionizing how software is being tested and validated. This project will
develop open-source curricula, and hands-on, "capture-the-flag" (CTF) exercises
that will enable Computer Science programs across the country to teach these
techniques to students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to help develop
abilities in fuzzing the project will develop a polymorphically generated web
application that includes source code and several vulnerabilities. Students will
use a fuzzer to identify, and fix the vulnerabilities. As a result students will
develop the skills required to use fuzzers, and the ability to spot the errors
and vulnerabilities in source-code that fuzzers reveal. By building and
publishing these educational artifacts, this project will place these tools in
the hands of as many students as possible so that industry can efficiently build
and secure software. As a result, the next-generation of developers will
understand the fundamental ideas behind automated vulnerability detection and
correction, and develop the ability to leverage modern software testing
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.