* 1821996
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Technological Response To Environmental Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Mica Jones, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 7,493.00

Mica Jones, PhD Candidate at Washington University in St. Louis, will
investigate how hunter-gatherer lifeways change and have diversified through
time in response to large-scale climatic and environmental fluctuations.
Scholars of non-food producing societies have noted close ties between resource
availability and the organization of forager societies. In temperate regions,
change among hunter-gatherers is often related to shifts in the amount of wild
foods available during the year. In areas like the African tropics where
resources do not vary significantly from season to season, climatic oscillations
over hundreds or thousands of years are more important drivers of social and
economic change in small scale human societies. The ways that broad shifts in
climate patterns affect social strategies employed by people relying on wild
resources in the tropics, however, are not well understood. The deep time
perspective of archaeology provides a useful lens for investigating such shifts
over long periods of time. This study will use archaeological data to examine
the ways small-scale, non-food producing societies adapted to well-known
climatic fluctuations over the last 20,000 years in eastern Africa. Findings
will provide new information on the role that hunter-gatherer social flexibility
had in shaping the social diversity of prehistoric eastern Africa. This doctoral
dissertation research project will also further MS Jones academic and
intellectual development.

Mr. Jones will examine changing hunter-gatherer behavior in two distinct eastern
African contexts: the wet, productive Lake Victoria basin of eastern Uganda and
the more climatically-sensitive semi-arid plains of southern Somalia. By
comparing wet and dry case studies, this research aims to understand how local
environmental conditions influence hunter-gatherer decision-making when faced
with ecological change. Using zooarchaeological and isotopic analyses, this
study will examine changing hunting and site-use strategies as well as local
rainfall patterns to track correlations in forager lifeways and environmental
changes. In doing so, it will help fill an ever-widening data hole in a
geographically important and politically sensitive part of the Horn of Africa
today by providing new information on the long-term presence of people in
prehistoric southern Somalia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.