* 1821097
* Moorea Coral Reef Ecological Omics Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Neil Davies, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2022
* USD 214,795.00

In its report guiding ocean science priorities at NSF, Sea Change: 2015-2025
Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences, the National Research Council highlighted the
democratization of genomics and related technologies ('omics) as an opportunity
to foster discovery and experimentation. The improvements implemented in this
project take full advantage of this opportunity, facilitating cutting-edge
behavioral and ecological 'omics experiments at the University of California's
Gump South Pacific Research Station. The new Coral Reef Ecological Omics Lab
(CREOL) implements plans drawn up with previous NSF support to develop a Coral
Reef Genomic Observatory at the Gump Station. The CREOL facility will expand and
improve the research station's existing marine lab and mesocosm facilities,
providing necessary equipment for sample processing and temporary storage of
specimens, prior to analyses at laboratories in California and beyond. This
research enhances society's ability to understand and sustain coral reef
ecosystems and the services they provide. Coral reefs are hotspots for
biological diversity and are sources of great societal significance and economic
value. Local and global processes, often associated with human activities,
increasingly threaten the continued health of these exceptional natural systems.
New research on population dynamics, ecosystem processes, biodiversity and
resilience is critical to successful management, conservation, and restoration
of coral reefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Coral Reef Ecological Omics Lab
expands and extends the types of scientific study carried out at the University
of California's Gump South Pacific Research Station (www.moorea.berkeley.edu),
increasing the research station's capacity to support genomics and other 'omics-
based research. While the new facility primarily serves researchers and students
studying marine ecosystems, notably those associated with NSF's Moorea Coral
Reef Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site, it also supports studies in
terrestrial and freshwater environments. The new facility has two key
components: first increased wet lab capacity to support a suite of new
mesocosms, and second, an upgraded molecular laboratory to handle the
concomitant increase in biosamples and the need to efficiently process and ship
those samples to home institutions for a variety of 'omics analyses. These
improvements enable the application of genomics and related new technologies in
process-oriented research and long-term studies. The project develops an
approach that stabilizes biosamples at the field station, maximizing the quality
of contextual information and metadata management. Biosamples are transported to
core facilities based at home institutions for the actual omics analyses, while
maintaining provenance information and the integrity of the data value chain
through advanced biological informatics software, such as the Genomic
Observatories Metadatabase (GEOME).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.