* 1821173
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Role of Pollen in Cloud Formation through Measurements and Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Allison Steiner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 415,670.00

While pollen is emitted from the Earth's surface in large quantities from
vegetation, these emissions are typically excluded from inventories due to the
large size of pollen grains. However, recent studies have shown that pollen
grains easily rupture when wet, forming smaller sub pollen particles (SPP);
these SPP have not been well-studied. The central goal of this study is to
accurately establish the amount of SPP produced by pollen rupture and to
determine its cloud formation properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
include a series of experiments utilizing a plant chamber and atmospheric
modeling simulations. The laboratory measurements will (1) Quantify the number
of SPP emitted from a single pollen grain and from a plant under atmospheric
conditions, (2) Determine the supersaturation required for cloud condensation
nuclei (CCN) activation, and (3) Determine the temperatures and relative
humidities required for ice nucleating particles (INP) activation. These results
will provide critical input for an online pollen emissions model that will be
used with the Weather Research and Forecasting model coupled with Chemistry
model (WRF-Chem) to (1) Implement the pollen emission rupture mechanism in WRF-
Chem, (2) Utilize measured rupture data to improve simulations of pollen
rupture, and (3) Conduct new simulations that account for the indirect effects
from both warm and cold clouds using CCN and INP activation
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project uses
laboratory and modeling components to maximize the value of the measurements for
improving model estimates of pollen effects on cloud formation. The work will
also be integrated in an undergraduate course that will introduce pollen
sampling equipment and instruct students on the basics of aerosol and climate
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.