* 1821422
* Developing a Computing Application Minor and an Inclusive Learning Environment to Build the Diverse, Multidisciplinary Computer Science Workforce of the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,307,351.00

This project aims to address two pressing needs in STEM education: 1) increasing
the number of students graduating with expertise in data and computer science;
and 2) improving diversity in STEM fields. The project team at San Francisco
State University (SFSU) will achieve these goals by developing and implementing
a Computing Application minor. This minor will use evidence-based approaches to
attract, retain, and support students, with attention to students from groups
that are underrepresented in computer/data science, including female students.
By tailoring activities to students' majors, the project expects to increase
student engagement and help students experience how data and computer science
are applied in their majors and future professions. Students in the minor will
have opportunities to work with local industry and governmental agencies. In
addition, this project will link to the NSF INCLUDES project at SFSU. As a
result, the Computing Application minors will be able to work with high school
students as computer science mentors and role models. These experiences can
support development of critical skills, including leadership. The project aims
to provide a sustainable and scalable model for introducing data and computer
science to science majors that can be adopted by other institutions, and that
can broaden participation in those fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Computing
Application minor will be a four-semester, five-course sequence designed for
STEM students who have no prior computer/data science knowledge and who are
taking a full course load in their major. The project will provide participating
students with learning experiences related to their majors, train computer
science faculty in evidence-based science teaching methods, and invite students
to share their knowledge with the K-12 community. To reduce stereotype threat
and imposter syndrome, the project will employ a cohort-based structure that
uses peer, faculty, and industry mentors to create a nurturing and supportive
community of learners. The project will identify pedagogies that promote
students' interest in computer/data science and their motivation to use it in
their majors. These research results can inform other efforts to broaden the
diversity of people who have computational expertise, and who decide to pursue
graduate degrees and careers in computer/data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.