* 1822087
* Phase II IUCRC The Catholic University of America: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Nader Namazi, Catholic University of America
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 638,417.00

This project is Phase II of the Broadband Wireless Access Center (BWAC), a
multi-university multi-industry organization composed of five universities (the
University of Arizona, Virginia Tech, University of Notre Dame, University of
Mississippi, and the Catholic University of America) and 20+ affiliates from
industry and government. In the past decade, wireless communications has made
major technological leaps. Wireless connectivity is pervasive in society,
leading to a shortage in wireless spectrum, network congestion, cyber-attacks
and personal security issues. The mission of BWAC is to address these challenges
and offer creative solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase II, BWAC will
expand its research footprint to address timely and industry-relevant challenges
in wireless networks. The CUA Site brings critical expertise and complementary
research capabilities to BWAC for fulfilling the Center's mission. The Site will
collaborate with the industry and academic partners to pursue advanced research
on cooperative mobile edge computing systems, massive multiple-input and
multiple-output (MIMO), millimeter-wave communications and networking protocols,
Internet of Things platforms and mobile applications. Such cooperative research
efforts will potentially make significant contributions to the advance in
wireless technologies, wireless standards, software and hardware components, and
network management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this collaborative
industry-university center will have a direct effect on public well-being,
enabling applications such as remote health, smart transportation, internet of
things, and high speed broadband access in rural areas, to name a few. The
partnering universities are committed to broadening participation in BWAC's
activities. This is achieved through REU site programs, participation of under-
represented minority students and faculty in research projects, and involvement
of multidisciplinary projects. With its research, established partnerships, and
long history of collaboration between its members, BWAC will likely create
intellectual property and spin-off companies, leading to job growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead site, University of Arizona manages the central
BWAC project website at www.bwac.arizona.edu. This website contains various
information about the center including the overview of the center, mission,
industry membership, projects, meeting announcements and technical data. Center
proprietary documents are managed through secure internal pages requiring access
credentials. The data repository will be managed at the main website with links
to the other university sites. The repository will contain technical papers,
project descriptions, relevant software, testbed details, etc. The repository
will be maintained during the project and for an additional five years beyond
its termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.