* 1822080
* Phase-I IUCRC Virginia Tech: Center for Space, High-performance, and Resilient Computing (SHREC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Wuchun Feng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,650,246.00

With this effort, Virginia Tech becomes a research Site of the existing Center
for Space, High-performance, and Resilient Computing (SHREC), an NSF Industry-
University Collaborative Research Center. SHREC comprises four university Sites:
University of Pittsburgh, Brigham Young University, University of Florida, and
Virginia Tech. The Center is dedicated to assisting U.S. industrial partners,
government agencies, and research organizations in mission-critical computing
across three domains: space computing for Earth science, space science, and
defense; high-performance computing across a broad range of grand-challenge
applications; and resilient computing for dependability in harsh or critical
environments. The Center also seeks to address the shortage in the mission-
critical computing workforce by training many students with the knowledge and
skills necessary to solve the many challenges facing this growing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the complementary nature of expertise at
each Site, the Center will address research challenges facing the three
aforementioned domains of mission-critical computing by exploiting a variety of
existing and emerging computing technologies, including field-programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs), graphical processing units (GPUs), and hybrid processors. For
space computing, the Center will develop, evaluate, and deploy novel forms of
space architectures, systems, and applications while leveraging commercial and
radiation-hardened technologies. For high-performance computing, the Center will
explore the application and productive use of heterogeneous computing
technologies and architectures in support of high-speed, mission-critical
computing. For resilient computing, the Center will exploit its expertise in
energy-efficient embedded computing for resilience and in fault injection and
mitigation and radiation testing to demonstrate reliability concepts and
solutions, including adaptive hardware redundancy, fault masking, and software
fault tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects in the SHREC IUCRC will
significantly benefit society in terms of economic impact, due to the
advancement of new ideas and technologies adopted by industry partners and
featured in Center publications. Moreover, the new IUCRC will be student-
centric, where each industrial affiliate board (IAB) membership funds a graduate
student, and each project aims to support a graduate thesis and will employ a
diverse body of undergraduate and graduate students. In addition to its research
activities, the Center will serve as a catalyst for supporting and broadening
the educational and outreach missions of its university partners and members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artifacts that result from this SHREC IUCRC will be
maintained at the Center-wide repository at http://www.chrec.org/ and gradually
transitioned to https://nsf-shrec.org/. In addition, as appropriate, code and
data will be hosted at an open-source GIT repository such as github, gitlab, or
gitea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.