* 1822336
* Collaborative Proposal: Web-based Geo-Visualization and Laboratory Integration with the Magnetics Information Consortium
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 621,690.00

This award continues support for the Magnetics Information Consortium (MagIC).
The goal of MagIC is to develop and maintain an open community digital data
archive for published rock and paleomagnetic data. This will allow researchers
and other users continued free access to archive, search, visualize, manipulate
and download these data, thereby improving research capabilities and ensuring
ongoing access to previously collected data in the Earth Sciences. Since 2003,
MagIC`s development has been funded by NSF as a domain-specific enterprise, and
has recently transitioned to a modern system that will allow development of
improved capacity to link to other data collections necessary to harness data
addressing significant long term research problems in paleomagnetic and rock
magnetic research. These include (i) understanding of past climate changes and
their relation to the Earth`s magnetic field; (ii) the timing of the appearance
and growth of the Earth`s solid inner core and the associated influences on the
geomagnetic field; (iii) the geodynamics of the Earth`s mantle, where magnetic
data are crucial in determining the fixity of mantle plumes and the possibility
of true polar wander, (iv) biogeomagnetism, and (v) magnetism at high pressures
and in extra-terrestrial bodies, including other planets. MagIC provides
fundamental tools online for data interpretation and geo-visualization. Training
of the next generation in the development and use of modern data analysis
methods is a key component of this initiative.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major
overhaul of MagIC`s architecture has been undertaken, including transitioning to
the open source GitHub repository so that community input can drive software
development. The database backend (using MongoDB and Elasticsearch) and web
interface (using Meteor with React and Semantic UI) have been completely
rewritten and the underlying data model (now version 3.0) has been drastically
simplified. Flexible procedures for archiving data via web interfaces have been
developed to improve the user experience and address the needs of the
paleomagnetic and rock magnetic community. This has been a drastic effort, but
the new architecture is ready for expanded business. Modern scientific efforts
require efficient access to data, transparency in data processing, and reliable
documentation so that questions of reproducibility and standardization can be
readily addressed. A key aspect of our past and future work is the establishment
of individualized workflow schemas for understanding all aspects of any study
from field metadata, through lab measurements, and interpreted results. This
facilitates integration of data from disparate studies, and gives full control
to the data user in determining data quality and suitability for specific
purposes. It is also rapidly developing into a requirement for geoscience
publications. Work under this proposal will focus on five areas: (i) assisting
paleomagnetic labs in development and implementation of transparent workflow
strategies to archive their data; (ii) adding new search, visualization, and API
features to MagIC; (iii) interoperability with other magnetics databases; (iv)
additions to PmagPy data processing tools, including reproducibility via the use
of Jupyter notebooks; (v) making make other data sources, such as IODP,
accessible in MagIC; (vi) data rescue operations to ensure that valuable
existing information is not lost to future
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.