* 1822212
* Planning IUCRC University of Southern California for Networked Embedded Smart and Trusted Things (NESTT)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The University of Southern California plans to work together with Arizona State
University, University of Arizona, Southern Illinois University and University
of Connecticut to form a new NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC) for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things (NESTT). The vision of
the NESTT center is to contribute to the development of an equitable, safe and
secure connected world, focusing on creating holistic Internet of things (IoT)
solutions by integrating technology disciplines with expertise in other areas
such as law, business, and humanities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning
grant's objective is to organize workshops and a planning meeting with industry
partners to form the research agenda for NESTT and to explore industry
commitment to the proposed center. At these workshops and the planning meeting,
USC faculty will present and discuss their research pertaining to IoT, spanning
a range of technology horizontals, including networking, distributed edge and
cloud computing, blockchain, formal methods, machine learning, data analytics
and security, as well as application verticals, including transportation,
energy, smart buildings, and smart cities, and interdisciplinary collaborations
with non-engineering experts from business, policy, and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed NESTT center aims to undertake cutting edge
fundamental and applied research that will lower the barriers to the adoption of
IoT technologies through holistic multidisciplinary design and innovation in
diverse domains such as smart cities, transportation, and energy. These research
activities would lead to broader economic, societal and environmental benefits
and contribute to new scientific discoveries. The planning effort will also seek
effective ways for the proposed center to broaden the participation of
underrepresented students in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information
about the NESTT IUCRC planning meeting and associated workshops will be posted
online at USC under the auspices of the USC Viterbi Center for Cyber-Physical
Systems and the Internet of Things (website:
http://cci.usc.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.