* 1822060
* 2018 Mitochondria and Chloroplasts: Fundamental Processes in Organelle Biology: Evolution, Biogenesis, Dynamics and Quality Control GRC; July 7-13; 2018; II Ciocco, Lucca, Italy
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Katherine Osteryoung, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 03/31/2019
* USD 7,000.00

This project will support attendance of young faculty, under-represented
minority scientists, along with graduate students and post-docs at the 2018
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Mitochondria and Chloroplasts to be held in Il Ciocco, Italy, July 7-13, 2018.
The meeting will consist of short talks, poster sessions, communal dining, and
conversations that will provide ample opportunity for sharing latest research
results and for exploring collaborative possibilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria and chloroplasts are unique and crucial
organelles of eukaryotic animal and plant cells as they produce the energy (ATP,
NADH) cells need for their metabolism either by using high energy molecules
(carbohydrates, fats, proteins) in the case of mitochondria, and sunlight in the
case of chloroplasts. Recent provocative findings in these fields, require that
scientists come together to discuss these findings to move the fields forward.
This meeting will provide opportunities for networking and sharing of research
findings and approaches. For early career scientists and those new to the field,
the meeting will provide important information relevant to a fast-moving area of
research. Graduate students and post docs will be afforded ample opportunity to
give oral as well as poster presentations which will assist their professional
development. A 'Power Hour' presentation by senior female scientists will be
followed by an open discussion on mentoring and support to ensure the
professional growth of women in this STEM community. NSF funding will provide
support for attendance by graduate students, post-docs and Assistant Professors
with preference given to participants from underrepresented groups including
minorities and women. Of note, the up-to-now confirmed program already includes
41% female presenters, the 2016 conference had 47% participants in their 20s and
30s, and the organizers are investing significant efforts to recruit minorities
and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.