* 1822011
* Expanding Computing Education Pathways 2.0
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Debra Richardson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,403,565.00

The University of Texas at Austin proposes a project - Expanding Computing
Education Pathways (ECEP 2.0) - that builds on the National Science Foundation-
funded ECEP Alliance that began in 2012. That alliance facilitated state
leadership teams in broadening participation as they expanded opportunities in
K-16 computer science (CS) education. ECEP states share a common agenda with
respect to broadening participation in computing (BPC), participate in mutually
reinforcing activities including landscape report development, state summits,
and the ECEP Annual Meeting, engage in continuous communication through monthly
virtual conferences, connect with other BPC-focused projects such as the
National Center for Women and Information Technology and Access Computing,
mentor new states, and serve as national leaders in the emerging development of
shared measurement systems for evaluating progress toward BPC. ECEP 2.0 will
continue these efforts through mini-grants and toolkits supporting state
landscape report development, stakeholder meetings and state summits, the ECEP
Expert Bureau, ad hoc coaching sessions, and the ECEP Annual Meeting. In
addition, ECEP 2.0 investigators will leverage their expertise and experience to
facilitate three Networked Improvement Communities (NICs) for ECEP states, one
focused on pre-service teacher preparation, one on 2-year to 4-year post-
secondary pathways, and the third on BPC-related professional development. ECEP
state teams will continue their work on education policy reform efforts and
serve as the laboratories for iteratively developing, testing, and refining new
state-level strategies, policies and interventions for K-16 BPC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECEP 2.0 will employ three primary strategies:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategy 1: Catalyze, incubate, and sustain state
leadership teams focused on BPC. &lt;br/&gt;Strategy 2: Support states in
developing long range goals for BPC as well as metrics and data infrastructures
for tracking progress toward those goals. &lt;br/&gt;Strategy 3: Research best
practices in BPC pathways at a state level, leverage the power of the ECEP
network to capture best practices and lessons learned, and contribute to the
emerging knowledge base around systems-level strategies for impacting BPC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECEP 2.0 will also develop and disseminate resources and
research regarding K-16 BPC so as to benefit both ECEP and non-ECEP
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.