* 1822424
* Arctic Village Dynamics: Longitudinal Study of Population, Environment, and Community Change in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Lawrence Hamilton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2024
* USD 120,170.00

This project will develop, analyze, and share a database tracking yearly changes
in population and migration for approximately 80 individual Arctic Alaska towns
and villages, doubling the size of extant databases on this topic. Some of these
communities face serious threats from erosion while other communities may see
substantial impacts from transportation or resource development in the changing
Arctic. All are experiencing complex and rapid socioeconomic changes as
Indigenous communities in a globalizing environment. This database will measure
population change and net migration, which provides key social indicators for
assessing overall effects from many competing forces, and informing plans for
the future. Previous work with preliminary versions of this database tested
hypotheses about the impacts of the 2008 recession, and consequences of rising
erosion in some villages on population dynamics. Newer analyses have compared
population trends in northern Alaska with those of two other Inuit Arctic
regions, Nunavut Territory in Canada, and Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
organization of this database facilitates integration of community demographics
with other types of data such as resource use, environmental observations, and
regional or place-based socioeconomic and health indicators. The data collected
focus primarily on demographic data, including birth and death rates as well as
migration patterns. Applications to date include characterizing demographic
aspects of community change; modeling electricity consumption of individual
communities; and testing hypotheses about environmental and economic effects on
net migration. New analyses planned for the first two years of this project will
address (1) inter- and intra-regional comparisons of Arctic community trends;
(2) detection and testing for change in response to sudden events, new policies,
or economic and environmental forces already in motion; (3) magnitude and impact
of continuing gender differences in migration from indigenous communities; and
(4) further analysis of differences between communities of Arctic Alaska,
Greenland and northern Canada. Reports on project findings, in appropriate
formats, will address a range of scientific, Alaska stakeholder, and general
public audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.