* 1822796
* Connections of Earth and Sky with Augmented Reality (CEASAR): Transforming Collaborative Learning Practices with Shared and Embedded Digital Models
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Nathan Kimball, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 748,022.00

Augmented reality (AR) technologies are becoming increasingly accessible and
there are promising opportunities to develop interactive virtual content that
can be shared and worked on by multiple users. The Connections of Earth and Sky
to Augmented Reality (CEASAR) project will design and prototype immersive
Augmented Reality (AR) learning scenarios that support collaborative interaction
around solar engineering design challenges using models of planetary astronomy.
This project aims to transform the way that AR is used to support small group
collaboration with virtual models of scientific systems. The project envisions
future workplace scenarios where teams are tasked with designing solutions to
engineering problems that rely upon scientific models. Findings from this work
will inform the practice of designing for computer-supported collaborative
learning generally, as well as principles for designing effective immersive AR
work and learning platforms. CEASAR aims to demonstrate efficacy of these
extended AR capabilities for small group collaborative learning that can serve
as a launching point for work and learning scenarios in medicine, engineering,
science laboratories, industrial facilities, and other contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is evidence that AR can generate positive
learning outcomes in comparison to traditional instructional methods, only
recently has the technology offered collaborative engagement with shared virtual
objects. The project will investigate collaborative learning practices in the
context of immersive augmented reality. Specifically, the project will
investigate the role of 1) coordinated visual models, 2) embodied interaction,
and 3) personalized prompts and visualizations based on a collaborator's role.
The project team will work directly with instructors from two local community
colleges to design the collaborative learning scenarios and to recruit students
for participation in design-based research studies. The project will apply
available learning analytics techniques to detect and assess collaborative
learning interactions within the CEASAR environment, explore ways of making the
activities suitable for "whole-class" contexts, and create a set of design
guidelines for supporting future AR workplace collaboration. Identifying
practices and principles for effectively guiding learners' model engagement and
design discourse through AR interactions will contribute to the research on
human-computer interaction, computer-supported collaborative learning, and
technology-enhanced STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.