* 1822417
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions US-BIOTA-Sao Paulo: Scales of biodiversity - Integrated studies of snake venom evolution and function across multiple levels of diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Christopher Parkinson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 480,259.00

This project will determine how key innovations within the venom system have
contributed to diversification in the 2,500 species of advanced snakes. Venom is
hypothesized to have been the key innovation initiating the evolutionary
radiation of snake species by expanding feeding opportunities. This project will
seek to determine the factors and traits that promoted that diversification, and
will test for biases in the genetic pathways underlying rapid evolution in
venoms between closely related species. The study includes the training of two
postdoctoral researchers, and multiple high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students at three major state universities in Ohio and Florida. The research
will produce new data on venom chemistry and function, which may be useful for
novel drug discovery and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representative samples of
diverse species from three families of venomous snakes will be collected in the
United States, Central America, and Brazil to test for relationships between
venom function and diversification rates. Venom complexity, composition, and
enzymatic-activity profiles will be assayed to test the hypothesis that higher
venom evolvability is a prerequisite for rapid evolutionary diversification. Six
closely related species pairs with highly divergent venoms will be chosen for
molecular assays to evaluate the genetic and protein changes responsible for
rapid evolution of venom function. This work will unite diversification studies
and the genetics of adaptation to provide an integrated perspective of how
adaptations are built and how they affect diversification, leading to an
understanding of how biodiversity originates across micro- to macroevolutionary
levels.