* 1822147
* Phase I IUCRC at University of Massachusetts Lowell:  Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,225,745.00

The IUCRC Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
will serve the diverse interests of industry, government, and academia to
address fundamental research challenges to meet the commercial needs of industry
for heterogeneous 3D printing of materials. The additive manufacturing (AM) is
viewed as a research area for global competitive advantage by industries such as
automotive, medical, aerospace, and consumer products. SHAP3D aims to accelerate
expansion and competitiveness of the domestic AM industry and its customers by
addressing two critical market needs: (1) the growth of AM into more complex
topologies, heterogeneous, and multi-functional applications that command high
margins commensurate with their increased performance, and (2) the expansion of
AM into lower margin industries via order-of-magnitude improvements in
throughput, material-per-performance cost reductions, and ease-of-use design
rules that enable SMEs and large companies to rapidly adopt advanced techniques.
The Center will disseminate its design, material and process research to
industrial members and practitioners, and the broader academic community. SHAP3D
will provide a technically trained workforce, with industrial perspective,
through the close collaboration between industry and academia. UML site-specific
educational programs associated with this I/UCRC include K-12 modular block,
freshman Co-op Scholars and online education programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SHAP3D Center research will be driven by the performance requirements of
industry, built from a technical foundation of the fundamental structure-
processing-property relationships associated with the voxel-level control and
integration of diverse processes and materials. The enormous number of material
combinations possible in these multi-material systems multiplied by the
parameter space represented within processes with voxel-level state-variable
control requires fundamental understanding of the material (constituent
matrices, fillers/additives, interfaces) properties, processing protocols, and
design rules to reliably predict the properties of products and parts. Despite
the diverse materials and process combinations, they are unified by many
underlying physical principles related to melting, processing, and
solidification, and interfacial physics for heterogeneous additive printing of
materials.. The Center will support members' choice of AM methods and envisions
research that encompasses numerous additive printing methods, such as fused
filament fabrication (FFF), stereolithography/digital light projection
(SLA/DLP), and other additive approaches. The University of Massachusetts,
Lowell (UML) site will add research strength in modeling, material
characterization, processing, rheology, multi-material printing, and new
materials for additive manufacturing. The Center and UML site will add
significant value for industry by addressing their vision to additively
manufacture dissimilar materials into heterogeneous, valued-added products
imbued with previously unattained biological, chemical, electrical, and
mechanical functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.