* 1822624
* UGA/SkIO R/V Savannah Ship Operations - CY 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* John Bichy, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2024
* USD 5,324,040.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This request is to fund the first year, 2018, of a five-year
cooperative agreement for Ship Operations of&lt;br/&gt;the Research Vessel
Savannah. Built at the Maine shipyard of Washburn and Doughty and delivered
to&lt;br/&gt;the UGA/Skidaway Institute of Oceanography in 2001, the 92-foot
coastal research vessel was designed&lt;br/&gt;to provide researchers with a
versatile platform to conduct primarily federally-funded
oceanographic&lt;br/&gt;research and educational activities in the southeastern
U.S. With its moderate draft, the R/V Savannah is&lt;br/&gt;capable of working
in a variety of environments, from coastal rivers and estuaries to the outer
continental&lt;br/&gt;shelf and beyond. The ship funds will support a variety
peer-reviewed NSF funded projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 17 years, and in the next five, the R/V
Savannah has continued and will continue to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate its ability to
host a large number of scientific cruises with a broad spectrum of
mission&lt;br/&gt;requirements by providing a vessel with excellent range and
endurance for its class, robust overboard&lt;br/&gt;handling systems and the
capacity to berth 16 scientists plus 6 crew. For example, federally-
funded&lt;br/&gt;projects over the past two years used the R/V Savannah to
assess the role of vitamin B-12 and nitrogen&lt;br/&gt;availability on the
regulation of oceanic dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and dimethylsulfide
(DMS)&lt;br/&gt;across a 250 nautical mile transect from the inner continental
shelf to the Sargasso Sea; to study soluble&lt;br/&gt;iron fluxing in
continental shelf margins using benthic lander deployments to 2500 meters and
sediment&lt;br/&gt;collections to 1000 meters off the North Carolina capes; to
quantify the cryptic diet of the globally&lt;br/&gt;significant pelagic tunicate
Dolioletta gegenbauri on the mid-shelf of the South Atlantic Bight, and
to&lt;br/&gt;measure the health of fish stocks from northern Georgia waters to
south Florida. The R/V Savannah has&lt;br/&gt;also supported Navy ship trials
and shock tests, ONR glider operations and the maintenance
of&lt;br/&gt;meteorological data buoys as well as a variety of educational
programs. All of the aforementioned&lt;br/&gt;projects were federally funded by
NSF, ONR or NOAA. 2018 and years following will have some&lt;br/&gt;continuing
projects and new research activities, mostly supported with federal
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purposefully designed with a large science berthing
capacity, the R/V Savannah is well suited to provide&lt;br/&gt;learning
opportunities in ocean and estuarine environments and to demonstrate
oceanographic research&lt;br/&gt;methodologies to diverse student populations.
In 2017, the R/V Savannah hosted 30 undergraduate, 40&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students, 23 high school science teachers and students, and 19 observers across
25 cruises. In&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Savannah State University, the R/V
Savannah continued to host the two-day Research&lt;br/&gt;Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) cruise (OCE-1460457) in 2017, giving students from all over
the&lt;br/&gt;U.S. the opportunity to experience life at sea aboard a working
research vessel by conducting standard&lt;br/&gt;sampling regimes across the
continental shelf to be used in student research papers. The state of
Georgia&lt;br/&gt;and Skidaway Institute of Oceanography regularly provide 5+
days per year, to support beginning&lt;br/&gt;investigator and graduate student
research. To better inform and educate the public about advances
in&lt;br/&gt;ocean sciences, the R/V Savannah is open to the public for guided
tours each year, including the annual&lt;br/&gt;UGA/Skidaway Institute of
Oceanography Marine Science Day which draws 1800-2500
participants&lt;br/&gt;annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Statement of Merit
Review:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.