* 1822522
* Workshop on Sound Change 5: Sound Changes in Endangered or Small Speech Communities; June 20-22, 2019; Davis,  CA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Alan Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 30,648.00

Language change is inevitable and constant: all spoken languages evolve over
time in their fine-grained speech patterns and the sound-to-meaning mapping of
words. The study of sound change is important for understanding the mental
representations and cognitive mechanisms underlying speech communication. The
Workshop on Sound Change will take place at the University of California at
Davis, June 20-22, 2019. The meeting will bring together researchers working on
sound change who come from a variety of different backgrounds and disciplines to
have conversations, integrate their perspectives and insights, and make
substantive progress on questions the remain in the field. Potential
collaborations and research that emerge from the meeting may offer new insights
into the social, cognitive, and linguistic factors at work when a language's
sound patterns change over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As not all speech
communities are equal, and the consequences for differences in the make-up and
size of a community could impact how sound change occurs in a language. To this
end, the workshop will feature a special theme on sound change in endangered and
small speech communities. Sound change research, as in most work in phonetics
and phonology, has focused on languages that have historically been dominant or
where speakers are easily accessible. The dynamics of language endangerment and
interaction between small groups of speakers may provide unique opportunities
for sound change to take place. Small speech communities have different social
factors at work than large communities, leading to the phonetic and cognitive
influences to interact and diffuse in different ways when there are fewer
agents. How sound change might originate and diffuse in speech communities of
different sizes is poorly understood. Furthermore, endangered and small
languages are often heavily influenced by other languages and cultures, making
sound change more likely. In order to make useful models and predictions about
when and how sound change will occur, we need to explore these patterns in
diverse speech communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.