* 1822042
* The SRBR 2018 Meeting: Fostering Training and Diversity in Biological Rhythms Research:  Omni Amelia Island Plantation Resort, in Florida, May 12-16, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Ilia Karatsoreos, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Living organisms have developed endogenous biological rhythms to predict and
adapt to the oscillating environment (e.g. day/night cycles, seasonal
variations). Biological rhythms touch upon all aspects of biology and ecology,
with huge impacts on society, biodiversity and economy. Biological rhythms
include circadian (or daily) rhythms as well as faster rhythms of seconds, hours
or days in behavior and physiology on one end, and slower rhythms, such as those
that relate to the annual environmental changes (migrations, seasonal changes in
reproduction or physiology). Biological clocks are ubiquitous (from single-
celled organisms to humans), and their interaction with systems at all levels of
organization (from single molecules to ecosystems) have placed biological timing
systems at a paramount node that impacts human society on many fronts, in part
represented by the awarding of the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine
to pioneers in this field. Our growing knowledge of the basic science of
biological clocks is changing decision-making in public health, education, labor
and the environment. These are all questions addressed at the 2018 Society for
Research on Biological Rhythms (SRBR) conference. The overall objectives of SRBR
2018 are to showcase new research directions, integrate newcomers in the field
brought into our community through targeted recruitment, and design training and
mentoring efforts directed to young and underrepresented investigators. All
these initiatives will bring the biological rhythms field forward, enhancing the
impact of this knowledge in multiple aspects of society.

More than ever, there is a need for collaboration between specialists of
biological rhythms and scientists from other fields of science, and for
increased awareness of the pervasive and crucial importance of biological
rhythms. With this in mind, the 2018 SRBR meeting in Fernandina Beach, Florida,
aims to build bridges between scientists of various fields, between generations
of researchers, and with various end users and targets audiences. The meeting
also embraces comparative approaches, using both non-model and model organisms,
and laboratory as well as field studies. SRBR 2018, which has grown to attract
over 700 attendees, focuses on the breadth of topics that represent key research
areas in chronobiology, including molecular biology, genetics, cell biology,
neurobiology, physiology, metabolism, behavior, sleep, and mathematical
modeling. In particular, this award allows the meeting organizers to enhance
meeting aspects directed towards trainee professional development as well as
increasing attendance of underrepresented minorities and attendees from low-
income countries. This is achieved by providing trainees and junior faculty with
multiple professional development and mentoring opportunities (including our
acclaimed full-day Professional Development Day). The organizers also stimulate
attendance by underrepresented groups and researchers from low income countries
via multiple initiative, including incentive funding and active inclusion of
minorities in committees and scientific sessions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.