* 1822101
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Arkansas:  Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ranil Wickramasinghe, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,351,298.00

The Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST) Center focuses on
membrane-based separations. Separation processes are essential to purify and
recover products. Separations using synthetic membranes are often cost-
effective. Membrane-based separations have broad industrial applications
including but not limited to: chemical, biopharmaceutical, pharmaceutical, food
production, biomedical devices and oil and gas production. Membranes are
critical for desalination of seawater and for water recycle and reuse. The MAST
Center is largely sponsored by corporations as well as federal agencies and
national laboratories. The industrial members represent major membrane
manufactures and users. By bringing them together, the MAST Center catalyzes the
development of new membranes, devices and processes for emerging separations
challenges thus directly addressing the national interest by promoting progress
in science, advancements in health care, prosperity and welfare. The new
membranes and membrane-based separation processes developed in the MAST Center
can lead to more affordable human therapeutics, new specialty chemicals and
accelerated efficiency for water recovery and reuse. The education and training
opportunities provided to students and researchers at the University of Arkansas
site are directly leading to the development of a highly trained workforce that
is attracting new high-tech industries to Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
MAST Center focuses on developing new membranes, devices and processes for a
range of industries. The Center consists of three university sites. Current
center-spanning research themes, aligned with sponsor interests and fundamental
challenges include water treatment, bioseparations, membrane fabrication and
characterization, organic solvent recovery, gas separations and barrier
membranes. The University of Arkansas site focusses on water recovery and reuse,
bioseparations and the use of modeling tools to design advanced membranes and
membrane processes. A major research area is the removal of emerging
contaminates from wastewater in order to facilitate direct potable reuse. Water
recycle and reuse for the aquaculture and agriculture industries is another
major thrust. The University of Arkansas site has a strong thrust in
understanding the performance of commercially available membranes and membrane
based unit operations for removal of contaminants such as host cell proteins and
DNA as well as validating virus clearance in the manufacture of
biopharmaceuticals. A cross-cutting theme on multi-scale modeling leads to
unique fundamental insights into separation mechanisms as well as membrane
formation processes. These insights will enable the design of new advanced
membranes that address the separations challenges faced by membrane
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.