* 1822575
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Discovering Network Structure in the Space of Group-Level Functional Differences
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Archana Venkataraman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 874,048.00

Large-scale study correlated patterns of activity in the brain (functional
connectivity) can provide a unique glimpse into the inner workings of
neuropsychiatric functions and disorders. However, current methods follow a less
than optimal procedure for clinical analyses: they first fit a model to each
individual, and then separately identify group differences. In practice, this
approach tends to implicate distributed functional changes across the brain,
which are difficult to interpret, ignore crucial information about the patient
cohort, and fail to replicate across studies. This project takes an entirely new
look at this problem by hypothesizing that each neuropsychiatric disorder
reflects a set of coordinated disruptions in the brain. As a result, the induced
functional differences between patients and neurotypical controls should be
interdependent and form their own subnetwork. This strategy reflects a growing
perception in the field that complex neuropsychiatric disorders are system-level
dysfunctions, rather than collections of isolated effects. Going one step
further, the inference procedures developed in this work will strategically
leverage patient heterogeneity to guide the subnetwork estimation. In this end,
this project will pave the way for robust and targeted biomarker discovery
across a wide range of neuropsychiatric disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical exploration of this project will unfold in three stages, each of which
incorporates an additional level of abstraction. Task 1 is to develop a core
model of network-based functional differences via two complementary topologies.
Namely, a community architecture suggests that the given deficit arises from a
subset of abnormally communicating brain regions, whereas a spreading model
assumes that the deficit is linked to a sparse set of region hubs, which
abnormally interact with the rest of the brain. Task 2 will broaden the core
framework by incorporating structural information from diffusion MRI and by
estimating time-varying network differences. Finally, Task 3 will take a purely
data-driven approach to the network estimation based on semi-supervised
representation learning. In parallel with these technical innovations, Task 4
will address key clinical questions related to three of the most prevalent
neurodevelopmental disorders: autism, ADHD, and schizophrenia. The principal
investigators will release a flexible computational platform for functional
connectomics based on the results of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.