* 1822148
* Planning IUCRC at University of Tennessee/Knoxville:  Center for [Digital Composite Joining and Repair]
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Uday Vaidya, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

This award supports a planning workshop for an Industry-University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC) aimed at improving composite material joining and repair
(CJAR) technologies. Composite materials are vital to the competitiveness of
several sectors, including automotive, manufacturing, energy, biomedical,
defense and aerospace. Current CJAR practices are highly specialized, labor-
intensive, and require experienced technicians for critical inspection,
maintenance and repair. Partner institutions including The University of
Tennessee-Knoxville, Georgia Institute of Technology and Oakland University will
collaborate with various industrial companies, in the automotive, aerospace,
defense, energy, and biomedical sectors of the US economy. The University of
Tennessee site of D-CJAR will engage the Institute for Advanced Composites
Manufacturing Innovation (IACMI), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ONR) -
(Manufacturing Demonstration Facility (MDF) and Carbon Fiber Technology Facility
(CFTF)), material suppliers, equipment manufacturers and end users. Examples
include Magnum Venus Products (MVP), Resource Fiber, Mini-Fibers, HTS IC among
others. Faculty and student teams at the partner universities will work with
industry members to conduct pre-competitive research to develop and disseminate
basic and applied technologies/knowledge to facilitate rapid, reliable, and
cost-effective composite joining and repair, with an overall goal of
significantly reducing costs, cycle time, and variation of CJAR operations
within ten (10) years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of transforming the
current labor-intensive and specialized processes into science-based, automated,
and digital CJAR processes, the University of Tennessee site of D-CJAR will
primarily focus on developing CJAR technologies for multi-material joining and
repair of advanced composites, metals and hybrids. We expect advances in several
fields and knowledge domains around CJAR, including (1) design and analysis of
multi-materials joining, (2) process innovations, (3) materials and process
engineering, and (4) testing and nondestructive evaluation (NDE). We will apply
advanced digital techniques, including advanced computational modeling, sensing,
materials characterization, and machine learning to practical CJAR cases that
will also advance the education and workforce preparedness of students working
on projects at the partner universities. Development of new materials and
processes would facilitate standardization, modeling, and automation of many
CJAR tasks and processes, producing cost savings, faster cycle times, and
enhanced performance for industry partners across the entire composites supply
chain, contributing to the maintenance of U.S. global leadership in this growing
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.