* 1822677
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Randomness and systematicity in neural codes for motor exploration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Understanding how the brain learns and controls complex skills is one of the
crucial problems of neuroscience. In both humans and animals, "motor
exploration" - the process by which the brain generates variations in behavior
in order to learn - is critical for both the initial learning of a skill and for
the recovery of motor function following neurological injuries. In prior
research, motor exploration has been assumed to be a random process. In the
proposed research, we will evaluate the hypothesis that motor exploration is not
a random process, but rather a systematic exploration, of many patterns of brain
activity that might be used to achieve the desired output. Understanding how
motor exploration is implemented biologically would not only answer a key basic
question in neuroscience but would also open doors for creation of new
approaches to rehabilitative therapies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We will achieve
these goals by collecting data from the vocal control system in songbirds and by
creating novel mathematical tools that can be applied to data from any species.
Vocal learning in songbirds shares many behavioral similarities to speech
learning, providing one of the few non-human systems in which to examine how the
brain learns and controls the sound signals that allow individuals to
communicate with each other. Our experimental and computational studies will
reveal how the nervous system coordinates the precisely-timed patterns of
electrical activity that allow songbirds to explore different vocal outputs in
order to produce the desired sound. These studies will, enhance our
understanding of complex behavior, create novel analysis techniques for use by
other researchers. Additionally, as part of this award we will engage with local
middle school teachers to create educational resources for enhancing public
education in neuroscience, create training opportunities for graduate students
from under-represented groups, and write a textbook on how mathematical tools
arising from physics can best be applied to biological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.