* 1822960
* RAPID:  Are biogeochemical responses linked to the microbial composition of a defined nutrient and microbial input to a large river?
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Lydia Zeglin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project is to learn how water inputs from a decommissioned
fertilizer plant, which carries a large amount of nitrogen (N) and unique
microorganisms, affect riverine water quality. The fertilizer plant waste
carries microorganisms that grow well in high-N conditions; thus, the concurrent
addition of N and unique microbes could enhance microbiological N removal
activity within the river, and will advance understanding of the connections
between microbial community composition and riverine nitrogen cycling. This is a
significant frontier in ecosystem science with high potential to improve
mechanistic understanding of future changes in ecosystem structure and function.
To accomplish these goals, the research uses two approaches. First, the
relationship between changes in river water quality and changes in river water
microbial communities will be measured over time and compared to unaffected
sections of the river. Second, in order to directly test whether different
microbial populations have different effects on water quality, lab experiments
will compare N removal in waters inoculated with microorganisms from either the
river or fertilizer waste ponds. This project focuses on a uniquely well-defined
release of water with distinct chemistry and microbial composition, which
enables clear tracking of the effect of altered N input and microbial community
composition on river water quality. This research will teach us whether knowing
water microbial community composition helps predict water quality in a large
river. This project supports direct engagement between research scientists and
their local municipality and watershed organization to learn about controls on
water quality. It also gives graduate and undergraduate students hands-on
experience collecting, synthesizing and interpreting data on river chemistry and
microbiology. To reach project goals, the researchers will deploy a suite of
sensors (nitrate and dissolved oxygen) and automated water samplers, and collect
grab samples to characterize downstream changes in river biogeochemistry and
microbial community composition. Also, the researchers will filter live
microbial cells from river and fertilizer waste water and use these cells to
inoculate replicated lab incubation chambers that contain different N
concentrations. Response variables measured in both field and lab activities
include: water chemistry, nitrification and denitrification rate potentials,
total bacterial and archaeal community composition, nitrification and
denitrification functional gene abundance. This work offers a unique opportunity
to better understand how large rivers transport and transform nutrients in the
face of altered nutrient inputs and microbial loads, a key gap in our
understanding of lotic nutrient cycling. Also, because nitrification and
denitrification rates are limited by different environmental factors, the work
will provide insight on biological versus geochemical controls over two key
processes supporting total N removal from aquatic ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.