* 1822110
* Collaborative Research Spatial Archaeometry: Integrating Spatial Analysis into Archaeological Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 188,545.00

The SPARC program promotes the use of spatial analysis, 3D modeling, aerial and
geophysical remote sensing technologies in archaeological research projects
around the world. The increasing availability and sophistication of these
technologies and methods profoundly affects how archaeologists and other
scholars work. The things archaeologists study - from artifacts to sites to
landscapes - almost always have a spatial component and for many decades space
has been viewed as one of the central dimensions of archaeological study. The
capabilities of geospatial technologies to enhance the discovery and
interpretation not only offers new data, but also creates entirely novel means
of engaging with the archaeological record. Through the SPARC Program high-
impact projects seeking to explore and implement geospatial technologies and
methods are selected based on peer reviewed applications. Their work is
supported through close collaborations with experts in spatial archaeometry at
The University of Arkansas' Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST), the
University of Glasgow and Dartmouth University. Together, the teams at these
institutions form a center for innovative geospatial research and methods in
archaeology. Technical experts and research staff at CAST, Dartmouth and Glasgow
actively promote geospatial technologies in archaeology, and collaborate with
the selected projects, providing access to equipment, methodological and domain
expertise, and intensive training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program's goals are
to: enhance the research productivity of archaeological projects by making
geospatial technologies available to researchers who would not otherwise have
access to the tools or skills needed to collect and analyze these data; directly
generate high value archaeological data by participating in fieldwork and
analytical projects to efficiently collect and analyze geospatial data; provide
training opportunities for students and professionals seeking to use geospatial
techniques in their own research; promote the development of new geospatial
methods and applications in archaeology and the visibility of these innovations
in the broader archaeological community; and support good practice and promote
innovation in archiving and publication of digital geospatial data. The new
support from the NSF Archaeometry program will allow SPARC to continue building
a program that is increasingly visible - attracting top research projects;
efficient - as project staff build on their experience; high impact - as pilot
projects build skills in research teams around the world; and innovative - with
broader collaborations leading to significant methodological
advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.