* 1822585
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Secondary Gravity Waves and Influences on Momentum Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Katrina Bossert, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 10/31/2020
* USD 152,022.00

This project would carry out research primarily aimed at the study of the
production and effects of secondary gravity waves (SGWs). The main objective is
to understand how breaking gravity waves produce SGWs and then to assess the
subsequent effect of SGWs on the mesosphere and lower thermosphere region.
Studying the process of developing SGWs is necessary because these waves would
potentially transport momentum to higher altitudes than the primary GW. The
science plan of this project would also consider whether some of these SGWs
could propagate even through a critical layer. These are important aspects of
the coupling processes between different atmospheric layers. This question of
energy transfer between atmospheric regions is a potentially transformative area
of research and is an active topic in atmospheric research now that observations
and models have recently become available. This project would help support two
early career researchers with the lead Principal Investigator (PI) being a woman
thus improving the gender diversity within the space physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While theory and modeling demonstrate the
presence of secondary gravity waves, there are few observational, statistical,
and combined modeling and observational studies on SGW generation and associated
momentum flux and influences within the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT)
region. The research aims to answer the following questions: 1) How do
stratospheric and mesospheric conditions play a role in the evolution and
propagation of gravity waves into the MLT and the progression of breaking
conditions leading to SGW generation? 2) What are the implications of gravity
wave breaking and resulting secondary gravity waves on momentum transport in the
MLT? 3) What is the correlation between strong orographic gravity wave activity
observed in the Northern hemisphere and observations of different gravity wave
spectra in the MLT?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.