* 1822736
* Nanophotonics of RE/DNA/nanotube materials: From bio-sensing-on-chip to live stem cell measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Slava Rotkin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 109,517.00

Abstract Title: Fundamental physics and biosensing applications of composite
fluorescent nanomaterials rare-earths combined with DNA-enclosed carbon
nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials have influenced
drastically several aspects of modern life, one of those is associated with
their power in medicine and health care. This research involves rare-earth based
materials due to their excellent fluorescence rare earths have already found a
significant application niche in lighting, solar cells, sensors, biological and
medical diagnostics and imaging. The bioimaging applications will be further
advanced in this project. It is a continuation of the previous study in which
rare-earths were combined with a unique nanocarbon material, so called single-
wall nanotubes. Nanotubes by themselves has been already used in various
miniaturized sensors, which are so extremely small that can be placed on a
fabric thread. Most recently this group proposed using nanotubes enclosed in the
DNA for studying live cells and has obtained promising results. It has been
already demonstrated how nanomaterials could improve sensing capabilities of
rare-earths. New project will extend this study and focus on nanotubes as tiny
antennas to magnify the optical signals received by rare-earths. Due to small
(nanometer) scale of these optical elements they can penetrate inside the cells
and transmit the biologically relevant information from there, potentially
improving our knowledge about how cells work as building blocks of organisms and
helping medicine and health sciences in solving their current problems. This
research is accompanied by a vigorous outreach program, aimed both on the local
community and STEM students nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing and studying materials for bioimaging based on the
rare-earth complexes with single-wall nanotubes and single strand DNA.
Significance of this research is in developing a new biosensing material. Since
single-wall nanotubes have diameters of only a few nanometers, they are
comparable to many biological macromolecules such as enzymes, antibodies, DNA
plasmids, etc. and may interact with intracellular environment. This makes them
increasingly relevant for new opportunities in biomedical research and
applications. Though at early stage, this project enlighten us about how the
living organisms, at the cell level, may be influenced by new modern
nanomaterials (nanotubes) upon ingestion. Using optical non-destructing
characterization the fate of the nanotubes inside the cells has been already
determined on the previous stage of the project. In the course of new project
the team will work on intertwined theoretical and experimental tasks, including
experimental optical characterization and theory of near-field electromagnetic
modes in the hybrid materials of nanotubes-DNA-rare-earth-ions; exploring
performance of these nanomaterials for bio-sensing applications in photonic-
crystals and inside bio-mimetic hydrogels; studying the role of hotspots in
nanotube materials and their influence on the photoluminescence of rare-earth
ions and/or DNA; experimental studies of modulation of optical response of
photonic crystals incorporating biosensing materials inside its lattice;
application of these nanomaterials inside micro-fluidics sensing system and to
studying in vitro neural stem cell. A series of samples will be studied,
prepared at Lehigh University as well as at University of Utah, LANL and NIST
via the collaboration links. A diverse program for dissemination of those
results involves research advising and teaching at Lehigh, outreach at local
schools (Palisades High School, Moravian Academy), participation in exhibition
at a school children development National facility (the DaVinci Discovery
Center), STEM enhancement programs via local Community Colleges (NCCC, LCTI and
LCCC) and local Kutztown University, REU and GAAN programs within the Physics
Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.