* 1822619
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Prioritization of memory reactivation for decision-making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Daphna Shohamy, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 375,001.00

The decisions we make are shaped by memories of our previous experiences.
Indeed, what decision you make may ultimately depend on which memories your
brain accesses, and which ones you neglect, in contemplating a potential
action's outcome. This project aims to measure memory access in support of
choices, using functional neuroimaging, so as to study which memories are
accessed when, and how retrieving these memories affects the choices people
make, either immediately or later on. Understanding these processes will lay the
foundation for a better, more unified understanding of many diverse phenomena
affecting choices - planning, when habits arise, the role of dreams, and the
impacts of advertising. This could also improve our understanding of maladaptive
choice in various disorders, such as rumination, compulsion, and craving. The
experiments also aim to examine how manipulating the structure of previous
experience affects these memory-access patterns, and ultimately choices. In
addition to its scientific aims, the project aims to train young scientists in
an interdisciplinary range of techniques, combining computational and cognitive
neuroscience, and to serve diversity especially by facilitating training of
women in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actions can be separated from their
consequences by many steps in space and time. Anticipating these consequences so
as to choose the best actions requires integrating memories of multiple
intermediate events, which often were not originally experienced together. But
so far there has been a lack of a principled and unified account of which
memories are accessed, when, and which are neglected, to support value-based
decisions. This project aims to test a recent computational theory that
formalizes the ways in which particular memories are accessed and integrated to
evaluate options, and the consequences for choice. The overarching hypothesis is
that the brain sequentially integrates multiple memories for separate
experiences either retroactively or prospectively, prioritizing the most
valuable ones depending on the statistics of previous experience. The project
will test this hypothesis using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging in humans
that will be engaged in solving several reinforcement-learning tasks. The
project will take advantage of category-specific visual activity to measure
memory access at different points during acquisition and deliberation, compare
these patterns to subsequent choices, and test whether manipulations of the
statistical structure of experience affects both memory access and the resulting
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.