* 1822864
* Data-Driven, Human-in-the-Loop Support for Facilitating Participatory Learning Activities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,681.00

Museums are increasingly developing digital learning experiences where visitors
generate interesting usage data, but these data are rarely used to support
learning. This project poses a "human-in-the-loop" model of facilitation where
museum experts are provided with data visualizations and other feedback derived
by mining exhibit use data. These visuals will be used as coaching support for
facilitators as they help visitors make sense of the rich learning experiences
that digital exhibits now offer. While this approach is immediately relevant to
museum learning, human-in-the-loop systems represent a new take on cyberlearning
systems that will be applicable to many other formal and informal STEM learning
environments that demand immediate, just-in-time reflection that is guided by an
expert observer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intervention will be used in the
context of an open-ended, participatory exhibit that invites up to 50 visitors
at a time to manipulate a simulated ecosystem, with the goal of having visitors
engage with concepts related to sustainability and complex systems by exploring
emergent phenomena. Open-ended learning experiences are common to museum
exhibits but are under-studied in the Educational Data Mining (EDM) community.
This research will add to the growing EDM literature on open-ended problems and
provide insights for how museum exhibits can be designed to supply data that can
be useful for analytics and data mining. A goal of this research is to develop
and refine a typology of the forms of information that museum and other
facilitators working with real-time data can make sense of and act on, which
could be used to inform both the analytics and the software design for future
tools to facilitate learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.