* 1822213
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Hawaii:  Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility (CEMC); University of Hawaii in Electromagnetic Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yuanzhang Xiao, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,064.00

Electromagnetics (EM) technologies have been a backbone for monumental global
economic growth and development in numerous key industries with applications in
communications, radar, space exploration, remote sensing, biomedical diagnosis,
and environmental monitoring. Advances in EM have enabled phenomenal growth in
wireless technologies with more recent applications in mobile biomedical
monitoring/diagnosis, Internet of Things, and smart grids. The University of
Hawaii has a long standing distinguished research reputation in the area of
communications, with recent expansion of research activities in the broader area
of wireless technologies. Available laboratory facilities include wireless
testbed, indoor antenna range, multiple microwave network analysis laboratories,
and a physical electronics lab for device fabrication and characterization. With
this project, the University of Hawaii Team will be joining the highly
successful Phase II IUCRC Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility (CEMC) at
Missouri S&amp;T and the University of Houston. The University of Hawaii EM
technologies site brings research innovation and laboratory facilities that
complement ongoing activities in CEMC. Together, the joint CEMC will provide
broader EM expertise and will be able to address a wide range of projects with
applications in national defense, smart communities and healthcare, smart grids,
and in the Internet of Things research and applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawaii IUCRC site has several faculty
members, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, working on a variety of EM-
based projects. Example projects include advanced antenna arrays design with
beam steering and beamforming capabilities, reconfigurable RF devices, liquid
metals, Terahertz sensors, metamaterials/smart materials technologies,
propagation modeling, and RF sensors for remote biomedical and environmental
monitoring applications. Digital signal processing, advanced optimization, and
reinforcement learning algorithms have also been collaboratively integrated in
EM research projects to provide affordable and reliable wireless access in rural
areas, noninvasive and remote monitoring of vital signs and changes in lung
water content, and in the monitoring, control, and optimization of future smart
grids with large penetration of distributed renewable energy sources. Besides
the significant research benefits from the collaborative and expanded
capabilities of the joint center, the Hawaii site of CEMC will also have a
significant impact on developing a highly qualified workforce with EM expertise
for both the military and commercial sectors. The joint teams intend to exchange
distance learning courses to enrich and grow their graduate programs. The Hawaii
experience with STEM education and the NSF RET program will also be enriched
through this collaboration between the three participating
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.