* 1822976
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Automated Synthesis of Extreme-Scale Computing Systems Using Non-Volatile Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Sumit Jha, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The project investigates the design of a scalable computing infrastructure that
uses nanoscale non-volatile memory (NVM) devices for both storage and
computation. The project's novelties are (i) the use of multiple parallel flows
of current through naturally occurring sneak paths in NVM crossbars for
computation; (ii) the replacement of slow organic expert-driven discovery of
flow-based computing designs by automated synthesis techniques for accelerated
discovery of novel NVM crossbar designs; and (iii) a pervasive focus on fault-
tolerance throughout the design of exact, approximate and stochastic flow-based
computing designs. The project's impacts are (i) the design of an end-to-end
framework that maps compute-intensive kernels written in a high-level
programming language onto nanoscale NVM crossbar designs and (ii) the creation
of a new scalable capability to perform exact and approximate in-memory digital
computations on fault-prone nanoscale NVM crossbars. The team of computer
scientists and nanoscience researchers is creating flow-based computing designs
for four benchmark problems: the Feynman grand prize problem, computer vision,
basic linear algebra, and simulation of dynamical systems. The automatically
synthesized NVM crossbar designs are being evaluated using high-performance
simulations and experimental benchmarking in a modern nanotechnology laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing using multiple parallel flows of current through
data stored in nanoscale crossbars is often fast and more energy-efficient, but
the design of such crossbars is highly unintuitive for human designers. The
project explores a combination of formal methods for checking satisfiability of
Boolean formulae, and artificial intelligence techniques such as best-first
search, to automatically synthesize NVM crossbar designs from specifications
written in a high-level programming language. The team of computer scientists
and nanoscience researchers is pursuing a transformative agenda for extreme-
scale computing by leveraging memory devices in NVM crossbars as structurally-
constrained fault-prone distributed nano-stores of data, and exploiting the
natural parallel flow of current through NVM crossbars for computing over data
stored in the distributed nano-stores. The NVM crossbar designs generated from
OpenCV, LAPACK, and ODEINT programs are evaluated using the Xyce circuit
simulation software and subsequently fabricated for experimental benchmarking.
By combining storage and computation on the same device, the project circumvents
the von Neumann barrier between the processor and the memory and creates
scalable solutions for extreme-scale computing on fault-prone NVM crossbars
without introducing substantial changes to the programming
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.