* 1822307
* RAPID: Integrated Geotechnical and Geophysical Investigation of Subaqueous Foundations, Levees and River Banks Impacted by Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2020
* USD 84,202.00

Hurricane Harvey caused severe wind damages and flooding in Fall, 2017. In fact,
the associated flooding can be classified as a 5,000 year event. Associated to
the flooding, significant sediment relocation processes occurred. Sediment
erosion around submerged structures and foundations, commonly referred to as
scour, represents a significant risk to the stability of infrastructures. During
Hurricane Harvey, early reconnaissance teams observed significant scour and
erosion at bridge piers, river embankments, sheet pile walls, boulder walls, and
other infrastructure with submerged foundations. However, safety constraints
limited on site investigations while water levels were still elevated. An issue
of post-event scour and erosion investigations is the refilling of scour holes.
This means that when with receding water levels and flow velocities, sediment
transported in suspensions settles and infills the scour holes, often leading to
false assessments of the magnitude of erosion during the event. Additionally,
the infill is freshly deposited and often weak, potentially providing a false
image of stability. This award will support the collection of perishable field
data investigating scour and erosion, as well as post-event infill at locations
impacted by flooding and storm surge during Hurricane Harvey. The collected data
will advance the understanding of scour, erosion, and infill during extreme
flooding events, and therefore, contribute directly to the improvement of risk
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will visit sites that
experienced severe scour and erosion during Hurricane Harvey, and that were
initially investigated by early reconnaissance teams. An integrated geotechnical
and geophysical approach will be employed to gather a unique data set of scour
and erosion, and the subsequent infilling. Sub-bottom echo sounders (chirp
sonar) will profile the submerged sediment stratigraphy, supported by portable
free fall penetrometer deployments which will provide geotechnical parameters of
the different sediment layers. Side scan sonar and photogrammetry will provide
detailed imagery and topography. In-situ erodibility will be tested using a
cohesive strength meter. Gravity coring will enable sediment sampling in
submerged areas, while push tube sampling will be conducted at emerged banks.
Sediment samples will be tested for geotechnical sediment characteristics, and
erodibility. The latter tests will be conducted using a Erosion Flume Apparatus.
The collected field data will be unique by providing geotechnical information
from the native sediments and the infill, and will enable future research and
insights into the erosion and infill processes associated to extreme flooding
events as during Hurricane Harvey. The data will be made available to the public
and other researchers immediately after collection through the Designsafe-CI
data repository.