* 1822169
* Planning IUCRC Arizona State University: Center for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things NESTT
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

Arizona State University will collaborate with The University of Arizona,
University of Southern California, Southern Illinois University Carbondale and
the University of Connecticut to plan for the formation of a new Industry
University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC), called Center for Networked
Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things (NESTT). Companies from a wide spectrum of
industries will be recruited and will work jointly with faculty to create a
portfolio of industry-ranked, multi-disciplinary research projects to develop
innovative solutions to fundamental technological and societal challenges posed
by Internet of Things (IoT). The outcome will be a proposal to establish NESTT
as an IUCRC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASU will work with its partners to organize
workshops involving industry leaders and academic researchers to draft the
research agenda for NESTT, aimed at accelerating IoT technology development and
transfer to industry, and make opportunities from the IoT equitable, safe and
secure for all. ASU expertise will include edge and Fog computing; safe and
secure cyber-physical systems; machine learning, data analytics; trustworthy,
networked embedded systems; robotics and industrial IoT; smart cities and
transportation systems; sensors and wearable electronics; IoT governance,
technology-related law and ethics, and business models. NESTT at ASU will
further the participation of underrepresented students in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IoT will become the foundational technology for every
major industry. NESTT?s technological innovations and holistic multi-
disciplinary design will lower the barriers to the adoption IoT technologies
which will accelerate the delivery of significant economic, societal and
environmental returns. The enormous wealth of data generated from such IoT
systems will also lead to new discoveries and inventions in many scientific
disciplines as scientific communities further embrace data-driven research. The
planning for NESTT will include working with industry partners to develop
innovative ways for recruiting (in industry and academia) underrepresented
students in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda and documentation
of activities for the NESTT IUCRC planning meetings will be made available on
ASU's website for the Center for Embedded Systems (https://embedded.asu.edu ).
It will be maintained until the establishment of NESTT, and then merged with the
NESTT site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.