* 1822919
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Scalable Heterogeneous Migrating Threads for Post-Moore Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Vivek Sarkar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The project will advance the state of the art in computer architecture and
programming systems for extreme and heterogeneous parallelism. It is clear that
the post-Moore' law era will require major disruptions in computing systems.
This project will address computer architecture and programming system
challenges for this new era, with a focus on approaches that are expected to be
scalable in size, cost effectiveness, and usability by retaining some tenets of
the von Neumann computing model (unlike more exploratory approaches like
biological or quantum computing). By emphasizing data analytics, the work will
also benefit a rapidly growing swatch of modern life (commercial, cyber,
national security, social networks). A deeper understanding of how such
applications can be made more scalable, and responsive enough to handle
increasing real-time requirements, should lead to wider impacts across every-day
life with significant potential for technology transition. There is also a
direct connection to pedagogy and workforce development, since both hardware and
software aspects of this proposal can enable a broad range of students to better
understand the wider diversity of computing platforms projected in future
technology roadmaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SHMT (Scalable
Heterogeneous Migrating Thread) model developed in this award will include
extensions to the migrating threads and asynchronous task models to support
heterogeneity, and extensions to the transaction and actor models to support
data coherence. Further, the investigators propose to use data analytic graph
problems to evaluate their research, since these applications are both important
in practice and are challenging to solve on current systems. Given the expected
continued increase in the size, complexity, and dynamic nature of such
computations, it is of growing value to understand how to implement them in a
manner that can scale to very high levels of concurrency in environments that
include high rate streams of both updates and queries. These techniques can also
apply to other application classes, such as scientific applications where data
is sparse or irregular. The overall objective of this 3-year research project is
to advance the foundations of computer architecture and programming systems to
address the emerging challenges of scalable parallelism and extreme
heterogeneity, with an emphasis on data analytics and solving data coherence,
system management, resource allocation, and task scheduling issues. The
investigators will leverage their distinct but synergistic expertise in the
architecture and programming systems areas by building on, and integrating,
their past work on migrating threads and near-memory processing, software
support for asynchronous task parallelism for heterogeneous computing, and data
analytics. The Center for Research into Novel Computing Hierarchies (CRNCH) at
Georgia Tech will provide access to first-of-a-kind alternative systems for use
in evaluating the new concepts. Industrial collaborators include Lexis-Nexis
Risk Solutions and Kyndi, for whom graph data analytics are central to their
business model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.