* 1822459
* EAGER: Improving Lifetime and Data Reconstruction Time of Flash-Based RAID by Orchestrating Control between RAID and SSD Controllers
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,584.00

To meet stringent latency and throughput requirements for big data applications,
flash-based Solid-State Drive arrays (SSAs) have become popular in enterprise
storage systems. SSAs have many advantages over conventional Hard Disk Drives
(HDD), such as enhanced input/output (IO) performance and storage density, lower
power, cooling, and rack space cost. However, SSAs have lower endurance and
lower lifetime than HDDs, requiring more frequent replacement, negating some of
their advantages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To optimize the lifespan of SSAs, this
project will divide data into two separate classes, hereafter described as
ordinary data and approximate data. With approximate storage, bad blocks that
contain pages with uncorrectable errors can be reused to store approximate data
that can tolerate some errors. Applying approximate storage in SSAs requires new
mechanisms and techniques to coordinate redundant arrays of inexpensive disks
(RAID) and SSD controllers to manage both approximate and ordinary data. This
project will (1) develop new mechanisms to orchestrate control between RAID and
SSD controllers to extend the lifespan of SSAs; (2) investigate new schemes to
utilize the computing power of SSDs to accelerate the data reconstruction of
SSAs under heavy workloads; and (3) integrate the above two approaches to
develop an experimental framework for evaluation. This project is expected to
have a major impact on industry, since it addresses a real, very timely
technical problem. Further, this project has societal benefits, in reducing
storage cost at data centers, educating graduate and undergraduate students
about cloud computing architecture, while seeking to broaden participation of
students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.