* 1822517
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Stochastic Processes Driving the Ascending Reticular Activating System
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Skirmantas Janusonis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,832.00

All brain circuits, including those that underlie consciousness and perception,
are physically embedded in a dense meshwork of microscopic, meandering fibers.
These fibers are active and release signaling molecules that profoundly affect
the brain. However, individual fibers do not have well-defined destinations and
appear to be randomly oriented within brain tissue, frequently changing their
direction. This property makes them very different from point-to-point nerve
connections. Because of the unpredictability of individual fiber trajectories,
brain research to date has focused on overall fiber "densities." These densities
vary across brain regions and have been associated with normal and altered
functions of the brain. This research project aims to reveal how local, random-
like decisions by individual fibers lead to specific fiber densities in brain
regions. The research also intends to determine whether the behavior of the
fibers has remained fundamentally the same in the last 250 million years of
vertebrate evolution. This conceptually-novel, interdisciplinary approach brings
together recent developments in high-resolution microscopy, automated image
analysis (including machine learning), and stochastic processes. The causal
models developed in the project are expected to provide essential tools for the
prediction of fiber densities from the dynamics of single fibers and will lay a
theoretical foundation for fiber density manipulations in fundamental and
applied neuroscience. The project's data and analyses will be used in a newly
created interdisciplinary laboratory course and will also strengthen an
undergraduate training program in bio-image informatics. The project naturally
brings together neurobiology, engineering, and mathematics; this and its visual
appeal make it well-suited for planned STEM-oriented presentations for K-12
students, as well as for public talks. Since serotonergic fibers present unique
computational challenges, the project will contribute to the development of
image analysis algorithms. The project will also build a rigorous theoretical
foundation for the structure of "diffuse" neurotransmission that is affected in
several mental disorders, including depression, schizophrenia, and autism
spectrum disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all neural processes in
vertebrate brains take place in a dense matrix of fibers that release serotonin,
norepinephrine, and other neurotransmitters. This ancient system originates in
the brainstem and is known as the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS).
Since ARAS fibers do not form well-defined projections and have extremely
meandering trajectories, their current descriptions fall outside the scope of
connectomics projects and are based on observed fiber "densities." This
interdisciplinary project seeks to reconstruct the fundamental self-organizing
process that builds and supports the ARAS in the brain. In a radical departure
from current descriptive approaches, it hypothesizes that the behavior of single
serotonergic fibers can be described by a three-dimensional stochastic process,
which determines the resultant fiber density (as an emergent phenomenon).
Vertebrate brains, spanning some 250 million years of evolution, will be used to
elucidate this process. Single ARAS fibers will be visualized with
immunohistochemistry (including tissue expansion) and imaged with confocal laser
scanning microscopy. Long fiber trajectories in mice will be visualized using
tissue-clearing techniques and whole-brain imaging with light-sheet microscopy.
An image analysis algorithm will be developed to automatically detect and trace
individual fiber trajectories in the 3D-space. The trajectories will be used to
build an optimal stochastic model, by taking advantage of advanced computational
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.