* 1822728
* Mapping Fields in Augmented Reality with Personal Mobile Devices:  Enhancing Visualization Skills for Education and Industry
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Colleen Megowan-Romanowicz, American Modeling Teachers Association
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 382,689.00

Magnetic field visualizations are essential to many branches of the technology
workforce. While fields are a core concept in K-14 STEM education, the field
model of magnetic interactions is often poorly conveyed and regularly
misunderstood by K-14 teachers and students alike. This project will
significantly advance the augmented reality (AR) capabilities of personal mobile
devices to help learners conceptualize magnetic fields. The proposed technology
will enable users to use smartphones or tablets to visualize in real time and
3-D, the shape, magnitude and direction of magnetic fields around everyday
objects. Few affordable technological solutions exist to address students'
difficulties with fields or to support instructional improvements with 3-D
visualization. This innovative technology development and educational research
aims to address this issue by providing a broadly accessible, easy to-use, low
cost magnetic field visualization tool that will enable both guided and unguided
exploration, and support the learner's ability to make sense of magnetic field
interactions in their environment. Ultimately, this project will produce low-
cost visualization tools that will be available to smartphone users for use
anytime, anywhere to visualize the magnetic fields in their environment or
workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers and educational software developers
will design and create a new software educational tool as well as developer
resources for data-based visualization. The software will utilize the new
capabilities of recently-introduced AR frameworks to determine physical location
of the mobile device based upon both the inertial sensor unit including
accelerometer and gyroscope, and the camera. It then overlays the screen with
field information based upon the magnetometer. Magnetic field data will be
collected as the user "sweeps" through space surrounding a field source by
simply moving the mobile device around the physical area. The vast majority of
pre-existing AR software resources utilize tools to superimpose images onto a
primarily 2-D world, require the use of an image target, and focus on
entertainment as the main goal, not education. The development of the proposed
application for teaching and learning will work toward addressing technological
challenges for developers in motion tracking, environmental understanding, and
light estimation, as well as challenges associated with field data acquisition
and 3-D visualization. The researchers will study how this new tool will support
the teaching and learning of fields, a notoriously difficult topic for
introductory learners given its reliance upon theoretical understanding and 3-D
visualizations. User testing and observations in both high school and college
physics classrooms will be carried out during the development process. A
Magnetic Field Concept Inventory will be developed and used to measure student
gains in conceptual coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.