* 1822268
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Air Turbulence and Snowflake Morphology on Snow Fall Speed
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Zachary Lebo, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,733.00

Numerical weather models contain built-in assumptions for the fall speed of
raindrops and snowflakes. For raindrops, the fall speed is relatively well-
constrained near terminal velocity. However, snowflakes can have very complex
patterns allowing them to tumble, spin, and collide with other flakes. The
result is that forecast models have a difficult time predicting snowflake fall
speed, affecting the projection of accumulations on the ground. This award will
make use of advanced techniques used in the fluid dynamics community to measure
snowflakes in real-world settings and in the laboratory, and use this data to
improve numerical weather models. The main societal benefit of the work will be
the potential for better weather forecasts, especially for winter weather events
that have significant safety and economic impacts. The project also focuses on
education and training, and a special public outreach event is planned in
coordination with the Minnesota Winter Carnival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a predictive understanding of the
effects of snowflake morphology and atmospheric turbulence on the fall speed of
snow. The research team will study the physical mechanisms controlling snowflake
fall speed in atmospheric flows with a combination of field campaigns and
laboratory experiments, and will evaluate the impact of such mechanisms on
snowfall predictions. Field observations will take place at a research station
in southern Minnesota, where natural snowflake motion will be obtained by
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), trajectory of snowflakes will be reconstructed
by Particle Tracking Velocimetry (PTV), and the morphology of snowflakes will be
quantified by Digital In-line Holography (DIH). Laboratory experiments will be
conducted in a custom instrument with 256 air jets that are able to generate
turbulent flow. Synthetic snowflakes, manufactured by 3D printing, will enter
the instrument and similar PIV and PTV techniques would be used to capture their
motion. Finally, the data will be used to develop parameterizations which will
be integrated into a bulk microphysics scheme in WRF and assessed through
simulations and comparisons to observations. The work plan is derived to answer
the following three main research questions: 1) Which aspects of the snowflake
morphology are most influential for the snow fall speed? 2) What is the effect
of ambient turbulence on the fall speed of a snowflake of given morphology? 3)
What is the effect of snowflake fall speed on cloud system characteristics and
predicted snowfall?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.