* 1822071
* Phase II IUCRC University of Arizona: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Tamal Bose, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 665,550.00

This project is Phase II of the Broadband Wireless Access Center (BWAC), a
multi-university multi-industry organization composed of five universities (the
University of Arizona, Virginia Tech, University of Notre Dame, University of
Mississippi, and the Catholic University of America) and 20+ affiliates from
industry and government. In the past decade, wireless communications has made
major technological leaps. Wireless connectivity is pervasive in society,
leading to a shortage in wireless spectrum, network congestion, cyber-attacks
and personal security issues. The mission of BWAC is to address these challenges
and offer creative solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase II, BWAC will
expand its research footprint to address timely and industry-relevant challenges
in wireless networks. Research thrusts for the center include spectrum sharing
for heterogeneous wireless systems, secure and private wireless communications,
multi-antenna (MIMO) signal processing techniques, millimeter wave (mmW)
systems, and collaborative mobile edge computing (MEC) systems. The UA site has
significant expertise in wireless protocols, spectrum sharing, and physical-
layer security. Projects conducted will include inter-operable spectrum sharing
mechanisms, beamforming, massive MIMO, techniques for eavesdropping-free secure
communications, antenna design for mmW systems, and adaptive schemes for full-
duplex and self- interference cancellation in opportunistic spectrum access.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this collaborative industry-university
center will have a direct effect on public well-fare, enabling applications such
as remote health, smart transportation, internet of things, and high speed
broadband access in rural areas, to name a few. The partnering universities are
committed to broadening participation in BWAC's activities. This is achieved
through REU site programs, participation of under-represented minority students
and faculty in research projects, and involvement of multidisciplinary projects.
With its research, established partnerships, and long history of collaboration
between its members, BWAC will likely create intellectual property and spin-off
companies, leading to job growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead site,
University of Arizona manages the central BWAC project website at
www.bwac.arizona.edu. This website contains various information about the center
including the overview of the center, mission, industry membership, projects,
meeting announcements and technical data. Center proprietary documents are
managed through a secure internal pages requiring access credentials. The data
repository will be managed at the main website with links to the other
university sites. The repository will contain technical papers, project
descriptions, relevant software, testbed details, etc. The repository will be
maintained during the project and for an additional five years beyond its
termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.