* 1822151
* Planning IUCRC at Harvard University:  Center for Biological Applications of Solid-State Systems (CBASS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Donhee Ham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,000.00

Moore's Law scaling of semiconductor technology has been the single biggest
driver of economic growth worldwide through its revolutionary impact on
communications and computation. At the same time, discovery and technological
activity in the life sciences has exploded. Life sciences efforts have, however,
benefited little from advances in semiconductor technologies beyond the dramatic
improvements in computation infrastructure and higher performance cameras for
microscopy. The Center on Biological Applications of Solid-State Systems
(C-BASS) seeks to transform both the biotechnology and semiconductor sectors by
forging new connections between these two largely disjoint ecosystems and by
training a generation of scientists and engineers well versed in both fields.
The center proposes a comprehensive research program designed to expand and
train the workforce required to implement this vision, while creating new
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Harvard University, the Center will be
supported by the integrated activities of companies and research institutions
across semiconductor, biotechnology, and other related industries. The results
of the C-BASS effort will transform a range of fields including biology,
biomedical engineering, semiconductor technology, and medicine by developing a
range of new sensing systems that take advantage of the small scale and high
performance of nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.