* 1822490
* Investigating Deliberative Argumentation in Large-Lecture Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andy Cavagnetto, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 403,422.00

Modern biology research rapidly generates new and complex expansive information.
This flux of new knowledge makes it impossible to teach a complete body of
knowledge to future biologists, much less to educate an informed public about
biology. Instead, modern biology instruction increasingly emphasizes teaching of
scientific practices, such as interpreting data and arguing from evidence. These
topics have long been the purview of laboratory biology courses. However,
embedding them into large introductory lecture courses has the potential to
reach more students, especially those who enroll in the introductory courses to
fulfill general education requirements and those taking their first science
classes as they prepare to enter a STEM major. This project will develop
approaches and measures to incorporate deliberative argumentation into large-
lecture biology classes. Deliberative argumentation emphasizes collaborative
approaches and active searches for alternative explanations, which are practices
that are widely used by research scientists. Teaching students to take part in
these practices lets them "think like a scientist" and encourages them to stick
with science as a college major and to consider a career in a STEM field. Large
introductory lecture courses often serve as gatekeeper courses, with high
failure rates that discourage students from continuing in STEM majors. Even more
troubling is that failure rates in these classes are often disproportionately
high for underrepresented minority students. Incorporating deliberative
argumentation into these classes is a strategy to help students develop a
conceptual understanding of the topics that they study, which may in turn help
students to earn better grades and pass the course, providing motivation to
stick with a STEM major. Promoting practices in the classroom that improve the
teaching and learning of science can help to retain students in STEM, which
supports the national interest of developing an informed citizenry and building
a larger scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this three-year
Exploration and Design project is to increase knowledge about how the rhetorical
practices of scientists, specifically deliberative argumentation, can be
implemented and leveraged for learning core concepts in large-lecture biology
courses. Using Asterhan and Schwarz's argumentation-to-learn framework, the
project will focus on individual characteristics of students (i.e. content
knowledge and skills necessary to productively engage in argumentation),
argumentation task design, and supports (i.e. teacher scaffolds and discourse
instructions). The project is designed to determine how deliberative
argumentation should be structured in large-lecture biology to support student
learning by accomplishing four aims: 1) Optimize pre-class activities to support
deliberative argumentation; 2) Refine and demonstrate feasibility of in-class
argumentation activities; 3) Develop and validate measures of deliberative
argumentation; and 4) Pilot argumentation activities in large-lecture
introductory undergraduate biology courses. In doing so, the proposed research
will lay the foundation for future efficacy and effectiveness studies by
establishing the feasibility and potential of an argumentation-for-learning
approach in large-lecture introductory biology. Project personnel will adopt a
quasi-experimental design to identify effective pre-class activities for
preparing students for argumentation (Aim #1). An iterative design-based
research (DBR) approach will be used to test and refine the design of
argumentation sessions for large-lecture biology (Aim #2). The project intends
to develop and validate a measure of deliberative argumentation (Aim #3) to
inform the iterative argumentation session design. Project efforts will conclude
with a pilot study, which will apply a repeated measures experimental design to
determine the potential impact of the argumentation intervention (Aim #4). The
proposed research will broaden understanding about "what works" in creating
student-centered undergraduate large-lecture biology courses. Specifically, the
project will generate evidence regarding the efficacy of two pre-class
activities in preparing students for active learning instruction and to identify
key instructional supports for argumentation-to-learn. The study is designed to
advance knowledge in the field of argumentation by creating a robust and
replicable measure of deliberative argumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.