* 1822989
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Enabling Efficient Computer Architectural and System Support for Next-Generation Network Function Virtualization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Tao Li, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2022
* USD 182,705.00

Network Function Virtualization (NFV) has been widely adopted by
telecommunication and internet service providers for greater performance,
flexibility, and adaptability, and is treated as the most promising technology
for the upcoming fifth generation (5G) wireless networks. However, ensuring that
consolidated next-generation NFV workloads can efficiently run on current,
commercially available servers and systems while maintaining optimal
server/network utilization remains a challenge. The main reason is that existing
solutions only serve as layer-specific optimizations. Due to the loose-coupled
optimizations across the system and architectural layers, these solutions lack
the holistic and synergistic view to guarantee the performance, resilience, and
elasticity posed by the features of 5G NFV. This project aims to optimize the
efficiency of consolidation of 5G NFV on commercially available server
architectures and systems. The contributions of this project are: (1) rethinking
the mechanisms employed in various layers of current NFV deployment and
optimization, and (2) re-architecting the abstractions between the layers and
applications. The impacts of this project will open the door for a new class of
efficient scalable computing platforms for next-generation NFV in the 5G era.
This project will also contribute to society through engaging under-represented
groups, research infrastructure/tools/benchmarks dissemination for education and
training, and technology transfer to industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to develop: system-wide profiling tools and an automatic,
architectural statistics-aware NFV workloads orchestration and benchmarking
framework; new techniques that allow NFV applications to leverage virtualized
graphic processing units (GPU), and that improve the scheduling of data movement
between GPU and smart network interface cards (NICs); new abstractions that
allow NFV applications and building blocks to leverage emerging offloading
techniques (e.g. smart NIC and GPU remote direct memory access) and a novel
architecture to improve the consolidation efficiency, parallelism, and
scalability; and novel algorithms and abstractions for operating systems and
accelerators to improve the thread, cache and memory management and cross-layer
parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.