* 1822205
* Planning IUCRC at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign:  Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy Systems (CITES)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* David Nicol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Perhaps more than any other piece of critical infrastructure, today's power
delivery systems are critical to the welfare of the country and its citizens.
All other systems, from agriculture, transportation, and manufacturing to
telecommunications are dependent on safe, reliable delivery of power. Faulty
systems, as in the case of the northeastern US failures of 1965, environmental
factors, as in the northeastern US failures of 2003, physical attacks, as in the
2013 northern California outages, or cyber attacks, as in the 2015 attacks in
Ukraine, have all led to human suffering and loss of productivity as the result
of this interdependence. The Center for Infrastructure Trustworthiness in Energy
Systems (CITES) IUCRC will enable our nation to limit impact of these cyber-
physical attacks on national security by providing capabilities that: seek to
prevent such attacks, rapidly detect attacks that do occur, enable robust
infrastructure that continues to operate in the presence of such attacks, and
quickly restore the nation's infrastructure after
attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, as the systems that controlled energy
delivery systems (EDS) became more complex, their components became increasingly
interconnected. Systems originally intended for closed, serial systems were
exposed to adversarial environments without state-of-the-art designs for
cybersecurity; merely connecting to such services was often enough to exert
complete control over the processes they oversee. While the modern EDS designs
are fully aware of these limitations, after substantial academic research and
industry infrastructure investment, the legacy of such systems persists. CITES
seeks to address these legacy implications through a unique academic and
industry partnership aimed at: (i) ensuring that legacy systems and providers
continue to learn from the nascent science of cybersecurity and failures and
improvements in other domains; and (ii) addressing the unique nature of threats
to the critical EDS infrastructure. These dual goals require tightly integrated
research and industry partnerships to solve not only the problems as they exist
today, but to insure the continued reliability of our nation's EDS
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.