* 1822221
* Advancing Sub-Seasonal Weather Predictability Through Machine Learning Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Timothy Delsole, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 459,667.00

Current operational weather forecasting systems can produce valuable predictions
of day-to-day weather, but such predictions are only skillful up to a week or so
in advance. On the longer subseasonal timescale, say between two and eight
weeks, useful forecasts of mean conditions and the likelihood of extreme events
may also be possible. But basic science questions, including the sources and
mechanisms of subseasonal variability, their potential predictability, and the
essential elements necessary for robust prediction, have not yet been resolved.
These questions are of practical as well as scientific interest, as guidance
from subseasonal forecasts could have a variety of uses including agricultural
planning and emergency management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
identify empirical predictive relationships between local climate variability of
interest and large-scale patterns in relevant predictors such as sea surface
temperature (SST), soil moisture, and atmospheric circulation. Prior work by the
Principal Investigator (PI) and colleagues demonstrated such a relationship
between heat waves in Texas, including the heat wave associated with the 2011
drought, and an SST pattern covering much of the North Pacific. A key limitation
to such prediction methods is that the observed record is too short to identify
statistically significant predictive relationships. Thus methods which seem
successful when tested on past cases may fail when used for realtime prediction.
The PI's strategy for circumventing this limitation is to identify predictive
relationships using output from weather and climate models in place of
observations, as many thousands of years of simulated weather and climate
variability are available from a variety of modeling projects. Model output used
here comes from the North American Multimodel Ensemble (NMME), the Subseasonal
to Seasonal (S2S) Prediction Project, and the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further concern in developing empirical
prediction methods is the need for regularization, meaning a way to eliminate
spurious small-scale features in predictor patterns which arise due to the large
number of data points used to represent the predictor fields. Such features are
not usually consistent from model to model or between model output and
observations. The PI uses a regularization scheme in which eigenvectors of the
Laplacian operator serve to factor out small scales, leading to more robust
predictive relationships. To further ensure robust predictions, the PI applies
an innovative cross validation technique which bypasses the best statistical
model identified in cross validation in favor of the simplest model which is
within a standard deviation of the best model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once robust
predictive relationships are identified that hold across different models and in
observations, the sources and mechanisms responsible for the relationships will
be explored. If the empirical methods can reproduce hindcasts from the models in
the NMME archive then the model output can be used to understand the time-
evolving dynamical processes linking the predictor pattern to the predicted
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the societal benefits of
subseasonal forecasts, the project provides support and training to a postdoc,
thereby promoting workforce development in this research area. The project also
addresses public scientific literacy through public seminars by the PI on sub-
seasonal prediction, a topic of interest to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.