* 1822163
* Planning IUCRC at Purdue University:  Center for Industrial Energy Efficiency (CIEE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2020
* John Howarter, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Industrial energy use accounts for about one-third of total U.S. energy
consumption. Due to mounting concerns about climate change as well as increasing
energy costs, energy efficiency has emerged as a key issue to be considered by
enterprises and the global research community. Based on U.S. Department of
Energy statistics, 64.4% of energy consumed in the U.S. manufacturing sector is
wasted. This suggests that there is a large opportunity to improve industrial
energy efficiency through cooperative research between university faculty and
industrial companies. This project seeks to establish a plan for a joint
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center on Industrial Energy Efficiency
between Case Western Reserve University and Purdue University. The vision for
the center is to establish a national/international research hub dedicated to
advancing the knowledge and techniques needed to improve industrial energy
efficiency to enhance the competitiveness of the U.S. manufacturing industry in
the global economy and to mitigate the carbon emissions from the U.S. industrial
sector. The center also seeks to develop an education program and train an
energy savvy workforce while committing to the inclusion of students from
underrepresented groups. This planning effort will generate significant
potential impacts in terms of research and education at Purdue University.

This IUCRC planning project will involve leading manufacturers, utility
companies, and industrial organizations to pursue collaborative research with
Purdue faculty members on industrial energy efficiency. Novel cooperative
projects will be conducted through integrated mathematical modeling and
experimental investigations. Specific research goals are: (1) Develop scientific
modeling tools and experimental techniques for identifying in-depth energy
saving opportunities in industrial operations. (2) Develop applicable control
algorithms for effectively reducing the energy consumption in industrial
systems. (3) Develop data analytics approaches and decision-support tools to
support policy-making and strategic planning on industrial energy efficiency.
These research projects can advance the knowledge base of current best practices
by identifying substantial energy saving opportunities and developing effective
control algorithms and tools integrated with big data analytics for improving
the energy efficiency of industrial operations from a systems perspective. The
research results produced from the center will lead to a set of novel measures
and strategies to improve the energy efficiency of manufacturing systems,
enhance the reliability of electric power supply and increase renewable enegy
utilization through demand size management, expand the capabilities of the
products/services of industrial control/automation products for energy
efficiency improvement, and support public policy-making on industrial energy
efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.