* 1822062
* Topographic response to the transition from snowmelt- to rainfall- triggered extremes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 404,990.00

In September of 2013, a "1000-yr" storm occurred in the foothills of the
mountains near Boulder, CO, triggering widespread landslides and floods.
However, the causal chain from extreme rainfall to flooding to river erosion and
landslides is complex. For example, this event produced "25- to 200- yr" floods
and landslides locally removed 100's to 1000's of years of sediment production.
This project focuses on how the two main modes of runoff generation (snowmelt
and rainfall runoff) in mountain landscapes can lead to diagnostic differences
in the rates and patterns of erosional processes. We use the Colorado Front
Range, USA as a case study where mean runoff systematically increases with
elevation due to increased snowmelt, while peak runoff is highest at
intermediate elevations caused by large, intense rainfall events. Better
accounting for elevation-dependent runoff generation has implications for water
resource management, flood and erosion hazard assessment, and landscape
evolution modeling. To this end, this project fosters collaboration among three
institutes at the University of Colorado, Boulder (the Boulder Creek Critical
Zone Observatory, Earth Lab, and the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System)
to better integrate data collection, analysis, and model development via open,
reproducible workflows made available to researchers, decision-makers, and
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project are to develop a
quantitative framework for river incision that accounts for two well-documented
attributes of the Colorado Front Range: (1) an orographic transition from
snowmelt- to rainfall- triggered extreme events, and (2) the formation and
persistence of high elevation, low relief, erosion surfaces, into which bedrock
river canyons have incised. While the Colorado Front Range is the focus, the
approach is transferable to other settings with strong orographic gradients in
event-scale runoff variability (e.g., Andes; Himalayas). To accomplish
objectives, research tasks consist of three main components: (A) Hydroclimatic
data analysis; (B) Topographic data analysis; (C) Numerical modeling of river
incision. Hydroclimatic data analysis focuses on how sub-daily to daily (i.e.,
intensity, duration) and spatial (i.e., storm size) attributes of rainfall and
snowmelt events imprint into flood frequencies. Topographic data analysis
focuses on quantifying how channel steepness, channel width, and grain size
distributions vary in the landscape based on data from field surveys and
photogrammetry, high-resolution airborne lidar topography along Boulder Creek
and the Rampart Range, and moderate-resolution regional topography. Numerical
modeling of river incision builds on a 1-D stochastic-threshold model of bedrock
incision, that currently only includes stochastic runoff intensity, by adding
more stochastic parameters (i.e., the location and spatial footprint of runoff
generation). Explicit accounting for orographic gradients in rainfall and
snowmelt statistics and their role in setting the timescale of river response to
base level fall provides a first test of a previously unrecognized feedback
between climate, topography, and erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.