* 1822820
* Conference on Stochastic Weather Generators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* William Kleiber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

The Conference on Stochastic Weather Generators (SWGEN 2018) will be held in
Boulder, Colorado on October 2-4, 2018. The conference will be held at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research. Stochastic weather generators (SWGs)
are mathematical or statistical algorithms whose simulated values capture the
statistical distribution of weather or climate variables of interest. Weather
and climate-related phenomena can have substantial impacts on human safety, for
example flooding, heat waves and severe storms. They also have significant
societal and economic impacts: seasonal water resource planning, crop yield
studies and weather volatility risk assessments all require high resolution
simulations of relevant weather quantities such as temperature, precipitation,
wind speed and solar insolation. Historically, SWGs were developed by domain
scientists for applied projects such as statistical downscaling of climate
models. Recently the applied mathematics and statistical science communities
have taken increasing interest in their formal development, which feed back into
novel modeling, estimation and simulation techniques that then warrant
theoretical study. SWGEN 2018 serves as the first conference devoted to SWGs in
the United States, and is intended to introduce a wide audience of mathematical,
statistical and domain scientists to the current state of the field, disseminate
novel techniques for precipitation, temperature, wind speed and solar radiation
modeling, to forge new collaborative opportunities and to identify areas of
future research.

The conference will consist of keynote lectures, a poster session and research
talks featuring topics of major interest in mathematical and statistical
communities for weather simulation including 1) modeling techniques for
renewable energy applications such as wind and solar irradiance simulation, 2)
modeling and simulation of complex nonstationary and inhomogeneous processes
that evolve over space and time, and 3) large-scale spatiotemporally-coherent
simulation methods. Generating realistic spatiotemporal weather processes
requires novel techniques from areas such as spatial and computational
statistics. These methods dovetail with current interests in the statistical
community involving big data modeling, estimation and simulation techniques.
Other topics will be considered, including nonlinear processes, high frequency
data, multi-scale models, extremes, analog or resampling techniques, and non-
Gaussian processes with applications in hydrology, agriculture, air quality,
insurance and environmental engineering. Links between topics will be identified
and discussed to better understand the role of mathematics and statistics in
this field.

The conference website is at:
https://www2.cisl.ucar.edu/calendar/swgen-2018-stochastic-weather-generators-
conference

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.