* 1822877
* Technology Facilitated Training for Mental Health Counseling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Vivek Srikumar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 749,781.00

Millions of Americans have been diagnosed with mental health or substance abuse
problems. While conversational interventions like psychotherapy and other forms
of counseling are among the most effective treatment options available, less
than half of those in need receive care. One problem is that it is difficult to
provide therapists in training with regular feedback based on direct observation
of their work. Accordingly, training therapists is expensive and time consuming,
leading to a shortage of expert counselors. Furthermore, due to difficulties in
obtaining care, patients are turning to online sources of support, where quality
may be difficult to ascertain. This project examines this timely question of how
to use technology to improve the training of mental health counselors at all
levels. This project will develop a novel intelligent tutoring system to
capitalize on developments in natural language processing and also facilitate
collaboration among trainees to enhance learning. Better trained therapists and
improved interactions on mental health forums should improve the quality and
timeliness of mental health care for everyone. Furthermore, this work will
support lifelong and collaborative learning for licensed professional mental
health counselors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and evaluate
technological tools that facilitate new models for training tomorrow's mental
health workforce. Specifically, this will involve creating and studying a novel
text-based platform with the goal of training mental health counselors. Within
this platform, two broad research questions include investigating the impact of
(a) natural language processing driven helpers that provide feedback in real
time, and, (b) crowd-sourced counseling using individuals with minimal training.
To this end, several statistical models will be designed and trained to operate
within the proposed text- based platform to interact with novice therapists. The
efficacy of the two kinds of feedback (automatic and crowd-based) in terms of
how well they can train different kinds of trainees (lay support providers in
online forums, novice therapists in training) will be compared to models where
the learner practices on their own and/or without specific
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.