* 1822330
* RESEARCH-PGR:  PanAnd - Harnessing convergence and constraint to predict adaptations to abiotic stress for maize and sorghum
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,998,384.00

Maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and Miscanthus are the most productive and water
efficient crops and biofuels in the world. This productivity is due to a shared
physiology and genetic ancestry over the last 15 million years. While these four
crops will be extensively used, they are closely related to another 800 species
that dominate grasslands across the world and are adapted to numerous
environmental stresses including flooding, drought, heat, and frost. The project
team will use modern genomics and machine learning to survey and analyze these
related species, determining the most important genetic features they share that
allow them to adapt to heat and drought. The results of this work will be used
by commercial and public sector plant breeders to make maize and sorghum more
productive and resilient to extreme weather. Key to this long-term impact is
training the next generation of scientists in computational biology to address
fundamental questions. These skills will be developed through hackathons and
bioinformatics training workshops. The project will communicate this science to
the general public through venues such as a traveling museum
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Andropogoneae tribe of grasses contains a
thousand species that collectively represent over a billion years of
evolutionary history. It has used NADP-C4 photosynthesis and a wide range of
adaptations to become a dominant clade on earth. This project will use the
diversity and evolution across this tribe to understand the rules of adaptive
convergence and constraint in plant genomes. The project team will sample and
analyze the worldwide spectrum of genetic diversity in Andropogoneae to develop
detailed models testing whether (1) quantitative estimates of evolutionary
constraint improve predictions of fitness-related traits, and (2) convergent
environmental adaptations shared across the Andropogoneae explain a substantial
proportion of total adaptive variance. These hypotheses will be tested by
assembling the gene and regulatory content of 57 species as well as whole genome
sequencing of another 700 species. For eight species, diversity across their
natural range of adaptation will be surveyed at the sequence level. Evolutionary
and machine learning models will be used to quantify the disruptive impact of a
mutation in every ancestral genomic element. The inter and intra-specific
surveys will also permit an estimation of the prevalence of convergent
evolution. This project addresses two key elements of the genotype to phenotype
problem - how to quantify the disruptive impact of mutations and how to
determine whether adaptive solutions to environmental stresses are convergently
shared across species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.