* 1822574
* R/V Armstrong Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Timothy Twomey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 16,047,459.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) requests funding to support NSF
funded, peer-viewed scientific research on R/V Armstrong in 2018. The proposed
operations will provide access for over 10 NSF Principal Investigators (PIs),
including OOI, to conduct multiple research sea voyages throughout the year.
Almost 78% of the 256 days scheduled will support NSF programs. ONR and WHOI
will also support PIs this year to make up the remaining 22% of the year.
Armstrong will conduct multiple voyages for NSF's PEACH, OSNAP, and SBF Programs
and will conduct OOI work at both the Pioneer and Irminger Sea sites in 2018.
Armstrong is also scheduled to support ONR MF Noise and Niskin programs along
with support of several WHOI operational programs in 2018.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects supported by operations on
R/V Armstrong in 2018 have been rigorously evaluated for scientific and
intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant review and award
process. The competitive nature of the award granting process ensures a very
high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the discoveries made by
the research programs supported by R/V Armstrong will enhance understanding of
the oceans and address a broad range of important scientific questions. The goal
of this proposal is to provide funding support to safely and productively
operate and maintain R/V Armstrong in 2018 and to ensure it is maintained to
support its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential prerequisite for
safe and successful scientific missions. WHOI research vessels provide at-sea
laboratories necessary to effectively and safely take science to sea. This
community includes senior oceanographic scientists, post-doctoral and doctoral
students, graduate and undergrad students as well as engineers, technicians, and
teachers. These intellectual endeavors have broadened our understanding and have
spurred on new questions and scientific theory. Research supported by R/V
Armstrong next year will be important in understanding the Earth's climate and
how it changes over time. In 2018 R/V Armstrong will exercise all of its
scientific mission equipment to evaluate its capability and what may need
further development on the nation's newest research vessel. Educational and
outreach programs will be featured on these voyages. All of these intellectual
endeavors will continue to broaden our understanding of the oceans, stimulate
new questions, and confirm scientific theory for years to come, benefiting
society at large. Oceanographic expeditions are an extension of university
classrooms and are an extraordinary educational experience. Voyages expose
participants to new ideas, teach fundamental scientific principles through
observation and practice, and inevitably raise questions that stimulate new
thinking about how the oceans work. An increased awareness of our responsibility
to bring this science into the classroom and to the public has resulted in the
development of new avenues to share these scientific findings. The cruise web
site concept has effectively reached classrooms with real-time images, data and
two-way communication between scientists and students in schools across the
country. These efforts have extended the sea-going experience from a handful of
participants to thousands of students in classrooms across the country, as well
as to the general public. Scientists on WHOI vessels will use this tool to
present their data through web based approaches either at their home institution
or through web sites maintained by community organizations. The WHOI web site,
http://www.whoi.edu, has pioneered efforts to present the results of research
expeditions to the public. Outreach programs are continuing in 2018 from WHOI
vessels with the Perkins School for the Blind and Disabled. which represent
cutting edge efforts to broaden the experience of conducting research at sea to
every American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.