* 1822783
* The Role of Social Organization in the Organization of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 213,517.00

Dr. Izumi Shimada, of Southern Illinois University, together with colleagues
will conduct research on the nature and means of social and political
integration, highlighting the importance of kinship and shared religion. Earlier
studies on this topic have emphasized the role of political economy and control
of resources and production, coercive actions or sponsorship of public events.
Kinship connections and cooperative behaviors were downplayed. The resultant
models accordingly stressed the strongly centralized and hierarchical character
of sociopolitical organization. Archaeology, particularly in collaboration with
complementary fields, is well placed to illuminate factors and processes that
promote stable and effective sociopolitical integration, a topic that has been a
pervasive concern for studies of complex societies past and present. In contrast
to previous studies, this research highlights instead the importance of kinship
or the degree and nature of genetic affinity to the real or fictional ancestors
and shared religious beliefs and rituals, thereby significantly broadening the
perspective on factors and hierarchical and non-hierarchical means of achieving
such integration. Not only does this research promote international and
interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration, but also American and Peruvian
student and postdoctorate training. In addition, it will enrich the public
display at the Sican National Museum that represents an effective sharing of
research results with both Peruvian and the non-Peruvian public. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; Monumental architecture built by many complex societies past and
present serves as an impressive, durable symbolic marker of power, prestige and
identity of associated groups. What then do multiple coexistent monuments built
close in time and space at a single location signify about group(s) that built
them? This question guides the field research in the Lambayeque region on the
north coast of Peru by Dr. Shimada and his team. Taking advantage of the fact
that monuments at the 1000-year old Sican capital have closely associated
cemeteries, the investigators will excavate burials that have been located in
previous seasons of fieldwork and carry out multiple detailed analyses of human
skeletons, ceramic, metal and other funerary objects as well as their associated
styles and images. Results from skeletal analysis, including ancient DNA, signs
of developmental health, and statistical analysis of numerous measurements taken
on teeth will illuminate genealogical relationships and life style of
individuals being compared. Ratios of carbon, nitrogen and strontium isotopes
defined from skeletal samples will in turn inform on dietary composition and
geographic origins of the same individuals. In addition, determination of
choices of techniques, styles, images, and/or raw materials used in
manufacturing of funerary objects further aid in distinguishing artisans and
larger groups to which they pertain. Employing the above multi-disciplinary
methodology, the research team will test three competing hypotheses regarding
the importance of kinship and shared religious beliefs. Test results will be
integrated into an expanding, regional funerary, DNA and other biological
database that will serve as a referential base for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.