* 1822214
* Phase I IUCRC at California Institute of Technology-Center for Geomechanics and Mitigation of Geohazards[GMG]
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Domniki Asimaki, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 829,000.00

A number of energy-related industrial activities as well as a range of natural
disasters - such as earthquakes and landslides - involve the deformation and
eventual failure of geomaterials in presence of fluids. The governing mechanisms
remain poorly understood. The Industry-University Collaborative Research Center
for Geomechanics and Mitigation of Geohazards (GMG) will enable a synergetic
research effort to improve their understanding. GMG will thereby contribute to
more efficient, reliable and safe methods for energy production, CO2 and gas
storage and improved methods for the assessment and mitigation of earthquake and
landslide hazard. The center members include oil and gas companies, engineering
companies in the areas of geomechanics and geohazard mitigation, and utilities
operators concerned with the exposure of infrastructures to earthquake and
landslide hazard. Participation of postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students in the research projects based on fundamental science yet
relevant to the industrial and societal needs to be pursued by the center will
educate a new generation of academic and industrial leaders in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deformation in the subsurface is often
associated to, and eventually coupled with fluid flow. Investigating these
mechanisms is important to improve our ability to model the effects of fluid
injection or extraction in the sub-surface, fault dynamics in general,
landslides and the ground response to earthquake shaking. The Industry-
University Collaborative Research Center for Geomechanics and Mitigation of
Geohazards (GMG) will therefore conduct cross-disciplinary research to advance
the fundamental understanding of how geomaterials deform and fail in presence of
fluids. GMG will achieve its goal by combining experimental and modeling
studies, and leveraging cutting-edge research in geomechanics and computational
mechanics, remote sensing, and geophysics. The research will benefit industrial
activities involving the management of fluids in the sub-surface related for
example, to energy production, gas storage and CO2 storage, and will advance
methods for the assessment and mitigation of geohazards, whether of natural
origin or related to industrial activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.