* 1822064
* Structural evolution of the Atacama fault system, northern Chile:  Insights into rheology and strain in a magmatic arc during oblique convergence
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* John Singleton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 308,743.00

This project addresses the displacement history and mechanical behavior of the
Atacama fault system -- a major tectonic structure that cuts along the Early
Cretaceous magmatic arc in the Coastal Cordillera of northern Chile. Intra-arc
structures such as the Atacama fault system play a critical role in
accommodating plate motion at convergent boundaries, yet significant uncertainty
remains surrounding their development. Societal benefits of the research include
the development of a new collaboration between geoscience faculty and
undergraduate/graduate students from Colorado State University and Pontificia
Universidad Catolica de Chile. Ten students from Colorado State University and
Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile are participating in a joint field-
mapping program that comprises a foundation for the research and provides a
high-impact learning experience for the students. Funding for this project
contributes to broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in an
important Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) discipline by
providing support a female doctoral student from Colorado State University. The
funding also supports the research program of an early-career principal
investigator. The research provides a new framework for understanding economic
copper-iron-gold deposits located along the Atacama fault system, and the
results will be presented by a field trip that targets the Atacama mining
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific goals of this project are
to: a) determine the timing, magnitude, and rate of slip across the Atacama
fault system, b) determine the spatial and temporal relationship between
magmatism and deformation along the Atacama fault system, and c) determine the
rheology and deformation conditions near the brittle-plastic transition along
the Atacama fault system. Reconstructing the slip histories of major geologic
structures such as the Atacama fault system is essential for understanding how
oblique convergence is partitioned above subduction zones, and information on
fault zone rheology and the relationship between magmatism and deformation is
needed to understand how and why strain localizes in the overriding plate. The
Atacama fault system is one of the most important Andean Mesozoic structures,
and it played a major role in controlling economic metal deposits. Despite its
significance, the tectonic development of the Atacama fault system is poorly
understood due to the lack of detailed geologic mapping and geochronology in the
region. During their preliminary fieldwork the project researchers discovered
distinct offset markers and numerous pre-, syn-, and post-kinematic igneous
units that offer great potential for addressing the magnitude, timing, and rate
of slip. They also identified evidence for widespread brittle-plastic
deformation, allowing them to evaluate the rheology and peak strength of the
fault system. In addition to establishing critical constraints on the Mesozoic
tectonic evolution of the central Andean margin, this research will provide
important insight into how oblique convergence is accommodated within magmatic
arcs. To address the proposal objectives, the research team is using a
multidisciplinary research approach that includes geologic mapping, U-Pb
geochronology, 40Ar/39Ar and (U-Th)/He thermochronology, microstructural
analysis, electron backscatter diffraction, Ti-in-quartz and oxygen isotope
geothermometry, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. This research is
being carried out in collaboration with Chilean geologists from Pontificia
Universidad Catolica de Chile, who are playing a major role in field mapping and
structural data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.