* 1822019
* Student Travel Support for the 2018 International Green and Sustainable Computing Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 14,000.00

This proposal is for support of a travel to the 2018 International Green and
Sustainable Computing Conference (IGSC). IGSC has established itself as the
premier conference in this area. Green computing is a newly evolving research
area that is establishing itself as an interdisciplinary research area spanning
across the fields of computer science and engineering, electrical engineering
and other engineering disciplines. Green computing or sustainable computing is
the study and practice of using computing resources efficiently, which in turn
can impact a spectrum of economic, ecological, and social objectives. Such
practices include the implementation of energy-efficient central processing
units and peripherals as well as reduced resource consumption. In addition, IGSC
covers applications and systems that use computing and information systems to
accomplish sustainability in power grid, environment, climate, agriculture, and
many other social and economic applications. The conference offers researchers,
industry participants, and students the forum for a growing awareness of the
study and practice of using computing resources efficiently, which in turn can
impact a spectrum of economic, ecological, and social objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant allows students interested in green or
sustainable architecture, networks, circuit design, software, and applications,
as well as students interested in use of computing for sustainability in other
areas, to find useful information on the topics of their choice. It also
provides an excellent opportunity for many students nationwide to get familiar
with and engage in a new research area of national importance. Students not
having a paper in IGSC or otherwise without the resources that allow the
opportunity to attend IGSC will be eligible for these travel
grants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.