* 1822422
* Nucleic Acid Nanostructures and their Cellular Transport Mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Nathan Gianneschi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 420,000.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules and materials used in medical
applications make intimate contact with our cells and tissues. This is true for
pharmaceuticals commonly administered to patients, through to metal implants
used in reconstructive surgery. These contacts between manmade materials and
natural, biological systems are poorly understood, and difficult to probe and
optimize. For example, medicines can have off-target effects, and implants can
cause unwanted rejection or scarring. These interfaces must be better understood
and optimized to correctly target tissues for better therapies. This project
will develop new strategies for understanding how materials interact with cells.
Specifically, to find fundamentally new methods for delivering gene based
therapeutics to diseased tissues. Students will be exposed to a grand challenge
in medicine, biology, materials science and chemistry, while working
specifically on advanced polymers and biochemical screening techniques
applicable to the study of many types of systems. Through interdisciplinary
collaborations, the team seeks to impact both the field of biomaterials broadly,
but also highlight the positive outcomes of working outside of normally well
defined fields of study to bring different ways of approaching hard problems
together in the lab to effect change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gianneschi and coworkers
have developed nanoparticles that serve to protect DNA from enzymatic
degradation while facilitating cellular entry and are able to modulate mRNA
levels in live human cells with no appreciable toxicity. This development
represents a significant advancement towards non-toxic nucleic acid delivery
systems that can be synthesized by simple protocols. However, as with many other
biologically active nanomaterials, the mechanisms underlying, cellular uptake,
endosome escape, mRNA regulation and nuclease resistance are not understood.
This project's goal is to develop a universally applicable method that will
allow researchers to understand the mechanisms involved in nanomaterial uptake
by cells. This will also enable identification of potential bottlenecks that are
associated with nanomaterial function and facilitate optimization of materials
for downstream applications. Through a combination of advanced gene-editing
tools and materials synthesis, new uptake pathways will be discovered,
optimized, and then utilized to modulate gene expression allowing several routes
towards treatment of disease including the sensitization of cells to therapies
to which they are otherwise resistant. The proposed work is a fundamental
biomaterials investigation of new structures, and new biological interfaces.