* 1822553
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Manipulating Dynamic Network Activity in the Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Constantinos Dovrolis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 245,000.00

CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Modeling and Manipulating
Dynamic Network Activity in the Brain

Connectome-based Dynamic Network Modeling (CDNM) is a recent approach in
computational neuroscience, made possible by the availability of structural and
functional brain connectivity data. This project aims to understand how the
interaction between structure and dynamics of neural populations leads to brain
functional networks and brain states. Understanding mechanistically and being
able to predict how the combination of macroscale structure and local neural
activity leads to complex whole-brain dynamics is a major research goal for
every aspect of brain science, ranging from basic neuroscience to clinical
psychiatry and neurology. This project can also have an important impact in
understanding both how Major Depressive Disorder emerges from specific
structural abnormalities, and the conditions under which Deep Brain Stimulation
is an effective treatment. The developed methods can be also applied to numerous
other mental and neurological disorders. The project will also develop and
openly disseminate new computational models, and optimization methods for
speeding up the simulation of complex CDNMs.

The project consists of three Aims: 1) Leverage dynamic functional connectivity
to further constrain and evaluate CDNM: The first goal is to clearly separate
the parameterization of a CDNM from the evaluation of its accuracy. It is
possible that several models, or parameterizations of the same model, lead to
realistic average functional connectivity. However, not all of these models may
be able to reproduce the more complex, dynamic functional connectivity patterns
observed in practice. The project relies on state-of-the-art methods that infer
dynamic functional connectivity between brain regions, applying these methods to
both empirical data and CDNM-based simulation results. Each candidate CDNM model
will be evaluated in terms of how well it can reproduce the dynamic FC patterns
observed in empirical data. 2) Using CDNM to understand the connection between
structural and functional connectivity in Major Depression Disorder: The
ultimate test for any model is its predictive power. The project will utilize
structural and functional connectivity data for a patient group that exhibits
known and significant differences from healthy controls. Starting with the best
model from Aim-1, that CDNM will be run on a perturbed connectome that captures
the major structural abnormalities in depression. Then, the CDNM results will be
analyzed to determine if the model can reproduce the FC abnormalities observed
in the group of patients. 3) Modeling the effects of interventions such as deep
brain stimulation: The use of this experimental treatment in depression is a
?network intervention?. CDNM can play a significant role in understanding how
and when it works as an effective treatment. The effect of deep brain
stimulation will be modeled by modifying either the local dynamics of certain
regions or the weights of specific connections in the model, such as increasing
or decreasing the weight of the connection. The project will investigate whether
there is a specific weight adjustment with which the stimulated model produces
dynamics that resemble the normal FC of healthy subjects. If that adjustment
needs to be in a very narrow range, it might explain why deep brain stimulation
is unsuccessful in some patients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.