* 1822065
* Collaborative Grant: RAPID: Capturing a critical transition in fungal wood endophyte communities by rapid-response sampling post-hurricane in Puerto Rico.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Jennifer Powers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2021
* USD 140,000.00

Endophytes are organisms that live inside plants. These inhabitants were long
invisible to scientists studying plants, but with the advancement of DNA-based
assessment tools, researchers have discovered an increasing diversity of
organisms that reside inside healthy plants. Endophytes include hundreds of
microbial species (bacteria and fungi) that live in healthy wood inside standing
trees. Some provide benefits to the host tree, but others, particularly fungi,
may attack and/or weaken trees (pathogens) or may try to get a head start
decomposing wood (saprotrophs). In addition, there are many microbes present as
endophytes with functions that have yet to be determined. Determining these
functions is a critical need for predicting the risk of tree hazards, and for
modeling rates of decomposition and carbon released once a tree dies. Accurately
predicting wood decay is difficult and presents a significant uncertainty in
carbon cycle models. To improve predictive power, it is necessary to model a key
transition that occurs when a tree dies a natural death, killing many endophytes
but exposing a payoff to others that rise to dominate these subsequent microbial
communities, particularly saprotrophs. This research makes use of a natural
disturbance event, the great deal of tree damage created by Hurricane Maria in
Puerto Rico, to study how endophytes shape the fungal decomposition communities
that develop post-disturbance. With this knowledge, it is possible not only to
improve decomposition models but also better predict endophyte success, an asset
for predicting tree hazard risks in future hurricanes. The project also offers
opportunities for STEM training of several female team members, including Puerto
Rican collaborators affected by Hurricane Maria. It will also lead to production
of a public video describing the science, the scientists, and the role of
endophytes in tree hazards and decomposition processes in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to track the
development of tree endophyte fungi post-hurricane in Puerto Rico's Guanica
Forest scientific area, and to correlate this process with environmental
variables and wood traits (e.g. nitrogen content). There are three specific
objectives to reach this goal, 1) rapid-response sampling to assess fungal
communities present at time zero, 2) tracking communities at two additional time
points to assess persistence of endophytes, and 3) matching outcomes over one
year to site climate data (temperature, rainfall) and to wood substrate
physiochemistry. This study includes wood sections from 14 tree species, either
cut and left in ground contact to decay along a transect or remaining standing
as a stump section. A key hypothesis is that endophyte saprotrophs will have a
greater influence on decomposition in standing sections rather than in ground
contact, but that the overall rates of decomposition will be influenced by
climate and wood physiochemical variables, particularly wood nitrogen and
heartwood content. The study design allows coupling of community structure and
function with host traits over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.