* 1822439
* Asymptotically Isometric Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Davidovitch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to advance understanding of the structure and mechanics of very thin
sheets and shells. Experiments triggered by the discovery of two-dimensional,
atomically-thin solids, most notably single atom thick carbon sheets known as
Graphene and plastic sheets that are only nanometers-thick. These developments
opened new platforms for designing novel types of extremely thin, highly
foldable solid materials, and a host of possible applications that may
revolutionize material science and industry, from stretchable electronic
circuitry to origami-based design of meta-materials to the encapsulation of
liquids by surfactants that impart to them solid-like properties to much more.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing theoretical tools to
study the intricate mechanics of such ultrathin solid materials. Of particular
interest is how the extreme bendability of these materials enables deformations
that would otherwise require substantial input of elastic energy. The wrapping
of a ball by a foil, for example a candy wrapper, provides an illustrative
example. The foil deforms irreversibly from its original flat state, due to the
high, unavoidable strains that are generated by the wrapping process. By
contrast, the extreme bendability of ultrathin solids makes them highly
efficient wrappers that can almost entirely avoid strain. Currently, it is not
known how the level of energy that is wasted in straining the foil depends on
its thickness, nor is it known how to control a wrapping process that will
minimize such strains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PI will advance a theoretical
framework called Asymptotically Isometric Mechanics introduced by the PI and his
collaborators. This theory shows that strains, and thereby elastic energy, may
be eliminated almost entirely for wrappers made of an ultrathin, highly bendable
solid sheet. The PI and his research group and collaborators will employ this
framework to unravel the principles that dictate energetically efficient
wrapping and other processes that impose strains on ultrathin solids, and will
provide a theoretical platform for computing the emerging structures of highly
bendable, ultrathin sheets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports in
part an annual summer school for graduate students, Soft Solid and Complex
Fluids, co-organized by the PI, and an annual outreach workshop, Patterns Around
Us, for middle school science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education to advance understanding of the
structure and mechanics of very thin sheets and shells through revisiting basic
concepts and providing new analytical tools to study the mechanics of very thin
solids. Experiments that study the confinement of ultrathin sheets through
geometric constraints or the exertion of boundary loads reveal mechanical
response and pattern formation phenomena that appear to be inconsistent with the
predictions of classical elasticity theory. This prompts the need for a new
approach which the PI has answered by the development of a framework called
Asymptotically Isometric Mechanics (AIM) which addresses the effect of
incompatible geometric confinement of solid sheets and
shells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIM underlies the approach the PI will use in the
research; it refers to a variational approach that characterizes the mechanical
response and morphology of thin solid bodies under geometrical constraints that
impose strain. Examples include the wrapping of liquid volumes by ultrathin
polymer sheets or "solid surfactants," the exertion of localized force on
shells, and the effect of inclusions on the mechanics and shape of an otherwise
pure crystalline sheet like graphene. Central to these problems is that
geometrically incompatible constraints prevent a complete elimination of highly
energetic strain, hence the mechanics is governed by the tendency to reduce
strain to the minimal level allowed by the geometric constraints, exerted loads,
and cost of bending. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop AIM theory by
deriving a comprehensive set of effective variational principles, and
corresponding analytical tools, that can be used to describe the mechanics and
morphology of sheets and shells subjected to a broad range of geometric
constraints and external loads. The outcome will be actual bridge between two
classical theories: Euler's "elastica," which amounts to minimizing bending
energy alone, and Foppl-von Karman equations, which express the simultaneous
minimization of the full elastic energy. Through collaboration with several
experimental and computational groups, the PI and his group will implement this
new analytical approach to study the geometry and elasticity of thin
solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports in part an annual summer
school for graduate students, Soft Solid and Complex Fluids, co-organized by the
PI, and an annual outreach workshop, Patterns Around Us, for middle school
science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.