* 1822713
* Using Fundamental Motives to Understand Well-Being Around the Globe
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michael Varnum, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 397,568.00

People in some countries are happier, feel more fulfilled, and generally
experience a greater sense of well-being than people in other countries.
Psychological well-being is not simply the result of economic well-being; the
wealthiest countries are not necessarily the happiest ones. This project
involves a collaboration with researchers in 30 different countries to better
understand the origins of happiness and subjective well-being. The project
focuses on the concept of fundamental human motives. These motives include the
satisfaction of basic physiological needs (such as hunger and thirst) along with
important social needs (such as affiliation, self-protection, status, mate
acquisition, mate retention, and kin care). The aim of the research is to better
understand the relationship between fundamental human motives and well-being
across different countries. It may be that people in poorer, but relatively
happy, countries, are able to satisfy those fundamental motives, whereas people
in richer, but relatively less happy, countries, are not. Preliminary research
supports this conclusion, but also shows that fundamental motives are linked to
happiness and well-being somewhat differently in different countries. The
initial studies also suggest that some motives are linked to happiness at the
national level, but not at the individual level. Governments, institutions, and
corporations around the world place a high priority on improving the lives and
well-being of people, because it promotes greater productivity, better health,
and more cooperation among groups. The aim of this project is to gain greater
insight into the factors that produce these desired
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large cross-cultural survey will be coupled
with focused experimental studies to examine the factors that lead to life
satisfaction, and how those are linked to fundamental human motives across
different societies. The survey will include large samples from 30 countries,
gathered by a network of collaborators located in each country. Using measures
developed by the investigators along with other relevant variables, it will be
possible to separate the contribution of fundamental social motives from the
satisfaction of basic physiological needs as they contribute to psychological
well-being. Experiments will then be conducted in the United States and in two
other countries (one with very low scores and one with very high scores on
measures of fundamental social motives), to achieve better insight into causal
processes at the individual level, and how those work differently in different
societies. The experiments will use a method designed to activate different
motives in participants, calibrated appropriately to have similar effects in the
different societies. Using fundamental social motives as a way to characterize
cultures will provide new tools for scientists across a wide spectrum of
disciplines who study the sources and consequences of cultural variation. The
project lies at the intersection of cultural psychology, evolutionary
psychology, and affective science, and will facilitate interdisciplinary
training for a diverse group of students. The research will increase scientific
understanding of the roots of cultural variations in everyday behaviors, as well
as broadening understanding of cultural variations that contribute to intergroup
cooperation and conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.