* 1822056
* Testing the Traditional Paradigm of the Sub-Auroral Polarization Stream During Storm and Non-storm Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Joseph Baker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 367,381.00

Sub-auroral polarization streams (SAPS) are regions of westward directed plasma
flows located equatorward of the auroral oval in the dusk-midnight sector. This
project aims to transform the understanding of SAPS from the "traditional
paradigm" to a broader description that encompasses all SAPS-like flows
including those occurring during geomagnetically "quiet" times. This work
leverages the National Science Foundation (NSF) assets and infrastructure to
advance understanding on magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. This topic is common
to both Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) and
Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) programmatic goals, so the effort will
bridge the thermosphere, ionosphere and magnetosphere communities. The science
of this project is pertinent to the National Space Weather Action Plan's goals
to develop benchmarks for space weather events. This project funds an early
career scientist, and engages undergraduates in summer research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology uses several open data sources, including
SuperDARN, GPS TEC (Global Positioning System Total Electron Content), high-
resolution AMPERE (Active Magnetosphere and Planetary Electrodynamics Response
Experiment), and POES (Polar Operational Environmental Satellites) data. The
project will gather characteristics of R1/R2 field-aligned currents, auroral
boundaries, and the mid-latitude trough for each occurrence of the SAPS-like
flows, and then statistically examine them with respect to geophysical
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.