* 1822141
* Phase I IUCRC at Georgia Institute of Technology:  Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials  SHAP3D
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 911,998.00

The I/UCRC Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
will serve the diverse interests of industry, government, and academia to
address fundamental challenges to meet the commercial needs of industry for
heterogeneous 3D printing of materials. The additive manufacturing (AM) is
viewed as a research area for global competitive advantage by industries such as
automotive, medical, aerospace, and consumer products. SHAP3D aims to accelerate
expansion and competitiveness of the domestic AM industry and its customers by
addressing two critical market needs: (1) the growth of AM into more complex
topologies, heterogeneous, and multi-functional applications that command high
margins commensurate with their increased performance, and (2) the expansion of
AM into lower margin industries via order-of-magnitude improvements in
throughput, material-per-performance cost reductions, and ease-of-use design
rules that enable small and medium-sized enterprises and large companies to
rapidly adopt advanced techniques. The Center will disseminate its design,
material and process research to industrial members and the broader academic
community. SHAP3D will provide a technically trained workforce, with industrial
perspective, through the close collaboration between industry and academia. GT
site-specific educational programs include collaborating with an AM-related REU
site and outreaching to K-12 through NSF research experience for teacher (RET)
program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SHAP3D research supported by Georgia Tech
(GT) will be driven by the performance requirements of industry, built from a
technical foundation of the fundamental structure-processing-property
relationships associated with the voxel-level control and integration of diverse
processes and materials. The enormous number of material combinations possible
in these multi-material systems multiplied by the parameter space represented
within processes with voxel-level state-variable control requires a fundamental
understanding of the material (constituents, fillers, interfaces) properties,
processing protocols, and design rules to reliably predict the properties of
products. Despite the diverse materials and process combinations, they are
unified by many underlying physical principles related to melting, processing,
and solidification, and interfacial physics for heterogeneous additive printing
of materials. The Center will support members' choice of AM methods and research
that encompasses numerous additive printing methods, including fused filament
fabrication (FFF), stereolithography/digital light processing (SLA/DLP), inkjet,
and other additive approaches. GT-site will use its expertise to support
research related to 3D printing-based design methods, modeling for the 3D
printing process, novel resins, and functional devices. The Center and GT-site
will add significant value for the industry by addressing their vision to
additively manufacture dissimilar materials into heterogeneous, valued-added
products imbued with previously unattained biological, chemical, electrical, and
mechanical functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.