* 1822371
* 2018 Natural Gas Hydrate Systems: Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Carolyn Koh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Natural methane gas hydrates that occur in the marine environment comprise a
major source of global methane and are known to be associated with sediment
failure on continental slopes that can impact telecommunication cables and other
infrastructure as well as fishery habitats. They can also cause blow-outs during
the drilling of oil and gas wells, causing loss of life and significant loss of
industry investment. Gas hydrates also comprise a major source of natural gas
that could form an important methane resource in the future and, when they
disintegrate as the seafloor warms, may also contribute to the concentration of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Although there have been numerous studies of
these unique minerals over the last two decades, it is clear that our
understanding of their dynamics and their response to various environmental
forcings is inadequate. This funding provides support to early career scientists
to attend the co-located Fifth Gordon Research Conference on natural gas hydrate
systems and its companion Gordon Conference Research Seminar on gas hydrates.
New data emerging from marine cabled observatories in the Pacific Northwest off
Oregon and Vancouver Island will be discussed as will new findings from Japan,
China, and India. Other topics include natural gas transport in cold regions and
challenges in the development of marine sediment gas hydrate fields. Broader
impacts of the funding include support of early career scientists, focusing on
engaging those underrepresented in the sciences, and providing a venue for
networking and an exchange of ideas and information on on-going research between
energy industry professionals and academics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine
methane gas hydrates occur widely in marine sediments. They are ephemeral
minerals that are stable at conditions of only small ranges of low temperatures
and higher-pressure conditions. Marine methane gas hydrates are susceptible to
rapid and catastrophic dissolution as a result of depressurization (e.g., during
borehole drilling) or subseafloor increases in temperature (e.g., due to
increasing ocean temperature due to climate change), which moves them out of
their thermodynamic stability field. This funding provides funds to support the
attendance of early career US researchers at the international gas hydrate
system Gordon Research Conference and Research Seminar in Galveston, Texas.
Topics include presentations on new data and research and discussions of the
dynamics and forcings that impact methane gas hydrated occurrence, distribution,
and dissolution. Over the last two decades, many field and laboratory studies
have been carried out to characterize these parameters; however, it is still not
clear how many of the forcings on gas hydrates operate and are linked and which,
and in what setting, are controlling under different conditions. This workshop
is constituted to bring the international intellectual pool of experts on gas
hydrates from academia and industry together to share results of their most
recent research and discuss challenges and possible ways forward to dramatically
improve our understanding a marine methane gas hydrate generation and behavior.