* 1822532
* Oceanographic Technical Services, Oregon State University, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Andrew Woogen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 2,070,379.00

Oregon State University proposes to support technical services on R/V Oceanus, a
177? general purpose research vessel as part of the US Academic Fleet scheduled
by University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). The vessel is
owned by the National Science Foundation. The proposal requests support for both
basic and specialized services. For basic services, they will provide one or two
shipboard technicians on each cruise of R/V Oceanus to support seagoing research
projects and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users items from
their pool of shared-use research instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.