* 1822256
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Marine Ecosystem Response to the Larsen C Ice-Shelf Breakout: "Time zero"
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Craig Smith, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 02/28/2019
* USD 26,093.00

Marine ecosystems under large ice shelves are thought to contain sparse, low-
diversity plankton and seafloor communities due the low supply of food from
productive sunlight waters. Past studies have shown sub-ice shelf ecosystems to
change in response to altered oceanographic processes resulting from ice-shelve
retreat. However, information on community changes and ecosystem structure under
ice shelves are limited because sub-ice-shelf ecosystems have either been
sampled many years after ice-shelf breakout, or have been sampled through small
boreholes, yielding extremely limited spatial information. The recent breakout
of the A-68 iceberg from the Larsen C ice shelf in the western Weddell Sea
provides an opportunity to use a ship-based study to evaluate benthic
communities and water column characteristics in an area recently vacated by a
large overlying ice shelf. The opportunity will allow spatial assessments at the
time of transition from an under ice-shelf environment to one initially exposed
to conditions more typical of a coastal Antarctic marine setting.

This RAPID project will help determine the state of a coastal Antarctic
ecosystem newly exposed from ice-shelf cover and will aid in understanding of
rates of community change during transition. The project will conduct a 10-day
field program, allowing contrasts to be made of phytoplankton and seafloor
megafaunal communities in areas recently exposed by ice-shelf loss to areas
exposed for many decades. The project will be undertaken in a collaborative
manner with the South Korean Antarctic Agency, KOPRI, by participating in a
cruise in March/May 2018. Combining new information in the area of Larsen C with
existing observations after the Larsen A and B ice shelf breakups further to the
north, the project is expected to generate a dataset that can elucidate
fundamental processes of planktonic and benthic community development in
transition from food-poor to food-rich ecosystems. The project will provide
field experience to two graduate students, a post-doctoral associate and an
undergraduate student. Material from the project will be incorporated into
graduate courses and the project will communicate daily work and unfolding
events through social media and blogs while they explore this area of the world
that is largely underexplored.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.