* 1822035
* Planning IUCRC at Georgia Institute of Technology:  Center for [Digital Composite Joining and Repair]
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports a planning workshop for a new Industry-University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) aimed at improving composite material
joining and repair (CJAR) technologies. Composite materials are vital to the
health and competitiveness of several important industry sectors, including
automotive, manufacturing, energy, and aerospace. As composites involve
different compositions and element concentration/orientation and tolerances that
vary widely, current CJAR practices are highly specialized, labor-intensive, and
require experienced technicians to complete the critical inspection, maintenance
and repair jobs. Partner institutions including Georgia Institute of Technology,
Oakland University, and the University of Tennessee-Knoxville will work
collaboratively with various industrial companies, in the automotive, aerospace,
energy, and bio-medical sectors of the US economy. The Georgia Tech Site of
D-CJAR will primarily work with firms in materials (Chomarat, Henkel, Owens
Corning), aerostructures manufacturing (Boeing, Fokker Aerostructures, Lockheed
Martin), system operators/maintenance providers (AFSC-Robins AFB, Delta), and
equipment vendors (Optomec, Siemens). Faculty and student teams at the partner
universities will work with industry members to conduct precompetitive research
to develop and disseminate basic and applied technologies/knowledge to
facilitate rapid, reliable, and cost-effective composite joining and repair,
with an overall goal of significantly reducing costs, cycle time, and variation
of CJAR operations within ten (10) years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of
transforming the current labor-intensive and specialized processes into science-
based, automated, digital CJAR processes, the Georgia Tech Site of D-CJAR will
primarily focus on developing CJAR technologies for maintenance, repair, and
overhaul of aerostructures, automobiles, and infrastructure. We expect advances
in several fields and knowledge domains around CJAR, including (1) design and
analysis, (2) materials and process engineering, (3) testing and NDE, and (4)
data analytics. We will apply diverse advanced digital techniques, including
advanced computational modeling, sensing, materials characterization, and
machine learning to practical CJAR cases that will also advance the education
and workforce preparedness of students working on projects at the partner
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.