* 1822334
* Arctic Air-Sea Fluxes and the Exchange Through Fram Strait
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 387,494.00

The project will use theoretical and numerical modeling approaches to understand
the movement of water, heat, and salt through the Fram Strait connecting the
Nordic Seas to the Arctic Ocean. These variables are important because they
influence the amount of ice formed in the eastern Arctic Ocean and the amount of
water transported from coastal shelves to the ocean basin interior. Ice cover
affects the amount of heat put into the atmosphere, atmospheric weather
patterns, and private, commercial, and military marine navigation. Water
temperature, salinity, and the exchange between the shelves and deep ocean help
determine the abundance and species of marine life that can be supported in the
region. Thus, understanding processes controlling flow through Fram Strait is of
crucial importance for the climate system, the Arctic ecosystem, commercial and
local fisheries, shipping, and national security. The investigator will
incorporate results from this program into graduate level classes and lectures
at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Summer School at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) to provide training on numerical methods, applied
mathematics, and computer modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses
the fundamental dynamics of the Arctic Ocean general circulation and its
connection to lower latitudes. The approach combines a multi-component
theoretical model with an idealized but high-resolution eddy resolving coupled
ocean/ice general circulation model of the Arctic. The goal is to relate basic
quantities -- such as ice cover; freshwater content; air-sea exchange; and heat,
freshwater, and mass transport through Fram Strait -- to external forcing due to
wind, heat loss, runoff, and variations in Atlantic Water temperature and
salinity advected in from the Nordic Seas. In addition to providing dynamical
insight into the controlling physics, this approach allows for a simple
assessment of how the system is likely to respond to changing environmental
parameters and of the existence of multiple equilibria or abrupt
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.