* 1822162
* Phase II IUCRC at Kansas State University:  Center for Wheat Genetic Resources (WGRC)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Bernd Friebe, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2024
* USD 654,387.00

Wheat is immensely valued as a staple crop and commodity throughout the world,
accounting for over 20% of all protein and calories worldwide while contributing
an estimated $30 billion boost to the US economy. Wheat production faces the
combined challenges of increasingly variable and unfavorable climates, including
new disease and insect pest pressures. In this context, new climate resilient
varieties with a broadened genetic base must be developed. As a raw ingredient
to the success of new wheat varieties, novel genetic diversity from wild
relatives is needed to improve performance and resilience to stress. The Wheat
Genetics Resource Center (WGRC) Industry-University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC) at Kansas State University has the primary focus of effectively and
efficiently mining these genetic resources and accelerating delivery of improved
diverse germplasm to industry partners with cross-cutting training of the next
generation of wheat industry scientists. The delivery of novel genetic resources
and high-caliber scientists to industry partners is the ground work for future
advancements and success in the wheat industry. The resulting improvement of
yield potential and nutritional quality in wheat contributes toward resilience
of the agriculture sector and the accessibility of affordable and nutritious
wheat-based foods to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex wheat genome,
more than five times larger than the human genome, and the narrow genetic base
of bread wheat, present formable challenges in breeding and to address problems
facing the wheat industry. Managing wheat genetic diversity to improve crop
performance and training of new scientists are major functions of the WGRC
IUCRC-and are critical success factors for the wheat research enterprise. The
center is advancing full genetic characterization and curation of thousands of
accessions of wheat wild relatives across all genomes and ploidy levels while
leveraging this information to develop improved germplasm for delivery to
industry partners. With targeted understanding of the genetic diversity,
accessing and delivering novel alleles in improved germplasm through allele
mining can be greatly expedited. Technical innovations for efficiently accessing
and transferring genes and chromosomes from wild relatives will allow rapid
transfer of useful traits to elite germplasm through targeted chromosome
engineering, increased recombination, marker assisted breeding and genomic
prediction. Through collaborative industry testing networks, the center delivers
improved germplasm including chromosome introgression stocks and diverse
populations with 1) abiotic stress tolerance, 2) resistance to disease and
insects, 3) yield potential and stability and 4) end-use nutrition and grain
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.