* 1822140
* Phase I IUCRC at Dartmouth College:  Center for Integrated Power Management Circuits and Systems - Power One IC
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jason Stauth, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 805,000.00

Microelectronics and integrated circuits have revolutionized computing,
communication, and information technology. However, in a variety of
applications, size, cost, performance, and battery life are increasingly limited
by systems that process power and energy. The Center for Power Management
Integration (PMIC) will engage with industry partners and conduct targeted
research in efficient, high-density power electronics, passive components, and
integration strategies. The overall goal of the center is to address bottlenecks
related to power and energy management that affect a variety of sectors from
performance and mobile computing, to renewable energy, automotive, and
industrial electronics. Across these industries, the center will work to help
alleviate key performance, packaging, and cost limitations, and enable continued
improvements with resulting economic benefits. The center will connect leading
academic researchers with a large and growing industry base that has a great
need for collaborative, interdisciplinary research as well as workforce
development. Educational programs at the graduate and undergraduate levels will
address this need while K-12 outreach will help expand awareness of power and
energy management disciplines. The program will emphasize recruiting and
training engineers from underrepresented backgrounds, building on Dartmouth's
success in recruiting and retaining women in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike traditional analog and digital circuits
that have dramatically benefited from semiconductor scaling, power management
systems depend on passive components and circuit architectures subject to
Maxwell's equations, material properties, and practical implementation. Thus,
addressing bottlenecks in power management requires multidisciplinary innovation
in electronics and circuit architectures, passive and active devices, and
integration strategies. The PMIC Center will target a range of innovations that
leverage novel materials and passive component implementation, new circuit
architectures that maximize utilization of available energy- and power-density,
and integration strategies leveraging semiconductor foundries and advanced
manufacturing. Modeling, design and fabrication of passive components will be
advanced through research including optimization of power density and efficiency
using advanced models, on-silicon microfabricated inductors using nanocomposite
materials and integrated resonant passive components. Research on power
electronic circuits will focus on novel architectures that maximize utilization
of both active devices and passive components, facilitating a roadmap to mm-
scale or monolithic integration. Application-specific objectives relevant to
industry partners will also be considered such as reliability, robustness, and
performance in high temperature, harsh environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.