* 1822809
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Moving Towards Secure and Massive Parallel Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Clifford Stein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2020
* USD 68,331.00

Modern computing systems have moved beyond single-core, single-processor devices
to more modern multi-core parallel processors operating in networked systems and
available in warehouse-scale clouds popularized by industries and the
government. This new parallel, interconnected, big-data world requires
fundamental research on multiple levels from algorithms to systems and computer
architecture. This project seeks to take initial steps in the study of the
expansive set of algorithms and systems issues in this important research
challenge by building and developing new general frameworks for massive parallel
computation, often involving privacy and security, in real-life scenarios.

The investigators? long-term goals include two directions. As the first thrust
of this effort, the investigators aim to design fundamental and efficient
algorithms for massive parallel computations in the practical MapReduce
framework, in particular by reducing the number of rounds in this framework. As
the second thrust of this effort, the investigators aim to augment current
parallel environments and architectures with better data structures and
abstractions to develop simplified and fast implementations of fundamental
algorithms such that everyone can use them in practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.