* 1822096
* International Glaciological Society Symposium: Timescales and Processes of Glacier Dynamics, Buffalo, NY, June 3-8, 2018
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Kristin Poinar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This project will support participation by US scientists, the majority of them
in early career stages, at an international scientific meeting organized under
the auspices of the International Glaciological Society. The meeting is focused
on understanding processes influencing glacier and ice-sheet dynamics. It will
bring together scientists from many different fields to hold interdisciplinary
discussions about paleoclimate records, modern observations, and computer
modeling, with the common goal of informing understanding of the stability of
ice-sheets and glaciers, and predictions of sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four outcome goals for the Symposium: (i)
assess the state of knowledge of glacier and ice-sheet processes and how they
manifest in observations, (ii) examine the range of timescales over which these
processes may act and interact, (iii) identify advances in ice-sheet and earth-
system models needed to resolve these processes, and (iv) identify techniques to
better utilize the paleoclimate observational record toward i-iii. The symposium
will bring together glaciologists, paleoclimatologists, geomorphologists, and
glacial geologists to link research on paleoclimate records (100-100,000 year
timescales) to modern observations of and models for glaciers and ice sheets.
Papers from the symposium will be published in a special issue of Annals of
Glaciology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.