* 1822130
* Phase II IUCRC at New Jersey Institute of Technology:  Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Kamalesh Sirkar, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,004.00

Separation and purification processes are essential to production of
biochemicals, biopharmaceuticals, chemicals, drugs, food products,
gaseous/liquid fuels, healthcare products, metals, potable water, semi-conductor
chips among others. Membrane-based separation/purification processes are
becoming increasingly important in manufacturing such products. A membrane
allows selective transport of one species from one phase on one side of the
membrane to another phase on the other side of the membrane; often a membrane
acting as a barrier selectively blocks one or more species from going through
(e.g., membrane-based protective clothing against toxic gases). The species may
be molecules in gaseous/liquid phase, ions in solution, macromolecules,
nanoparticles, micron-size particles. Membrane devices and processes are favored
due to lower energy consumption (e.g., desalination), easy scale-up (e.g.,
natural gas purification), smaller footprint (e.g., membrane contactors) and are
the only viable option in kidney dialysis. The New Jersey Institute of
Technology (NJIT) site of the Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology
Center (MAST Center) is focused on solving specific separation problems by
developing advanced membranes and characterizing such membranes and processes.
NJIT site provides advanced education, training and research opportunities to
students and young researchers on research topics specified by MAST Sponsors:
industrial corporations, national laboratories and federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MAST Center is a multi-university-based
industry-university cooperative research center with three university sites.
Guided by members of the industrial advisory board (IAB), MAST Center 1)
conducts fundamental research in membranes via innovative materials and
processes facilitating the use of membrane technology for current/emerging
industrial applications; (2) sustains technological leadership in membrane
materials and membrane-based separation processes and facilitates
commercialization of innovative technologies; and (3) provides undergraduate and
graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows with a relevant educational and
research experience. The Center-spanning research themes aligned with IAB
interests are: water treatment, bioseparations, membrane fabrication and
characterization, organic solvent processing, gas separations, barrier
membranes. NJIT's MAST Center faculty from four academic departments have their
research focus on water treatment, barrier membranes, organic solvent-based
system processing and membrane characterization. Research thrust areas of
special interest to NJIT MAST faculty are: water treatment membranes for
desalination, industrial effluent treatment and recovery of chemicals and metals
by novel membranes, organic solvent-based system processing with solvent-
resistant membranes, barrier membranes for chemical and biological protection.
Research on advanced membrane materials and structures and their incorporation
in novel separation devices/schemes are expected to respond to challenging
separation and purification needs encountered by current and potential membrane
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.