* 1822149
* Planning IUCRC at City University of New York:  Center for Biological Applications of Solid-State Systems (CBASS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Rein Ulijn, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,000.00

Moore's Law scaling of semiconductor technology has been the single biggest
driver of economic growth worldwide through its revolutionary impact on
communications and computation. At the same time, discovery and technological
activity in the life sciences has exploded. Life sciences efforts have, however,
benefited little from advances in semiconductor technologies beyond the dramatic
improvements in computation infrastructure and higher performance cameras for
microscopy. The Center on Biological Applications of Solid-State Systems
(C-BASS) seeks to transform both the biotechnology and semiconductor sectors by
forging new connections between these two largely disjoint ecosystems and by
training a generation of scientists and engineers well versed in both fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the City University of New York (CUNY), C-BASS the
focus will be integration of nanofabrication methodologies with biological
systems on order to create a seamless interface between devices and living
systems. We have support integrated activities of a range of stakeholders
including educational institutions, large and small companies, and international
partners. The results of the C-BASS effort at CUNY will provide insights and
techniques relevant to bio/device interfacing that will enable transformation of
a range of fields including biology, biomedical engineering, semiconductor
technology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.