* 1822028
* Planning IUCRC Oakland University Center for Digital Joining and Repair
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Lianxiang Yang, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports a planning workshop for a new Industry-University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) aimed at improving composite material
joining and repair (CJAR). Composite materials are vital to the health and
competitiveness of several important economic sectors, including automotive,
manufacturing, energy, and aerospace. As composites have different compositions
and element concentration/orientation and tolerances that vary widely, current
CJAR practices are highly specialized, labor-intensive, and require experienced
technicians to complete the work successfully and reliably. Partner institutions
Oakland University, Georgia Institute of Technology, and the University of
Tennessee-Knoxville will work collaboratively with both the civilian and defense
industries, in the automotive, aerospace, and energy sectors of the US economy.
The Oakland University D-CJAR will primarily work with firms in the automotive
(GM, Ford, Fiat Chrysler, BMW, General Dynamics Land Systems), manufacturing
(John Deere), and civil aircraft engine (Pratt &amp; Whitney) industries, and
also with the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences and the U.S. Naval
Research Laboratory. Faculty and student teams at the partner universities will
work with industry members to develop and disseminate basic and applied
precompetitive research on methodologies, technologies, tools, and workforce
innovations to facilitate rapid, reliable, and cost-effective composite joining
and repair, with an overall goal of reducing costs, cycle time, and variation of
CJAR operations within 10 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of work for the
Oakland University D-CJAR center will include components of automotive,
aircraft, infrastructure (wind turbine blades, etc.) and protective equipment
that are wholly or partially made with composite materials, with the goal of
transforming the current labor-intensive and specialized processes into science-
based, automated, digital CJAR processes. We expect advances in several fields
and knowledge domains around CJAR, including (1) design and analysis, (2)
materials and process engineering, (3) testing and NDE, and (4) data analytics.
We will apply diverse advanced digital techniques, including advanced
computational modeling, sensing, materials characterization, and machine
learning to practical CJAR cases that will also advance the education and
workforce preparedness of students working on projects at the partner
universities. Development of new materials and processes would facilitate
standardization, modeling, and automation of many CJAR tasks and processes,
producing cost savings, faster cycle times, and enhanced performance for
industry partners across the entire composites supply chain, contributing to the
maintenance of U.S. global leadership in this growing
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.