* 1822185
* Planning IUCRC University of Connecticut: Center for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things NESTT
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Georgios Bollas, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

The University of Connecticut will work together with the Arizona State
University, University of Southern California, University of Arizona, and
Southern Illinois University to form a new NSF Industry University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC) for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things
(NESTT). The vision of NESTT is to contribute to the development of an
equitable, safe and secure connected world. NESTT will achieve this vision by
focusing on creating holistic IoT solutions, integrating technology disciplines
with expertise in law, business, and humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the UConn's site planning project is to hold workshops with
industry partners and NESTT partner universities. The goal of these workshops is
to outline a research agenda and identify industry support for an IUCRC focused
on providing IoT solutions specific to cyber-physical systems, IOT requirements
and architecture, cybersecurity, industrial IOT for smart manufacturing, smart
buildings, grid modernization, and transportation. These application areas will
be supported by UConn's expertise in systems engineering, distributed edge and
cloud computing, formal methods, machine learning, data analytics, cyber-
physical security, prognostics and diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary research at NESTT aims to integrate societal and technological
aspects of IoT as a systems engineering and design problem. New scientific
discoveries in NESTT and their integration with industrial practice could enable
economic growth, and provide societal and environmental benefits. Access and
opportunities to students who are underrepresented in STEM disciplines and
relevant technology areas will be a priority. UConn's NESTT will engage with the
UConn Multicultural Scholars Program, the McNair Scholars Undergraduate Research
Program, liaisons at HBCUs, the National GEM Consortium, the Northeast Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate, and Summer Research Programs for
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda, list of participants and
outcomes of the UConn's NESTT IUCRC planning workshops will be posted online at
UConn under the auspices of the UTC Institute for Advanced Systems Engineering
(http://utc-iase.uconn.edu ) and promoted through its social media
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.