* 1822230
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Development of Urban Structure and Government
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Adrian Chase, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 16,261.00

Adrian Chase, of Arizona State University, will undertake research to study the
urban form created and used by the ancient Maya. Ancient Maya urbanism is
characterized by large low-density cities covering up to two hundred square
kilometers; some had populations of up to (and sometimes over) 100,000 people;
all had a reliance on seasonal tropical rainfall for both agriculture and
subsistence. While Maya rulers, mostly known from texts recorded on stone
monument, reigned over Classic Period (550 CE - 900 CE) Maya cities and states,
court officials and support staff likely handled day-to-day administrative tasks
within these cities. The ancient Maya provide an excellent case study to review
the role that both top-down (elite) and bottom-up (household) processes can
impact the day-to-day governance of ancient cities. This research incorporates
excavation at the Maya city of Caracol, Belize, one of the most well documented
Maya cities, with data analyses to determine governance patterns. Maya cities,
like Caracol, were designed to harvest rainfall for both sustenance and
agriculture, but these aspects alone did not provide for the longevity of these
ancient cities. Caracol itself also thrived for over one thousand years because
of its social and political organization. Additional understanding of governance
at Caracol will help elucidate how this city functioned, shed light on its
longevity, and provide data appropriate for theoretical formulations and cross-
cultural comparisons. Research at Caracol also involves cooperation between
United States and Belizean citizens, as well as building and reinforcing
positive international ties between both countries on a variety of levels that
include hands-on undergraduate archaeological
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, Adrian Chase assesses
the degree to which aspects of the physical layout of a city (including the
location of infrastructure, standardization of residential features, and
neighborhood identity) provide practical proxies for identifying governance with
Caracol, Belize as the test site location. Three datasets are used: 1) the
distribution of urban service facility features around the city as a proxy for
the degree of infrastructural power; 2) the degree of standardization of garden
city features as a proxy for residential autonomy; and, 3) the patterning and
distribution of ritual artifacts and their correlation with proposed
neighborhoods as a proxy for the potential for collective action through
neighborhood level identity. Through this research, concepts from more general
urban theory in a variety of disciplines will be integrated with archaeological
research through the operationalization of infrastructural power, household
autonomy, and collective action at multiple scales of analysis: citywide,
district, neighborhood, and plazuela household. Analysis of the built
environment and archaeological material will augment the hieroglyphic narrative
and provide a better understanding of the governance of a Late Classic Period
Maya city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.