* 1822085
* IUCRC Proposal Phase 1 Duke: Center for Alternative Sustainable and Intelligent Computing (ASIC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,603.00

Neuromorphic circuits, which mimic the human brain's structure and processing
ability on silicon, promise to enable ultralow power, high performance
computing. Various key breakthroughs have emerged from exponential advances in
computing technology and understanding brains, with increasing interest from
governments, research institutes, and business entities. Nonetheless, existing
computing architectures can hardly demonstrate universal advantages in a large
variety of neuromorphic computing tasks. To address this challenge, this project
will build the Center of Alternative Sustainable and Intelligent Computing
(ASIC). ASIC is a collaborative industry-university partnership that joins
leading industry members with academic researchers to conduct multidisciplinary
science and research to enable high performance and energy efficient machine
intelligence through novel circuits, architecture, and computation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center of Alternative Sustainable and
Intelligent Computing (ASIC) focuses on alternative computing platforms for
cognitive applications, which are in general difficult to be efficiently
performed on conventional von Neumann architecture. The ASIC Duke University
(ASIC-Duke) Site will serve as the lead Site for ASIC and will lead the
coordination and management of the Center. Research at the ASIC Duke Site will
focus on industry-driven hardware innovations, especially infrastructure and
implementation. The establishment of ASIC is expected to accelerate the
development of new computing diagrams in industry sectors and expedites
technology transfer from research discoveries to practical
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASIC research will have broad impact on the
computer and IT industries by introducing alternative computing platforms that
complement the conventional computing platforms built on von Neumann
architectures in the short term, and position alternative sustainable and
intelligent computing equivalents important in long term. The knowledge and
expertise developed via ASIC will effectively enable the predicted boom in
cognitive applications and their urgent demands for hardware and software
support. The talent and expertise of center PIs and the industry partners are
integrated to enhance the competence of the center members and accelerate
technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASIC research may involve academic and
industrial data along with public domain data. This data and the resulting
research outputs will be maintained using appropriate best practices for each
type of data for a period of three years after the closing of ASIC. A central
repository, suitably tagged for appropriate referencing and documentation, will
be set up at https://asic.pratt.duke.edu for maintaining the acquired and
generated data from center projects. Access to all models and project results
will be stored online and made available for downloading in near real time to
respond to approved user requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.