* 1822515
* Collaborative Research: A Search for the Electric Dipole Moment of the Neutron
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,028,169.00

To search for new laws of nature beyond our current understanding, researchers
can use very high energy accelerators, such as the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN, or alternatively they can make precise experimental measurements of basic
particle properties and search for deviations from the known physical laws. For
example, the universe now has much more ordinary matter than anti-matter but no
mechanism of known particle interactions can explain how the universe evolved
from the matter-antimatter balance at the time of the Big Bang to the present,
highly unbalanced, situation. By making precision measurements, it is possible
to detect the echoes of early particles and interactions, common at the time of
the Big Bang, in quantities like the electric dipole moment of the neutron. That
characteristic of neutrons reflects the separation of the neutron's internal
positive and negative charges. This award supports design and construction of
highly specialized instrumentation that is needed to precisely measure the
neutron's electric dipole moment. In addition to advancing our knowledge in sub-
atomic physics and cosmology, and generating technological progress, this
experiment will involve post-doctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate
students as an essential part, affording the young researchers exceptional
opportunities to advance their education and training in a forefront area of
nuclear physics. Some technological developments are expected as several SBIR
and STTR grants related to the experimental apparatus have been awarded to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neutron electric dipole moment (nEDM) is an
explicitly time-reversal-violating observable that has played an important role
in descriptions of elementary particle physics; measured upper limits continue
to limit extensions of prevailing models. Measurements at the scale of 10^-28
e-cm as proposed here will provide important input at combinations of very high
mass scales and small mixing angles. The neutron EDM is also important for
understanding the general pattern of T-(CP-) violation and the cause of the
observed asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the universe. This experiment, to
be performed at the Fundamental Neutron Physics Beamline of the Spallation
Neutron Source at ORNL, is based on a technique that is qualitatively different
from the strategies adopted in previous measurements. The basic technique in the
present experiment involves formation of a three-component fluid of polarized
neutrons and Helium-3 atoms dissolved in a bath of superfluid Helium-4 at a
temperature T ~ 0.5 K. The ultracold neutrons in this volume will be produced by
the collision of 8.9 angstrom neutrons with the phonons of the superfluid. The
neutron and Helium-3 magnetic dipoles precess in the plane perpendicular to an
applied external magnetic field, B0 in a traditional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
arrangement. The nEDM, dn, is determined by measuring the neutron precession
frequency in the presence of a strong electric field, E0. Application of the
electric field parallel (antiparallel) to B0 changes the Larmor precession
frequency, nu, in proportion to dn. With B0 = 30 milliGauss and E0 = 50
kiloVolt/cm, nu = 88 Hertz and the frequency shift is 4.8 nanoHertz for an EDM
of 10^-28 e-cm. Operationally, the neutron precession frequency is measured
relative to that of the Helium-3 by taking advantage of the strongly spin
dependent nuclear capture reaction and detecting the recoiling proton and triton
via scintillation produced in the liquid Helium-4. The polarized Helium-3 atoms
(in the same volume as the neutrons) also comprise a co-magnetometer (since any
EDM of the Helium-3 atoms is suppressed by its atomic electrons); their
precession is observed directly using SQUIDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.