* 1822949
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Rethinking Data Center Abstractions Utilizing Warehouse-Scale Shared Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Wentzlaff, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Warehouse-scale computers (or data centers) are essential for the technology
that people rely on every day: from making purchases, to hailing rides, to
sharing experiences with friends. Programming warehouse-scale computers requires
specialized software that coordinates the many individual computers that make up
the data center, while ensuring that the system will continue to operate if any
machine fails. Unfortunately, this data center software has fundamental
differences from that developed for single computers (i.e., that is taught to
most computer science students) resulting in long development times and poor
performance. The proposed work will bridge the gap between the software systems
used in current data centers and what is available to most programmers (and
computing students). The proposed work will allow individual computers within a
data center to communicate through "shared memory"---the same mechanism used
within small-scale computers from phones to laptops to individual servers. The
project has the potential to make warehouse scale computing much more accessible
to everyone. In particular, it will allow an easy transition for software that
runs on common machines (laptops, desktops) to the datacenter. Additionally, the
project will create many educational opportunities through enhanced classroom
projects and creation of research opportunities for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's distinguishing feature is a
holistic design of new computing hardware and operating systems to allow this
"shared memory" abstraction to provide both the scale and failure tolerance of
specialized data center software. While prior hardware takes an approach of
"share all" or "share nothing", the proposed hardware will allow subsets of data
to be shared across subsets of hardware. Then, the operating system will be
extended to automatically manage the access to this shared memory, so that
programmers do not need to be aware of the difference. By coordinating software
and hardware management, the project will overcome prior scalability and failure
tolerance challenges of sharing memory. It will also allow easy sharing of
datacenter resources, preventing fragmentation and reducing the cost of using
datacenters and cloud computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.