* 1822155
* Planning IUCRC Southern Illinois University Carbondale: Center for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things (NESTT)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Spyros Tragoudas, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

Southern Illinois University Carbondale plans to work together with Arizona
State University, the University of Arizona, the University of Southern
California, and the University of Connecticut to form a new NSF Industry
University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Networked, Embedded, Smart
and Trusted Things (NESTT). The vision of the NESTT Center is to contribute to
the development of an equitable, safe and secure connected world, focusing on
creating holistic Internet of Things (IoT) solutions by integrating technology
disciplines with expertise in other areas such as law, business, and
humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant's objective is to organize
with industry partners and the participating universities to outline a research
agenda and explore industry commitment. At the IUCRC planning meeting, SIUC
faculty will present their interdisciplinary research interests, spanning the
technology areas of embedded systems, networking, edge and cloud computing,
smart grid, machine learning, data analytics, and security. Innovative high
performance, trustworthy, and secure IoT solutions for transportation, smart
cities, energy, and healthcare will be developed. Researchers in non-engineering
disciplines, particularly privacy, trade secret rights, and contractual rights,
may engage in the Center's activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the planning
meeting is successful, the efforts of SIUC and partner universities in NESTT
could help implement IoT solutions that will improve the quality of life and
sustainability. Lowering the barriers to the adoption of IoT technologies
through holistic multidisciplinary design and innovation in embedded, networked,
trusted, and secure things, our efforts will help realize the full potential of
the IoT, and deliver significant economic, societal and environmental returns.
The planning meeting will explore ways to broaden the participation of
underrepresented students. For example, SIUC will engage with the Success in
Engineering through Excellence and Diversity program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
agenda, list of participants, and activities of the NESTT IUCRC planning meeting
and workshops will be posted on SIUC's website for the Consortium for Embedded
Systems (CES), https://ces.siu.edu. Once NESTT is established, CES will be
merged with the NESTT site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.