* 1822876
* Advancing the Use of Automated Dialogue Systems for Teaching Communication and Interpersonal Skills
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Jonathan Gratch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 744,862.00

This project advances the use of technology to improve worker communication and
interpersonal skills. The project pursues a near-term vision that students and
workers will soon be able to augment their interpersonal skills by receiving
conversational practice and personalized tutorial feedback with automated
teaching agents. By practicing effective strategies for handling common
interpersonal challenges, such as challenges involving communication, working in
teams, resolving conflicts, negotiation, or dealing with bias in the workplace,
trainees will be able to enhance their employability, their on-the-job
effectiveness, and their career opportunities. In particular, the project
directly supports the education and full participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by addressing identified obstacles to their advancement in STEM careers.
Given the broad importance of interpersonal skills development, the project's
results are expected to have wide-ranging impact extending beyond its core
research disciplines to include also law and political science as well as
practical impact for applications such as job skills training and human-machine
teaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the application of
technology to interpersonal skills training by addressing several fundamental
scientific and technical challenges in understanding their effectiveness and
achieving broad deployment of these systems. It improves the ecological validity
of previous menu-based training methods by using state-of-the-art spoken
dialogue system technology to provide conversation-based training that enhances
the realism of experiential learning. It addresses the high development costs of
applying spoken dialogue system technology to interpersonal skills training by
developing new techniques that reduce the costs in labor and knowledge required
to teach specific learning objectives. Finally, the project designs and
evaluates innovative methods that automated systems can use to provide
individualized assessment and feedback to trainees. The objective of the project
is to demonstrate the potential of automated, intelligent conversational agents
to enhance the experiential learning of interpersonal skills, and enhance the
science behind the use of automated tutors for teaching complex communicative
skills. The project plan includes the design and implementation of a
conversational agent, development of new approaches to automated assessment and
feedback, data collection, and empirical validation of the training benefits of
the approach. An expected outcome is an improved understanding of how technology
can be effectively applied to a range of training needs in the areas of
communication and interpersonal skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.