* 1822923
* SPX: SOPHIA: Support for Opportunistic Parallelism with Heterogeneous Intermittently-powered Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* John Sampson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

The rise of the Internet of Things relies on increasingly mobile and numerous
computing devices, for which battery-based or wired operation is not always
feasible and for which energy-harvesting (e.g. solar power) operation may be
preferable. There are increasingly important industrial, social, and
governmental domains that will profit from adopting energy harvesting or hybrid
power solutions, such as health introspection, smart cities, augmented reality
sensing, assistive cyber-physical systems, security and defense monitoring, and
emergency response, as well as natural synergies with green-computing. Energy-
harvesting devices are expected to be numerous, but unreliable, and thus offer
both an opportunity and challenge in their use as a parallel computing
infrastructure. This project develops new interfaces spanning from software
through hardware that allow energy-harvesting devices equipped with on-chip
nonvolatile memory to be treated as parallel computing accelerators, while
maintaining system level reliability. This project integrates research with
education by training graduate students and undergraduate honors students in
overcoming the cross-layer challenges, from circuits through system software, in
utilizing computation platforms that experience frequent power
interruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three open challenges
in parallel computing using energy-harvesting powered systems: 1) A lack of
coherence and synergy between hardware and software in terms of forward progress
guarantees; 2) An overfocus on serial execution scenarios that has not lent
itself to parallelism in energy-harvesting systems; and 3) the ad-hoc nature of
previous efforts to explore the design space of architectural support for
energy-harvesting systems. The project introduces four new foundational
abstractions to address these open questions: 1) an unified, cross-layer
hardware-software interface for metering and managing forward progress; 2) a set
of fair and parallel forward progress metrics; 3) an exposed cross-layer
interface for reasoning about approximate forward progress; and 4) an offload-
based model for nonvolatile processors (NVPs), wherein NVPs can be viewed as
accelerators for "opportunistic computation." Project results include the
validation of these abstractions, a systematic mapping of the design space of
hardware-supported approximate and heterogeneous energy-harvesting opportunistic
computation accelerators, and the development and public distribution of the new
software tools and simulation infrastructure necessary to model complex software
systems executing on energy-harvesting accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.