* 1822977
* Investigation of Secondary Water in Volcanic Glass and its Isotopic Signatures
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Ilya Bindeman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,956.00

Glass formed by quick quenching of magma from erupting volcanoes may inform us
about climatologic conditions because these materials react with the atmosphere
when exposed to the environment. The reaction of water with volcanic glass
creates a hydration zone that reflects the meteoric conditions at the time.
These zones can be measured with hydrogen and oxygen stable isotopes that can
then be used to infer the environmental conditions at the time of the eruption.
This research will constrain geological mechanisms of hydration of natural glass
with a combination of experiments, theoretical computations, and natural
observations. Results of this type of research will be applicable to questions
related to the stability of hazardous waste disposal, the alteration of obsidian
and chert artifacts in archeological environments, and the formation of perlite
that is an important natural material used in industry. Knowledge of these
geological processes can also inform us on how fumarole mounds were formed in
the Crater Lake and Katmai National Parks, and how hydration alteration of glass
can be imaged with remote, and rover-based sensing on Earth, Mars and other
planets that have water in their atmospheres. This project will promote synergy
and collaboration among the newly created Volcanology cluster hire program at
the University of Oregon and will promote international collaboration. Funding
will support graduate and undergraduate students, and analytical infrastructure
of the stable isotope lab at the University of
Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly available continuous flow mass spectrometric,
and microbeam methods now permit multi-method isotopic investigation of volcanic
glass with relative ease for the first time. The experimental study will
investigate hydrogen and triple oxygen isotopic fractionation factors for
silicic glasses and water from ambient to hydrothermal (25 to 250 C)
temperatures. The investigator will image hydration profiles in experimental
products with NanoSIMS and FTIR targeting water and D/H exchange profiles and
model them to derive fractionation and diffusion parameters. With collaborators,
he will perform ab initio equilibrium isotopic and numerical kinetic isotopes
fractionation of glass and analogous zeolite phases upon hydration and exchange
with water. The newly developed hydrogen isotope methods in combination with
triple oxygen isotope parameters in glass will create predictive criteria for
hydrating meteoric waters (glacial or interglacial). Using experimentally-
determined hydration and isotopic trends from the experiments and literature
data, the model will predict secondary hydration, alteration, and isotopic
trends across the deposit during its cooling, with percolative and channelized
water transport as is observed in gas escape pipes. The above results are
relevant for understanding water-glass interaction after ignimbrite and lava
emplacement, and for paleoclimate research, as silicic glass hydrates during
cooling within months to 10s of years upon emplacement, providing instantaneous
snapshots of meteoric water isotopic values. Isotopic parameters in rapidly
hydrated thick-walled perlites and fumarole escape pipes are better targets for
preservation of climatic signal than thin-walled ash that hydrates over 1000s of
years and averages out century to millennia-scale signals. In application to
nature, the proposal will explain the origin of Crater Lake Pinnacles and
deposits at the Valley of 10,000 Smokes by specifically targeting kinetics and
the duration of water-rock interactions, allowing the recognition of glacial vs.
interglacial hydration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.