* 1822559
* The Development of Social Complexity in a Mobile Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* William Gardner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 211,161.00

Regions that are commonly home to mobile peoples are often typified by sharp
contrasts and frequent environmental change that can take place unexpectedly.
Environmental variability that generally epitomizes the homelands of mobile
societies has often fostered a romanticized perception of nomadic people as
"stoic" figures that are the product of a long life, lived in isolation, always
moving as the natural environment dictates. Subsequently, researchers studying
the processes through which large scale socially complex societies emerge and
the mechanisms which bind members together into a functioning unit will often
ignore mobile societies in favor of "stable" sedentary populations. This project
argues that the distinctiveness of pastoral nomadic society allows analysis of
general questions of political organization in relation to a wider range of
variables and thereby provides insight into how political strategies play out
differently over a range of varying conditions. Ultimately, the research will do
much to illustrate how "mobile" polities provide examples of alternative
trajectories for the development of alternative political systems and as such
should provide better insight into the ways in which human societies do or do
not adopt more complex forms of organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
this research topic, Dr. William Gardner of Yale University, along with
colleagues in Mongolia, will explore the "bottom-up" processes at play in the
local acceptance, configuration, and enactment of political changes during the
Late Bronze Age/Early Iron Age (ca. 10th to 4th century B.C.) that eventually
led to the first regional-scale polity founded on the steppe of Mongolia, The
Xiongnu (ca. 3th century B.C.). Working in the greater Burgastai/Tarvagatai
region of north central Mongolia, data from the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age
periods will consist of 1) trends in exchange relationships as revealed by
neutron activation analysis of ceramics; 2) trends in long distance interactions
and movements as understood by isotopic analysis of herd animals; and 3) the
role of monumentality in sociopolitical development. This data will be
contextualized by previous archaeological research in the neighboring Egiin Gol
region in an effort to determine the extent to which individual members and
households were involved in a community's effort to establish itself within
larger political organization. In total, the question addressed by studies of
steppe societies are not just "pastoral" question per se but instead, a general
question on human organization at the household and community scale viewed
through the lens of mobility and agro-pastoralism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.