* 1822420
* Chequamegon Heterogeneous Ecosystem Energy-balance Study Enabled by a High-density Extensive Array of Detectors
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Mark Schwartz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,610,135.00

The living biosphere interacts with atmospheric processes at a multitude of
scales. Understanding these processes requires integration of multiple
observations for comparison to theories embedded in atmospheric models. But, all
observations mismatch the scale of all models. Therefore, spatial and temporal
scaling of surface fluxes is fundamental to how we evaluate theories on what
happens within the sub-grid of atmospheric models and how those feed back onto
larger scale dynamics. The Chequamegon Heterogeneous Ecosystem Energy-balance
Study Enabled by a High-density Extensive Array of Detectors (CHEESEHEAD) is an
intensive field-campaign designed specifically to address long-standing puzzles
regarding the role of atmospheric boundary-layer responses to scales of spatial
heterogeneity in surface-atmosphere heat and water
exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The high-density
observing network is coupled to large eddy simulation (LES) and machine-learning
scaling-experiments to better understand sub-mesoscale responses and improve
numerical weather and climate prediction formulations of sub-grid processes.
This project will advance spatiotemporal scaling methods for heterogeneous land
surface properties and fluxes and theories on the scales at which the lower
atmosphere responds to surface heterogeneity. CHEESEHEAD aims to provide a level
of observation density and instrumentation reliability never previously achieved
to test and develop hypotheses on spatial heterogeneity and atmosphere
feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The experiment
generates knowledge that advances the science of surface flux measurement and
modeling, relevant to many scientific applications such as numerical weather
prediction, climate change, energy resources, and computational fluid dynamics.
The research will train next generation land-atmosphere graduate and
undergraduate students. Field support outreach and teacher training is included
via middle, high school, and undergraduate student involvement at nearby schools
and colleges in coordination with UCAR's (University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research) GLOBE program, Northland College, and local school districts. The
database of observations and models will be made immediately available to the
community and public for general use for further scientific
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.