* 1822118
* IUCRC Phase II Colorado State University: Center for Cybersecurity Analytics and Automation CCAA
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Indrakshi Ray, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 763,148.00

Failure to protect systems from cyberattacks in an increasingly interconnected
world has severe consequences. The Center for Cybersecurity Analytics and
Automation (CCAA) with its universities, government and commercial partners will
embark on the development of science and technology to protect, defend, and
survive such attacks that are launched by advanced, persistent, and evolving
adversaries. The multi-disciplinary and collaborative approach will provide
research and technological solutions that will improve sense-making, decision
making, and resiliency to sustain cyber missions in the event of cyber warfare
and sophisticated cyberattacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCAA with its experts in
cybersecurity, formal modeling, and data-driven analytics will advance
cybersecurity in multiple ways including (a) robust and scalable sense-making
for dynamic and predictive cyber risk analytics using large-scale heterogeneous
cyber artifacts, (b) adaptive and autonomic decision-making for creating defense
strategies and courses of action that are provably correct and operationally
safe using mission requirements, security policies and guidelines, and system
configurations, (c) making resilience and agility inherent properties of cyber
and cyber physical systems to enable real-time deterrence, deception, and
mitigation. The Colorado State University (CSU) site will contribute in formal
methods, cyber physical systems, machine learning, and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's research will advance the field of
cyber security through its research in preventing, detecting, recovering, and
surviving cyberattacks in a connected world and make systems safe, secure, and
resilient. Technology transfer will occur through start-ups, student and faculty
internships at the member organizations. Students at all levels, high-school,
undergraduates, and graduates will be involved in the projects. Minority
students, especially first generation, will be actively recruited. Efforts will
be made to have students do internships at the industrial organizations and the
partner universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will make all the
artifacts developed in this project in a central repository that will be
accessible to all its members. The repository will be accessible through the
Center's website (http://www.ccaa-nsf.org/). The artifacts include manuscripts,
code, datasets, and experimental results. Some of these materials will also be
disseminated to the public, selected external organizations conforming to the
bylaws of the Center, the NSF policies, and the individual universities
requirements. The repository will be available for the duration of the Phase II
project, and an earnest attempt will be made to maintain the repository after
the project ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.