* 1822008
* The Affect Of Environmental Variation On Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 192,192.00

Drs. Thomas Pluckhahn (University of South Florida) and Victor Thompson
(University of Georgia) will undertake research regarding the manner in which
common property regimes shift over time in relation to changes in environmental
and socio-political contexts. The longstanding notion that common property
resources are effectively managed only through state control or private property
regimes has been refuted time and again by anthropological and historical case
studies demonstrating how social groups ranging from small communities to
nation-states have devised effective systems of resource management, some of
which endure for long periods of time. However, the manner in which common
property institutions develop and change over time is poorly understood. As a
result, researchers also lack the ability to reliably predict how existing
regimes may change with respect to future perturbations in natural and social
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Pluckhahn and Thompson, along with a team of
graduate students and a post-doctoral scholar, will study changes in sea
tenure?the collectively-managed use rights to fisheries?among the native
societies of the Tampa Bay estuary during the late Holocene, from around AD 250
to 1650. Spanish accounts from the end of this time range describe a fractured
socio-political landscape comprised of warring, territorially-based chiefdoms,
while archaeological evidence from the earlier range of the time frame suggests
a more dispersed population with less social stratification and little inter-
group conflict. The research tests the hypothesis that this transformation was
the result of changes in sea tenure occurring in conjunction with shifts in the
natural and social environments, through a program of archaeological and
paleoecological testing. For the reconstruction of ancient systems of sea
tenure, the research employs isotopic studies of oyster shells in concert with
the analysis of the relative abundance of shellfish species with varying
salinity tolerances, to model habitat of collection. To reconstruct the local
and regional manifestations of global shifts in climate, the researchers will
collect pollen and sediments from wetlands adjacent to archaeological sites.
Changes in socio-political organization will be identified through a program of
archaeological testing and shallow geophysics at mound and village complexes.
Temporal control is provided by a rigorous program of radiocarbon dating. This
interdisciplinary dataset will contribute to a better understanding of how
common property resource management systems may be remade over time and, in
doing so, offer insights potentially useful for predicting changes in
contemporary public policies regulating common-property resources as diverse as
air, water, gene pools, and the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.