* 1822346
* EAGER: Developing a Culturally Responsive Computing Instrument for Underrepresented Students
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Kimberly Scott, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 01/31/2021
* USD 299,922.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project aims to conduct a study
designed to operationalize a culturally responsive computing framework, from
theory to empirical application, by exploring what factors can be identified and
later used to develop items for an instrument to assess youths' self-efficacy
and self-perceptions in computing and technology-related fields and careers. The
project explores the constructs of culturally responsive computing across youths
of diverse gender and racial identities (i.e., White, African American, Latino,
Native American, Alaskan Native boys and girls) using a culturally responsive,
participatory action research approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
explores and develops the factor structure of an instrument on culturally
responsive computing with diverse middle and high schoolers of intersecting
identities. It uses culturally responsive methodologies to co-create an
instrument for later validation that will assess youths' self-efficacy and self-
perceptions in technology. The project will explore Culturally Response
Computing constructs across variables by conducting observations, focus groups
and interviews, and collect context data and information from teachers and
students that will contribute to a series of case examples. The work involves a
two-phase mixed-methods research study focused on assembling evidence to assess,
design and validate a Culturally Responsive Computing Framework from theory to
empirical application. A total of 50 students and teachers from four
geographically diverse rural and urban areas and racial ethnic backgrounds will
participate in co-creating constructs.