* 1822965
* SPX: Integrating Persistent Memory in the Cloud
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Baishakhi Ray, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 985,505.00

The massive volume of data and high computing intensity of large-scale
applications in the cloud require thousands of machines in big data centers. In
addition, there is an increasing demand for faster, energy-efficient, and
scalable performance from new data-intensive applications. Unfortunately, as the
technology scaling slows down, the semiconductor industry has been facing a
major challenge in providing better performance and reducing the power
consumption while processing large datasets. To provide better performance and
lower costs for cloud applications that manipulate massive data with tight
latency constraints, service providers are moving towards in-memory frameworks
to store the working data. By exploring the roles of emerging memory
technologies, this research project has the potential to improve cloud computing
performance. The ideas developed in this research will bridge the gap between
architecture, systems, and software engineering community and will enable system
support and automated tools for adapting applications in the persistent cloud.
The project will eventually enable a holistic "persistent cloud system" such
that the cloud applications can be adapted transparently without significant
programmers' effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to enable a
persistent cloud system in a holistic manner across the system stack such that
the persistent cloud applications can be adapted in the systems without
significant programmers? effort. In order to design a persistent cloud system,
this work is to provide full stack support from the applications to hardware
through three major research directions that need to be addressed to design a
full-stack persistent cloud system, (i) lightweight storage layer support for
persistent memory systems, (ii) data monitoring and placement based on
application characteristics and trade-offs in NVM, and (iii) automated
persistency support at the application-level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.