* 1822117
* Planning IUCRC at Georgia Institute of Technology:  Center for Engineering and Manufacturing Technologies Advancing Food Safety and Security (CAFSS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Douglas Britton, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The US food and beverage industry employs 1.46 million individuals and is
responsible for more than 10% of all manufacturing shipments. Even though
sanitation is one of the food industry's biggest production expenses, inadequate
sanitation remains one of the greatest threats to America's food safety and
security due to the lack of modern technology and consistent application of
sanitation policies.

CAFSS will strive to integrate and streamline the entire food supply chain in
the US from 'Farm to Fork' and supply safe (pathogen and allergen free), secure
(uninterrupted and fully traceable sources), wholesome and plentiful supply of
food to the US and Global consumers.

CAFSS objectives will focus on addressing two grand challenges of national
importance:

1) Ensuring a stable and sustainable supply of affordable, safe, nutritious food
not only for the US but also for the rest of the world. 2) Equipping and
empowering US food manufacturers and their supporting industries, to establish
highly competitive manufacturing plants in the US and the world.

The US food industry adds commercial value to agricultural products and provides
employment opportunities in both rural and urban areas and CAFSS will enhance
the overall sustainability and profitability through automation and new private-
public partnerships.

The proposed CAFSS will bridge technological gaps, which fall under the general
theme of food safety, security and traceability of all raw materials throughout
the entire supply chain from 'Farm to Fork'. Bridging these gaps will require
multidisciplinary collaborations among public and private enterprises and
groundbreaking research and development within the following fundamental science
and engineering platforms:

1) Automation, control and robotics; IoT systems and data integration; 2) New
sensors; big data analytics and artificial intelligence; 3) New functionalized
surfaces, new materials / coatings 4) Novel food sterilization technologies.

Automation, control, and robotics minimize human contact with food and greatly
enhance food safety. Newer sensors with data analytics enable the food companies
to improve food safety, quality, and traceability. Novel functionalized surfaces
enhance food sanitation efficiency thereby reducing production downtime, and
energy and water requirements. Novel food sterilization and pasteurization
technologies improve food safety with minimal deterioration in food quality and
they meet consumers' demand for minimally processed foods.

Research projects will be carried out at CAFSS hub facilities in Nebraska and
Georgia and the resulting breakthroughs will allow the US food manufacturing
industry to join other industries in terms of efficiency, automation, lower
cost, predictability, safety and security of goods supplied.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.