* 1822196
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Nanoparticle-Stabilized PolyHIPEs that Promote Integrin-Mediated Osteogenesis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Elizabeth Cosgriff-Hernandez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 405,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL: &lt;br/&gt;Over one million surgical procedures are performed
each year to treat bone injury and defects with an associated medical cost of
over 5 billion dollars. Current procedures are fraught with problems that limit
clinical success. One important approach for the treatment of bone fractures and
defects is in the use of injectable fillers or cements. However, current bone
cements do not adequately support bone healing, and may lead to poor clinical
outcomes. This project utilizes a novel method in preparing polymers to generate
an injectable bone filler that cures within the body, and forming a rigid and
strong foam implant. This specially prepared polymer composite is expected to
promote bone regeneration and growth by stimulating cells around the polymer. In
addition to improving care for patients that suffer from traumatic bone
injuries, these studies will provide exceptional training of future scientists
in materials research. Educational and outreach activities will focus on
strategies that enhance recruitment and retention of women and minorities in
science and engineering areas in addressing the national needs to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in the scientific and engineering
workforce. Finally, this Israeli-US partnership provides opportunities to train
students to compete globally through a summer internship exchanges at the
partnering laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: &lt;br/&gt;Current
injectable bone cements used for bone fracture and repairs are of limited value
because of lack of cement porosity, limited biodegradability, prolonged recovery
time and lack of significant stabilization and support of the damaged bones. In
addition, these synthetic scaffolds lack cellular cues to promote bone repair
and regeneration, without the addition of growth factors in the injectable
cements, and these involve high costs and safety concerns. To address these
issues, this project will develop a novel high internal phase emulsion graft
polymers (polyHIPE) using an emulsion-templating method. The graft polymers
prepared will be used to generate injectable bone fillers that cure within the
body to form rigid foams that are: 1) surface-modified with collagen-mimetic
proteins to induce osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells; and 2)
prepared without surfactants to minimize concerns with respect to
biocompatibility of leached breakdown products from these surfactants.
Additionally, bioactive nanoparticles with different size, distribution, and
hydrophobicity will be incorporated in these graft polymers, and these
nanoparticles are expected to migrate spontaneously to the pore surface of the
foam during curing process in the body. This migration of nanoparticle not only
strengthen the cured polymer cement but is also expected to promote enhanced
bone regeneration by stimulating cells in the polymer pores. Overall, these
studies are designed such that fundamental advances will be made in synthesis
and application of novel materials for the integrin-mediated osteogenesis for
injectable bone grafts. Although this work is focused on bone repair and
regeneration, the knowledge gained has potential to be applied to a variety of
other applications such as development of membranes with well-defined pore size
in battery and for water purification. Students participating in the research
will receive rigorous training in material science and tissue engineering that
will prepare them for careers in biomedical engineering. This collaboration with
Israeli scientists would also provide opportunities in training students through
a summer internship exchange at the partnering laboratory and prepare these
students to compete globally. An integrated educational platform will focus on
strategies that enhance recruitment and retention of women and minorities in
engineering to address the national need to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in the scientific and engineering workforce.