* 1822258
* Bad Metal Behavior and the Metal-Insulator Transition
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Vladimir Dobrosavljevic, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2022
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on materials that exhibit properties that
fall somewhere between those of typical metals and insulators. These curious
"bad" metals have surprisingly high resistance and unusual thermal properties.
For materials that fall within this regime, the dynamics of electrons in the
material change dramatically: they slow down, and this in turn produces
essential modifications of all key features of the potential energy landscape
that an electron explores on its way through the solid. What precisely happens
in this regime has long presented a basic science puzzle; now, due to recent
progress, new insight is at hand. More realistic microscopic modeling and new
experimental capabilities that have occurred in the last few years are opening
exciting new research opportunities that are exploited in this project to
understand fundamental aspects of the behavior of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also involve training of
graduate students in theoretical and computational condensed matter physics. The
PI will continue to promote and enhance broad scientific and technological
understanding and the importance of fundamental research to the general public
through various outreach activities. These will include: 1) Presenting lectures
at elementary schools in order to popularize science and technology and to bring
recent scientific discoveries within reach of young students; 2) Serving as a
judge at annual regional Science Fairs that involve K-12 students from public
and private schools within the region; 3) Working with high-school summer
interns as a part of the "Florida Young Scholar" program, enabling them to bring
cutting-edge science to the public at large through the development of JAVA
animations and other web-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on materials that fall somewhere between metals and
insulators. This so-called "bad metal" regime between a metal and an insulator
is typically characterized by behavior that is qualitatively different from
either phase. The PI will theoretically examine several fundamental aspects of
the metal-insulator transition (MIT) region that have come into focus due to
very recent experimental discoveries, which will be possible thanks to a newer
generation of theoretical tools: 1) First-principles modeling will be developed
for novel ionic systems on semiconductor surfaces, allowing to explore the MIT
in doped semiconductors with nanoscale control and imaging. 2) Metastable phases
of matter that are obtained by rapid supercooling will be explored, which often
display amorphous or unconventional periodic forms of electronic order. 3) The
dramatically increased role of electron-electron and electron-phonon
interactions will be investigated in systems tuned through disorder-driven MITs,
addressing the long-standing puzzles of Mooij correlations and the related
resistivity saturation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also involve
training of graduate students in theoretical and computational condensed matter
physics. The PI will continue to promote and enhance broad scientific and
technological understanding and the importance of fundamental research to the
general public through various outreach activities. These will include: 1)
Presenting lectures at elementary schools in order to popularize science and
technology and to bring recent scientific discoveries within reach of young
students; 2) Serving as a judge at annual regional Science Fairs that involve
K-12 students from public and private schools within the region; 3) Working with
high-school summer interns as a part of the "Florida Young Scholar" program,
enabling them to bring cutting-edge science to the public at large through the
development of JAVA animations and other web-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.