* 1822484
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Dynamic Site Characterization Following Mw 7.1 Puebla Earthquake for Development of a Refined 3D Shallow Crust Velocity Model of the Mexico City Basin
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Domniki Asimaki, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2019
* USD 85,000.00

The 2017 Mw 7.1 Puebla-Mexico City Earthquake caused numerous building
collapses, ground failures, and over 300 casualties. Documented field evidence
revealed damage distribution patterns that have been recognized in published
studies of previous earthquakes in the region, specifically that the complex
regional and local geology, hydrology and geotechnical conditions play a
decisive role in shaping the ground shaking characteristics of the clay
sediments in Mexico City. While ground motion recordings showed clear evidence
of one-dimensional (1D) site amplification in the lake zone of the basin, the
uneven damage distribution and ground motion variability in areas of reportedly
similar deposit depths and structural characteristics in the transition zone
suggest that three-dimensional (3D) site effects played a significant role in
the observed damage. The documented evidence of the role of site effects in
Mexico City combined with the high density instrumentation and decades of site
characterization research provide an excellent opportunity for engineers and
earth scientists to study in real scale the coupling of 3D basin effects and 1D
local (shallow) site response, and the interaction between hydrological
conditions and seismic amplification. Advances in our understanding of these
phenomena can be used to develop better prediction models for seismically active
regions, including U.S. metropolitan areas such as Los Angeles, San Francisco
and Seattle. The overarching goal of this Grant for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) project is to combine instrumentation and monitoring, ata collection and
analysis, and numerical modeling to better characterize regional basin and local
site effects during earthquakes. The rapid response framework maximizes the
project resources by aligning its goal with ongoing and upcoming activities of
Mexican researchers and engineers to refine the geological and geotechnical site
characterization of the basin, and map the evolution of dynamic geotechnical
properties with time to the rapidly changing hydrologic conditions in the area.
This award addresses the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a
technical level, this project focuses on conducting dynamic site
characterization of strong motion stations and other key places in Mexico City
using active source and ambient wavefield surface wave methods along with
horizontal-to-vertical spectral ratios. The goal of conducting these
measurements is to develop seismic shear wave velocity profiles and estimate
site periods that can lead to improved microzonation maps for the city and
regional hazard assessment. Combining field measurements with the spatial
variability of shallow deposits and geological information of the deeper
sediments from Mexican research databases, a 3D shallow crust velocity model of
Mexico City will be developed. This model is essential for physics based ground
motion simulations, given the known influence that small-scale lateral
heterogeneities in very soft materials have on ground motions, especially in
cases of complex resonance interaction between the deeper geologic formations,
the shallow sediments, and the structural vibration characteristics of
buildings. A better understanding of these phenomena contributes by extension to
improved seismic hazard estimates not only for Mexico City, but also for U.S.
cities that lie on similar sedimentary basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.