* 1822398
* Meeting: Developing a Global Inventory of Brain Initiatives
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Melina Hale, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2019
* USD 96,790.00

The brain is so complex that it will likely require the coordination of the
efforts of scientists around the globe to determine the mechanisms and
operational properties underlying its vast array of functions. The workshop on
Developing a Global Inventory of Brain Initiatives aims to advance discussions
on coordinating Brain Initiatives around the globe. It focuses on the
development of an International Brain Initiative Inventory that will collect and
report key information about each regional initiative in an accessible fashion.
Although there are significant independent efforts to catalog the developing
neurotechnologies and approaches for acquisition and management of data, these
efforts are not coordinated and do not communicate effectively with one another.
As such, there is a need for the implementation of a live inventory of Brain
Initiatives, to promote the coordination of large-scale projects that require
multinational involvement and to reduce duplication and increase efficiency of
resources developed through various brain initiatives globally. The
International Brain Inventory will serve to broaden accessibility to Brain
Initiative tools, data, and other resources, as well as increase collaboration
by US investigators with investigators from other countries. This workshop
critically informs inventory development by providing input from a diverse group
of US and international neuroscientists and communicating inventory goals to the
broader neuroscience community. In addition, the workshop serves to build
relationships among global Brain Initiatives. By working to inform the
International Brain Inventory, ultimate goals of this project include to: (1)
increase accessibility of all countries to Brain Initiatives work and products,
and (2) promote multinational collaborations. Further, by communicating these
efforts to the public, the workshop enhances awareness of global brain research
efforts and interactions between the US and other Brain
Initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three specific aims of the workshop:
1. To consider what content to include in an International Brain Initiative
Inventory, and advise on content and structure, with a focus on what would be
most useful to the scientific community; 2. To suggest approaches for
dissemination of inventory information and other mechanisms that encourage use
and communication across International Brain Initiatives; and 3. To recommend
approaches for receiving feedback from the neuroscience community and evaluating
the effectiveness of the inventory. The primary product of the workshop is a
publication that will summarize the discussion and articulates the group?s
perspective on key aspects of a global inventory as outlined above: inventory
content, input and structure, dissemination, and evaluation. The publication
will also outline steps for engaging the scientific community in this work. A
secondary product of the workshop is to propose strategies for communicating
inventory efforts to the public. An additional goal of the workshop and
surrounding collaborative work of its participants is the strengthening of
dialog and relationships between neuroscientists and Brain Initiative leaders
across many countries, governmental agencies, and foundations to accelerate our
understanding of brain function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.