* 1822128
* Collaborative Research: EAGER--Effect of Eddy Forcing Induced by Eyewall and Rainband Convection on Tropical Cyclone Rapid Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Jun Zhang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 81,244.00

The research seeks to advance our understanding of internal dynamics in
governing Tropical Cyclone (TC) intensification and improve forecasting skills
for rapid change of TC intensity. The results and products of this project can
be immediately implemented in operational models for TC prediction, disseminated
to the broader TC modeling community, and used in Principal Investigator (PI)'s
course teaching in TC theories and applications. The project supports a
postdoctoral researcher. The educational goal of the project is to train and
educate the next generation of scientists with the engagement of postdoctoral
researcher and graduate/undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conventional view of Tropical Cyclone (TC) intensification regards the absolute
angular momentum as a materially conserved quantity above the friction layer.
This study seeks to demonstrate that the eddy process associated with eyewall
and rainband convection serves as a sole forcing for the azimuthal-mean angular
momentum conservation. It is this forcing that provides an ultimate mechanism
for triggering and driving Rapid Intensification (RI) of TCs that cannot be
explained by the classic TC intensification theories. At the current resolution
of operational models, the PIs demonstrate that the sub-grid scale (SGS) forcing
above the PBL associated with convection poses an important bearing on TC
intensification, especially RI. How to generate a realistic SGS forcing aloft in
the TC inner-core region is a new challenge in turbulent mixing parameterization
that has not been previously explored. The most important features of this EAGER
project are: (1) advance our understanding of the role of eddy forcing
associated with eyewall and rainband convection in modulating intensity change
of TCs and (2) develop physically robust parameterization to represent sub-grid
scale forcing associated with convection above the PBL in numerical models used
for TC prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.