* 1822664
* The Chemistry of Oxidation Flow Reactors (OFR) and the Sources of Semivolatile and Intermediate Volatility Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Precursors in Recent NSF Field Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jose Jimenez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 641,589.00

This project will inform the use of Oxidation Flow Reactors (OFR) in the study
of atmospheric chemistry. OFR are used to study the formation of secondary
organic aerosol (SOA) in the atmosphere. Experimental and modeling
investigations of the use of the OFR will help to determine their
representativeness to understanding chemical reactions in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort addresses two research questions:
(1) What is the representativeness of OFR chemistry compared to the atmosphere
and large environmental chambers, and how can it be optimized? (2) What are the
key SOA precursors for OH oxidation of ambient air in biogenic environments? The
project includes modeling and laboratory studies to simulate observational
measurements from recent NSF-supported field campaigns. This research will
provide critically-needed information on the usefulness, interpretation, and
best practices of the OFR technique that is being adopted rapidly by the
atmospheric science community. This effort also will help place firmer
constraints on the key precursors, pathways and anthropogenic-biogenic
interactions controlling SOA formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.