* 1822066
* The Social Dynamics of Raised Field Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Charles Berrey, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 123,185.00

Systems of raised agricultural fields covering many square kilometers were
constructed by prehistoric societies in numerous parts of the world. These
fields, which consist of elevated platforms or ridges and excavated canals,
represent the earliest and most substantial forms of prehistoric landscape
modification undertaken in many regions; their emergence marks an important
shift in modes of economic production and labor organization. In the broad sweep
of human history these agricultural projects were important early steps toward
many of the organizational, technological, and engineering developments that
underpin modern society, and archaeological research has revealed a great deal
of variation in the types of social, political, economic, and demographic
conditions under which they came to develop. This variation raises important
questions as to how and why human societies first decided to undertake large-
scale landscape modification projects in the prehistoric past. What, for
instance, were the forces that prompted the emergence of raised-field
agriculture in different world regions? Were they environmental, demographic, or
political in nature? And what impact did this new mode of economic production
have on other aspects of social, economic, and political life? In a world where
large-scale landscape modification projects provide the economic and
infrastructural foundation on which society is built, and often with great
consequence to local populations, such questions are of particular
relevance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. C. Adam Berrey, of the University of
Hawaii, along with colleagues and students from Panama and Colombia, will
undertake research to study to the social, political, economic, and demographic
dynamics of raised-field agriculture among early complex societies in the Rio
Bayano valley of eastern Panama. It was among these types of societies that the
earliest forms of social inequality, economic specialization, and large-scale
social formations first began to emerge, making them a particularly interesting
context in which to evaluate the emergence of raised-field agriculture. How
might the emergence of raised-field agriculture, for example, connected to the
new forms of social and economic relationships, and the larger scales of
integration, that were emerging at this time? To answer this and the questions
enumerated above, Dr. Berrey will lead a team of archaeologists to study the
development of early complex society in the Rio Bayano valley, from the very
beginnings of a sedentary, agricultural lifeway to the arrival of the Spanish in
the 16th century. Regional and local-scale survey will be carried out to study
the changing demographic conditions of the region, while local survey and
excavation will generate household artifact assemblages with which it will be
possible to study changing social and economic relationships. Of particular
interest will be to examine if and how these social, economic, and demographic
conditions changed during and after the emergence of raised-field agriculture.
This research will generate new comparative data and methods for the study of
raised-field agriculture and early complex society development, and will provide
educational and training opportunities for students and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.