* 1822468
* Canadian Number Theory Association Meeting 2018
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Christelle Vincent, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,000.00

This award supports US participation in a meeting of the Canadian Number Theory
Association. The Canadian Number Theory Association (CNTA) was founded in 1987
at the International Number Theory Conference at Universite Laval, for the
purpose of enhancing and promoting learning and research in number theory in
Canada and beyond. To advance these goals, the CNTA organizes biannual
conferences that exhibit new research in number theory, with the aim of exposing
Canadian and international students and researchers to the latest developments
in the field. This year CNTA XV will be held in Quebec City, July 9-13 2018,
with further information available at
&lt;br/&gt;http://archimede.mat.ulaval.ca/CNTA2018/. The CNTA meetings are among
the largest number theory conferences in the world, rivaled in size only by the
biannual Journees Arithmetiques which take place in years alternating with the
CNTA meetings, usually in southern Europe. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The format of
CNTA XV will follow the general tradition of the CNTA meetings. It will be a
5-day conference featuring 8 hour-long plenary lectures, one of which will be
given by the winner of the 2018 Ribenboim Prize for Distinguished Research in
Number Theory, awarded at the meeting; 20 half-hour invited lectures; more than
40 contributed talks of 20 minutes each, delivered in up to four parallel
sessions; and a public lecture directed to the general public and free of
charge. Talks at CNTA meetings will cover topics in algebraic number theory,
analytic number theory, computational and algorithmic number theory, arithmetic
geometry, representation theory, automorphic forms, diophantine approximation,
and other areas belonging or related to number theory. A call for contributed
talks is forthcoming; interested speakers will submit brief abstracts which will
be reviewed for suitability by the Scientific Committee. Selected speakers for
contributed talks will range from young participants to well-known number
theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.