* 1822201
* Phase II IUCRC at Colorado School of Mines:  Center for Manufacturing &amp; Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Stephen Liu, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) addresses the
question of infrastructure rebuilding and innovative materials application in
modern manufacturing which are of national interest. The Ma2JIC Center
establishes an environment between universities and industrial partners that
promotes the development and application of fundamental knowledge in the areas
of materials joining and additive manufacturing and provides a platform for the
education of the next generation of scientists and engineers. As one of the
sites since its inception, the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) Site has
complemented the Center with its unique expertise and laboratory facilities in
the design and manufacturing of innovative welding materials, welding and
joining process innovation, welding materials characterization, and additive
manufacturing for the energy, aerospace, oil and gas, and manufacturing
industries. The CSM Site will seek to intensify its collaborations with the
other Center Sites to jointly develop collaborations with the welding, joining
and manufacturing industries, large and small, national laboratories and
government agencies. The strength of the Center is the ability of the group to
close the gap between materials development and weldability for materials used
in the manufacturing industry, with ultimate societal gain from all these
amazing synergies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ma2JIC Center research thrusts of
Process Innovation, Materials Performance, Additive Manufacturing, Weldability
Testing and Evaluation will develop fundamental understanding as described by
the materials tetrahedron - "Processing-Microstructure-Properties-Performance".
CSM Site researchers are examining the fundamental aspects of GTA and Laser
weldability of Laser-Powder bed fusion AM built products, solidification
behavior of Laser-Powder bed fusion and Directed Energy Deposition AM products,
and filler metal development for microstructural optimization in Electron Beam
Freeform Fabrication products, including metal matrix composites. The
incorporation of Reaction Synthesis powder into tubular wires for both laser-
based and electron beam-based additive manufacturing is being attempted. The
effect of surface tension on AM deposits will be fully characterized and
understood for process control. Another research focus addresses the design and
manufacture of thermal spray coatings with enhanced wear and fracture resistance
for oil and gas drilling operations. The CSM Site will continue to study and
design low transformation temperature welding (LTTW) consumables for distortion
control and residual stress mitigation control. These programs are expected to
lead to the development of fundamental knowledge as well as practical
technology. The CSM Site is also pursuing cross university and multi-industry
collaboration on intelligent welding, friction stir processing, robotics,
advanced neutron and X-rays characterization, and data-driven
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.