* 1822598
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: New dimensions of visual cortical organization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Michael Stryker, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 775,776.00

The visual system of the mouse is now widely studied as a model for
developmental neurobiology, as well as for the understanding of human disease,
because it can be studied with the most powerful modern genetic and optical
tools. This project aims to discover how neurons in the visual cortex of the
mouse allow it to see well by measuring how the cortex represents ecologically-
relevant properties of the visual world. Quantitative studies of neurons in the
mouse's primary visual cortex to date reveal only very poor vision, but their
behavior indicates that mice can see much better than that -- they avoid
predators and catch crickets in the wild. To understand mouse vision, the
investigators will study responses to novel, mathematically tractable stimuli
resembling the flow of images across the retina as the mouse moves through a
field of grass. Studies based on these new stimuli indicate that most V1 neurons
respond reliably to fine details of the visual scene. A mathematical
understanding of how the brain takes in the visual world should have real
implications for how we see, and should have great benefits for artificial
vision by computers and robots. Bringing these ideas into the classroom will
provide the foundation for new technologies, and will expose students to both
real and artificial vision systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses of the brain's
visual function are limited by the stimuli used to probe them. Conventional
quantitative approaches to understanding biological vision have been based on
models with linear kernels in which only the output might be subject to a
nonlinearity, all derived from responses of neurons in the brain to gratings of
a range of spatial frequencies. This analysis fails to capture relevant features
of natural images, which can not be constrained to linearity. The goal of this
project is to probe the mouse visual system beyond the linear range but below
the barrier posed by the complexity of arbitrary natural images. The
investigators have identified an intermediate stimulus class--visual flow
patterns--that formally approximate important features of natural visual scenes,
resembling what an animal would see when running through grass. Flow patterns
have a rich geometry that is mathematically tractable. This project will develop
such stimuli and test them on awake-behaving mice, while recording the resultant
neural activity in the visual cortex. Studying the mouse opens up the
possibility of applying the entire range of powerful modern neuroscience tools--
genetic, optical, and electrophysiological. Visual responses will be analyzed
using a novel variety of machine learning algorithms, which will allow the
investigators to model the possible neural circuits and then test predictions
from those model circuits. Such an understanding of the brain will inform both
primate vision and the next generation of artificially-intelligent algorithms
which, as a result, should benefit from being more "brain-
like."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.