* 1822314
* Airborne InfraRed Spectrograph (AIR-Spec) 2019 Eclipse Flight
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Edward DeLuca, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 04/30/2021
* USD 566,487.00

The 2017 eclipse observations by the Airborne InfraRed Spectrometer (AIR-Spec)
demonstrated that thermal infrared (IR) imaging spectroscopy is possible from
the NCAR's HIAPER GV platform. This opened a new window of opportunity for high
resolutions thermal IR spectroscopy of the Sun's corona on a platform that
avoids the vast majority of the atmospheric absorption. The 2017 AIR-Spec
eclipse observations revealed all of the target coronal emission lines at
several coronal positions, showed Hydrogen lines in the prominence observations
and captured the chromospheric flash spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-
year project is intended to re-fly the AIR-Spec instrument during the 2019 July
2 total solar eclipse in the south Pacific off the coast of Chile. During this
project, the AIR-Spec will be upgraded to have an improved sensitivity, image
stability, and automation of the data collection process. The goal is to
characterize the thermal IR emission of Sun's corona, including an investigation
of numerous coronal IR emission lines, across a variety of solar structures
(coronal holes, plumes, prominences, etc.) on an otherwise almost unexplored
physical regime. The project's primary personnel are two very early-career women
(one scientist, one engineer), and additional REU students will be involved --
including for the flight preparations themselves. The project team is committed
to fostering diversity and inclusion while training the next generation of
instrumentation scientists and engineers in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first AIR-Spec flight succeeded in measuring all targeted five infrared (IR)
coronal emission lines, including the first-of-its-kind measurement of the
coronal Fe IX line at 2.845 microns. The re-flight of AIR-Spec during the 2019
solar eclipse will allow the project team to focus on the detailed
characterization of various emission lines in different conditions of the Sun's
corona. The upcoming AIR-Spec experiment will exercise a different capability of
the NCAR's GV aircraft. Namely, the IR transmissive window will be mounted on a
side portal adjacent to the optical bench. In doing so, the project team will
demonstrate the flexibility of the design, simplify the operations and verify
their ability to observe eclipses anywhere in the world. Developing the ability
for coordinated observations of the Sun's corona with the future DKIST will be
greatly beneficial for the calibration of DKIST observations, and it will
motivate future solar instrumentation. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.