* 1822406
* AON: Atmospheric Tracers for Arctic Wildfires, Air Pollution, Atmospheric Chemistry, and Climate Change at GEOSummit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Detlev Helmig, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 344,020.00

Climate warming in the Arctic has been 2-3 greater than in any other environment
on Earth. There has been an increase in tundra wildfire occurrences in coastal
Greenland in recent years, setting a new all-time record in summer 2017. A
growing body of literature suggests that this increase in arctic wildfires is
largely due to drier summer conditions from increasing temperatures, increasing
length of the snow-cover free season, and increased lightning, all of which are
linked to the arctic warming. This project focuses on the study of emissions
from arctic tundra wildfires. Chemical tracers of wildfires, including carbon
monoxide, methane, and a series of volatile organic compounds will be monitored
in the atmosphere at the Greenland Environmental Observatory at Summit
(GEOSummit), which, while considered one of the most pristine and remote
locations in the Northern Hemisphere, has previously been shown to receive fire
plumes from coastal Greenland and other arctic regions further away.
Observations will be applied in modeling research to assess the impacts of the
increasing frequency and geographical extent of fires on the arctic environment
and lower latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deliver continuous
high time resolution data for wildfire emission and climate forcing atmospheric
constituents at GEOSummit. All data will be submitted to the Arctic Data Center
for worldwide dissemination. Data analyses and modeling will improve assessments
of fire emissions and their environmental and climate impacts. Results and
interpretations will be presented in university class room teaching, seminars,
at conferences, and in peer-reviewed journal publications. Observations will
make a pivotal contribution to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Global Atmospheric Watch (GAW) program. This research will also contribute to
the following programs: Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH),
Cryosphere and Atmospheric Chemistry (CATCH), Pollution in the Arctic: Climate,
Environment and Societies (PACES), and the international Year of Polar
Prediction (YOPP). It addresses the need for ?long-term atmospheric
measurements?, as stipulated in the Report on the Future of Atmospheric
Chemistry Research to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.