* 1822251
* CI-EN: Collaborative Research: An Experimental Infrastructure and a Database of Real Faults to Foster Reproducibility in Software Engineering Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Michael Ernst, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 284,086.00

A core tenet of the scientific method is reproducibility of experiments. To
reproduce an empirical study in software engineering research, it is necessary
to use the same experimental subjects and equivalent experimental
infrastructure. Reproducibility in software engineering research is an important
topic, as is evident from the recent establishment of artifact evaluation
committees and from publication of papers with conflicting results. Prior
efforts to establish reusable artifacts for specific software engineering
domains are based on artificial data, are too small, are not uniformly
organized, and/or lack extensible infrastructure. This holds the software
engineering research community back, hampers reproducibility and comparability,
and reduces confidence in empirical results.

This project promotes reproducibility and comparability in software engineering
research, through a large-scale database of real software defects and a
standardized infrastructure that enables controlled experiments. It enhances an
existing prototype (Defects4J) by adding new artifacts, adding infrastructure
for labeling and experimenting with the artifacts, and improving usability.
Specifically, this project provides (1) the world's largest database of isolated
and annotated real software defects, (2) an extensible mining infrastructure
that supports automated defect mining and isolation, (3) an extensible
experimental infrastructure that also includes a statistics and replication
package component, and (4) tutorials and training materials for researchers and
educators.

This project advances software engineering research in three ways. (1) It
enables researchers to perform more realistic experiments, using real instead of
artificial defects. (2) It frees researchers from the burden of (re-)developing
an experimental infrastructure, allowing them to focus on research ideas. (3) It
fosters reproducibility and comparability by providing reusable artifacts and
data sets. Furthermore, this project advances software engineering education at
the undergraduate and graduate level: students can experiment with existing
techniques, reproduce published results, or quickly evaluate new ideas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.