* 1822480
* Collaborative Research: CSinParallel: Experiential Learning of Parallel and Distributed  Computing Through Sight, Sound, and Touch
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Richard Brown, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2023
* USD 362,958.00

Today's desktops, laptops, tablets, and smartphones all contain multiple core
processing units. Many people today also use cloud computing services for online
shopping, sharing photos, and other conveniences. Multicore computers and cloud
computing services are both examples of parallel and distributed computing.
Current computer science (CS) curriculum recommendations require every
undergraduate CS student to learn about parallel and distributed computing
(PDC). To help students master the complexities of PDC, this project will
develop software and curricular materials that combine two strategies for making
PDC topics tangible and accessible: inexpensive single-board computers and
teaching materials that use sight, sound, and touch. By using these teaching
materials to explore PDC topics, CS students will be able to see and hear
parallel and distributed computations and touch the hardware performing those
computations. The project team will also develop a free, interactive, online PDC
textbook and a collection of "unplugged" exercises for learning PDC concepts
without a computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop: 1) visual
software and teaching materials that use the investigators' Thread-Safe Graphics
Library so students can see parallel computations in real-time; 2) audial
software and teaching materials for a new Thread-Safe Audial Library so students
can hear abstract PDC concepts and computations; 3) manipulative learning
systems constructed with inexpensive multi-core single-board computers so PDC
systems are concrete and touchable; 4) "unplugged" activities that make PDC
algorithms accessible to broad audiences; and 5) a free, interactive PDC
textbook that will be deployed through a combination of client-side and cloud-
based systems. These materials will be accessible through the CSinParallel.org
website, a previously-funded NSF project (Awards 1226172; 1225739; 1225796).
Broader impacts will include strengthening and diversifying the U.S. cyber-
workforce, improving the PDC skills of CS instructors and students nationwide
including those at minority-serving institutions, and diversifying the community
of PDC educators through faculty-development workshops and new social-networking
features on CSinParallel.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.