* 1822816
* Collaborative Research: CSEdPad: Investigating and Scaffolding Students' Mental Models during Computer Programming Tasks to Improve Learning, Engagement, and Retention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vasile Rus, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,136.00

Computing skills, such as computer programming, are an integral part of many
disciplines, including the fields of science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM). Although such skills are in high-demand, and the number of aspiring
Computer Science (CS) students is encouraging, a large gap between the supply of
CS graduates and the demand persists because, for instance, college CS programs
suffer from high attrition rates in introductory CS courses. One reason for the
high attrition rates in introductory CS courses is the inherent complexity of CS
concepts and tasks. To help students better cope with the high level of
complexity, this project investigates a novel education technology, called
CSEdPad (CS Education Pad), meant to ease students' introduction to programming
during their early encounters with CS concepts and tasks. Moreover, the project
forges new frontiers in CS education through a research program that advances
our understanding of students' source code comprehension, learning, and
motivational processes. The CSEdPad project has the potential to transform how
students perceive computer science, increase their programming skills and self-
efficacy, and lead to increased retention rates. The result will be a win-win-
win situation for aspiring students, CS programs and their organizations, and
the overall economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSEdPad system design brings to
bear proven educational technologies and techniques to improve students' mental
model construction, learning, engagement, and retention in CS education. In
particular, the system targets source code comprehension, a critical skill for
both learners and professionals. It monitors and scaffolds source code
comprehension processes while students engage in a variety of code comprehension
tasks. Key approaches being explored include Animated Pedagogical Agents, self-
explanation, and the Open Social Learner Model. Outcome variables include
comprehension measures, learning gains, engagement level, retention, and self-
efficacy. Due to its interdisciplinary nature, the project will impact several
fields including Computer Science education, cognitive psychology, intelligent
tutoring systems, and artificial intelligence. Students participating in the
experiments will be selected from a diverse student body with respect to gender,
ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. An increase in recruitment and retention of
students from these populations will have far-reaching
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.