* 1822444
* Effectively Communicating Science Workshops (2018-2020); Saint Paul, Minnesota
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* John Sonsteng, Mitchell Hamline School of Law
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 499,506.00

This award support three annual "Effectively Communicating Science" Workshops on
the topics of weather modification and hydraulic fracking to help scientists in
communicating and teaching complex Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) concepts effectively and ethically.

The premise of the Workshops is that scientists must not be advocates for one
side or the other, but must be able to convey the quality and accuracy of their
work. There is a significant societal impact in helping scientists better
communicate and teach their expertise. There are thousands of scientists in
geoscience-related fields who are teaching, researching, publishing, and
communicating with colleagues in the STEM community and the public at large.
These scientists, and their work, will become increasingly important in future
scientific and public discussions on complex STEM concepts.

The project team will build on the success of previously-funded Workshops;
expand the number of participants who benefit from the Workshops; further refine
the Workshop materials and methodology; and implement and evaluate new materials
to reach more participants in other STEM disciplines. Each Workshop includes a
diverse group of approximately twenty-four science participants, an equal number
of law students (law students are not supported with NSF funds), and an
experienced cadre of practicing lawyers, judges, and legal educators.

The Workshops will include simulations where participants communicate and teach
complex STEM concepts to non-scientists in a range of challenging settings.
During the workshops, participants learn and practice the role of both
scientists and non-scientists to: 1) develop and build upon skills necessary to
effectively communicate their expertise; 2) understand the culture and
perspectives of non-scientists; and 3) develop a deeper understanding and
appreciation of the different challenges in communicating and teaching complex
STEM concepts to non-scientists. Workshop faculty provide individualized
feedback and coaching along the way.

The potential Broader Impacts involve creating a diverse cadre of scientists who
are better prepared to teach complex Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) concepts effectively and ethically. All Workshop alumni
become informal "Fellows" of the program which preserves, encourages, and
continues to build a network of scientists who have, in turn, developed informal
mentorships, collaborative relationships, and support of each other as they work
to better communicate and teach STEM concepts.

Participants in Workshops in previous years have included academic geoscientists
familiar to science programs across the wider NSF as well as participants from
industry and with ties to various government agencies. Weather modification and
hydraulic fracking are issues of increasing interest in science and policy
circles. Some previous scientist participants in the Workshop are now actively
engaged in research, application, and policy aspects in these fields and have
benefited from exposure to the culture of the law and regulation. It is the
Paleoclimate Program's judgement that exposure to such trans-cultural
experiences enhances the public discourse on knotty technical and policy issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.