* 1822025
* Physiological Adaptions for a Deadly Diet: Bioaccumulation Mechanisms of Defensive Chemicals in a Poison Frog
* BIO,IOS
* 12/06/2017,06/30/2020
* Lauren O'Connell, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 471,937.00

South American poison frogs are brightly colored and highly toxic, advertising
their unpalatabilily to potential predators. Poison frogs do not make these
toxins themselves, but instead acquire toxins from the ants and mites they
consume in their diet. Although scientists have long known that poison frogs
accumulate toxins from their diet, how the frogs accumulate the toxic chemicals
is unknown. The goal of this research is to understand how poison frogs
accumulate and move toxins from the gut through the liver and to the skin for
storage. Describing this process will increase our knowledge of how animals have
evolved special physiological mechanisms to acquire new resources from their
environment. As many of these toxins and other frog chemicals are small
molecules similar to many pharmaceutical drugs, understanding how poison frogs
transport these chemicals may yield more general insights about how this process
is different from other animals (including mammals), which cannot accumulate
these compounds. This research will provide learning experiences to all age
groups in both the United States and in Ecuador, where fieldwork on poison frogs
will be conducted. This award is co-funded by the NSF Office of International
Science and Engineering. Research will be incorporated into science K-12
classrooms through the Little Froggers School Program, which teaches children
about ecology and evolution. High school biology teachers will be involved in
fieldwork in Ecuador and will incorporate their research findings into their
science curriculum. This research will also involve training of undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students in chemistry, ecology, proteomics, and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poison frogs acquire chemical defenses from
dietary arthropods and have evolved specialized physiological adaptations for
toxin bioaccumulation and modification. Although sequestering defensive
chemicals is one component of well-studied ecological and evolutionary
relationships between arthropod prey and frog predators, the mechanisms used by
poison frogs to sequester and modify toxins are largely unknown. The overall
goal of this research is to understand the physiological mechanisms of toxin
bioaccumulation in poison frogs through three aims: 1) Identify proteins
involved in bioaccumulation of dietary toxins in the Little Devil frog using
thermal proteome profiling. 2) Determine toxin pharmacokinetics in distinct
genetic backgrounds of the Little Devil frog using captive feeding experiments
and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry across several time points. 3) Test
the hypothesis that different Little Devil frog populations have local
adaptations to efficiently accumulate chemicals found in local arthropod prey by
characterizing population differences in toxin-binding protein abundance using
tandem liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Together, this work will test
whether variation in toxin-binding protein levels is due to genetic differences
between populations, response to dietary toxin availability, or a combination of
both genetic and environmental contributions. This research will more broadly
add to the knowledge of how ecological resources shape animal physiology.