* 1822903
* R/V Kilo Moana Ship Operations CY18-23
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Alexander Shor, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 47,773,656.00

University of Hawaii seeks funds to continue operating R/V Kilo Moana, a
research vessel owned by the US Navy and operated by University of Hawaii as
part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) Academic
Research Fleet. This general purpose Ocean Class SWATH (Small Waterplane Area
Twin Hull) research vessel's home port is Honolulu, Hawaii, making it the only
ARF vessel based in the central North Pacific Ocean. This location provides
proximity to research sites in the central and western Pacific, with transit
costs more than a week less than ships based on the US West
coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A particular focus of research using R/V Kilo Moana
is the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) site at Station ALOHA, an important site
for study of biogeochemistry, oceanography, climate and plankton ecology and
microbiology processes in the oligotrophic subtropical North Pacific Ocean
(http://hahana.soest.hawaii.edu/hot/). The 30-year HOT program stands as a
landmark achievement in US ocean research, and Station ALOHA has been recognized
as a "Milestones in Microbiology Site" by the American Society for Microbiology.
Research at Ocean Station ALOHA was a key element in the award of support by NSF
for the Center for Microbial Ocean Research and Education (C-MORE) as a Science
and Technology Center of Excellence at UH, and in the selection of HOT co-
founder David Karl as a Fellow of the National Academy of Science. Research at
HOT has advanced our understanding of ocean nitrogen, carbon and phosphorus
cycles, and the extraordinary time-series of ocean pH from Station ALOHA (Dore,
et al, 2009 - http://www.pnas.org/content/106/30/12235.full) documents both the
seasonal variability and the decadal increase in upper ocean acidification here,
correlated closely to the well-known changes in CO2 in the atmosphere on nearby
Mauna Kea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R/V Kilo Moana provides access to the sea to any
US researcher funded by NSF or another US Federal agency. The stable SWATH
design provides access to researchers who would otherwise be unable to sail due
to seasickness, as vessel motion is much less than on a standard "mono-hull"
vessel. The ship carries state-of-the-art systems for seafloor mapping, and UH
is completing trials of Lu'ukai, UH's new 6000-meter ROV that will support deep
submergence science from Kilo Moana at Station ALOHA, in the Papahanaumokuakea
Marine National Monument (Northwest Hawaiian Islands), and throughout the
Pacific. Kilo Moana supports NSF Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU)
site and many other educational opportunities for students, funded both by
Federal agencies and SOEST&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.