* 1822157
* Phase 1 IUCRC at University of Connecticut:  Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Anson Ma, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 866,077.00

The Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials
(SHAP3D) will serve the diverse interests of industry, government, and academia
to address fundamental research challenges to meet the commercial needs of
industry for heterogeneous 3D printing of materials. Additive manufacturing (AM)
is viewed as a research area for global competitive advantage by industries such
as automotive, medical, aerospace, and consumer products. SHAP3D aims to
accelerate expansion and competitiveness of the domestic AM industry and its
customers by addressing two critical market needs: (1) the growth of AM into
more complex topologies, heterogeneous, and multi-functional applications that
command high margins commensurate with their increased performance, and (2) the
expansion of AM into lower margin industries via order-of-magnitude improvements
in throughput, material-per-performance cost reductions, and ease-of-use design
rules that enable SMEs and large companies to rapidly adopt advanced techniques.
The Center will disseminate its design, material and process research to
industrial members and practitioners, and the broader academic community. SHAP3D
will provide a technically trained workforce, with industrial perspective,
through the close collaboration between industry and academia. UCONN site's
educational activities include summer programs for high school students and
teachers, outreach to minority graduate students, and certificate programs in
additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SHAP3D research will be driven
by the performance requirements of industry, built from a technical foundation
of the fundamental structure-processing-property relationships associated with
the voxel-level control and integration of diverse processes and materials. The
enormous number of material combinations possible in these multi-material
systems multiplied by the parameter space represented within processes with
voxel-level state-variable control requires fundamental understanding of the
material (constituents, fillers, interfaces) properties, processing protocols,
and design rules to reliably predict the properties of products. Despite the
diverse materials and process combinations, they are unified by many underlying
physical principles related to melting, processing, and solidification, and
interfacial physics for heterogeneous additive printing of materials. The Center
will support members' choice of AM methods and research that encompasses
numerous additive printing methods, such as fused filament fabrication (FFF),
stereolithography/digital light processing (SLA/DLP), ink-jet, and other
additive approaches. UCONN will leverage its strengths and will focus on three
thrust areas: (i) automation, (ii) integrating polymers with non-polymers, and
(iii) bio-printing. The Center and UCONN-site will add significant value for
industry by addressing their vision to additively manufacture dissimilar
materials into heterogeneous, valued-added products imbued with previously
unattained biological, chemical, electrical, and mechanical
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.