* 1822813
* Cyberlearning: Sensei: High-Fidelity, Non-Invasive Classroom Sensing for Professional Development
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yuvraj Agarwal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 766,000.00

For years, research has shown that moving away from large lectures and
increasing student engagement and participation in classrooms significantly
improves learning. Unfortunately, professors lack quality professional
development opportunities to improve their instruction, and typically receive no
training on how to teach. This project is addressing the issue of college
professors' professional development through a cyberlearning innovation called
Sensei. Sensei has novel capabilities using sensors to capture, isolate, and
analyze voice and video that will provide near real time data on classroom
interactions such as the percent time students talk vs professors, the percent
time students talk to students, student engagement through facial expression
analysis, turn taking between students and professors, etc all of which involve
multimodal analysis of voice and video. The second component of this research is
the development of suggested actions to improve the professor's performance as a
teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, Sensei draws on technical and
socio-technical advances in sensing arrays, computer vision, intelligent
environments, and personal informatics, as well as frameworks of professional
development in higher education. In this project the researchers will 1) develop
the technologies needed to automatically sense and display feedback to
instructors, 2) deploy this system in-vivo to college instructors over semesters
of use in a series of design-based research studies, and interpret the results
to 3) iterate on our framework for the routine incorporation of classroom data
into professional development. This research is enabled by a cyber innovation in
which computing is expanded by the capabilities of state of the art multimodal
sensing approaches to achieve non-invasive sensing at classroom-scale. This
cyber innovation drives a learning innovation of delivering near-real-time data
on teaching practices in a combined reflection and training system by delivering
rapid and frequent feedback and instruction on good strategies in manageable
instructional units, that support a focus on student-centered beliefs. In turn,
the learning innovation advances understanding of how instructors learn in
technology-rich learning environments by exploring mechanisms in a framework of
professional development that would not be possible without this new
cyberlearning genre. In particular, through a series of design-based research
studies with instructors teaching STEM college courses, the researchers explore
ways in which Sensei a) can trigger critical self reflection, b) how this self-
reflection changes based on the features of the data viewed, c) how datadriven
goal-setting can foster self-efficacy in teaching, and d) how these effects vary
over time. All of the code will be developed as open source and, if successful,
Sensei could be generalized to include K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.