* 1822840
* STARSS: Small: Collaborative: Physical Design for Secure Split Manufacturing of ICs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jeyavijayan Rajendran, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 95,858.00

The trend of outsourcing semiconductor manufacturing to oversea foundries has
introduced several security vulnerabilities -- reverse engineering, malicious
circuit insertion, counterfeiting, and intellectual property piracy -- making
the semiconductor industry lose billions of dollars. Split manufacturing of
integrated circuits reduces vulnerabilities introduced by an untrusted foundry
by manufacturing only some of the layers at an untrusted high-end foundry and
the remaining layers at a trusted low-end foundry. An attacker in the untrusted
foundry has access only to an incomplete design, and therefore cannot easily
pirate or insert Trojans into it. However, split manufacturing alone is not
sufficiently secure, and na√Øve security enhancement techniques incur tremendous
power, area, and delay overhead. The goal of this research is to develop new
physical-design techniques that can ensure security through split manufacturing
and simultaneously minimize the overhead on performance, power and area of
semiconductor products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research lays the foundations
for a comprehensive set of physical design tools for security. Its expected
outcomes are: 1) Systematic techniques for modeling attacks that recover the
missing parts of the design from the information available to the attacker; 2)
Security metrics to assess the strength of integrated circuit designs by
measuring the difficulty for an attacker to reverse engineer the design in the
context of split manufacturing; 3) Active defenses through physical designs
techniques such as cell layout, placement perturbation and rerouting designs to
increase security; 4) Techniques to reduce the overhead of secure split
manufacturing and make the security enhancement seamlessly compatible with
existing design flows.