* 1822029
* Determining Teachers baseline practice and alignment prior to a systemic curriculum change
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Christopher Rakes, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 03/31/2020
* USD 199,993.00

The goal of this research is to document current teaching practices prior to the
systemic integration of the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in
Baltimore City Public schools. In this study, UMBC will collaborate with
Baltimore City Public Schools (City Schools) to collect and document teacher
classroom practices prior to the implementation of an extended professional
development model that targets pedagogical skills associated with the Next
Generation Science Standards. The broad objective of the project is to
characterize the benefits and limitations of utilizing controlled practice-
teaching as a key component of teacher professional development for integrating
NGSS aligned practices in middle school science classrooms. Success will be
measured by changes in teacher attitudes, enhancement of teacher pedagogical
skills and student learning gains. Sixty teachers, and over 4,500 students in
Baltimore City will be directly impacted through the professional development
and curriculum enactment efforts proposed. As a full partner in the project, the
City Schools' leadership will also learn what works, for whom, and under what
conditions in schools that are representative of their diverse district. Lessons
learned have the potential to inform the implementation of other new reform
initiatives within City Schools and beyond. Findings from the proposed research
have the potential to advance our understanding of innovative professional
development strategies and their impact on classroom practices and student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a national need of models
for high quality professional development that directly tie specific strategies
to classroom-based instructional changes and student learning outcomes. One
particular shift in classroom practice that is fundamental for the classroom
implementation of NGSS is scientific discourse and argumentation. One particular
strategy that has shown promise for supporting teachers' use of strategies
supporting argumentation is the use of controlled practice teaching. The
proposed study explicitly attempts to determine the impact of the controlled
practice-teaching using a quasi-experimental design. The research plan involves
middle science teachers being assigned to one of two experimental conditions (PD
including or excluding a controlled practice-teaching component) and then to
investigate potential differences among the two treatments and control
conditions related to changes in attitudes toward NGSS, classroom practices and
impact on student learning. The researcher hypothesizes that the inclusion of
control-practice teaching that is imbedded in a sustained professional
development program will promote the development of teacher pedagogical skills
aligned with NGSS more effectively than sustained professional development that
does not include a control-practice component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.