* 1822473
* RAPID:   Growth, Mortality, and Competition of Tropical Tree and Liana Species During an Extended Drought
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Stefan Schnitzer, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2019
* USD 141,037.00

A major goal in ecology is to understand why different types of plants and
animals occur where they do. This question is particularly important for
tropical forests because they are home to most of the world's species and are
essential for global carbon and nutrient cycles; they help control the
atmosphere of the entire planet. In a sense, tropical plants are the "lungs" of
the planet. Scientists are starting to think that drought is critically
important in determining how well tropical forests "breathe". However, the
evidence for this is still unclear. In this project, researchers will test how
different tropical plant species respond to an ongoing, multi-year drought in
Panama. Undergraduate and graduate students from the U.S. will participate in
the project and receive training in how to conduct scientific research.

In the context of a large-scale, long-term competition experiment, the PI will
examine the role of a multi-year drought to test two predictions: 1) The
strength of plant-plant competition increases with drought and varies with
species identity. 2) Plant species that capitalize on drought will share a suite
of plant hydraulic functional traits. By testing these predictions, the PI can
provide a functional-mechanistic explanation for how different species respond
to drought, and determine whether plant-plant competition intensifies the
effects of drought. By examining the responses of more than 100 plant species
and by relating those responses to a suite of functional characteristics for
each species, this project will identify the subset of species that will likely
increase or decrease with future droughts, as well as the dual effects of
drought and competition on tree species performance. Considering the importance
of both drought and competition to tropical forest diversity and function,
results will be fundamental to our understanding of tropical forest ecology and,
more generally, ecosystem health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.