* 1822173
* Phase II IUCRC Virginia Tech: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jung-Min Park, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 263,288.00

This project is Phase II of the Broadband Wireless Access Center (BWAC), a
multi-university multi-industry organization composed of five university sites
(the University of Arizona, Virginia Tech, University of Notre Dame, University
of Mississippi, and the Catholic University of America) and 20+ affiliates from
industry and government. In the past decade, wireless communications has made
major technological leaps. Wireless connectivity is pervasive in society,
leading to a shortage in wireless spectrum, network congestion, cyber-attacks
and personal security issues. The mission of BWAC is to address these challenges
and offer creative solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase II, BWAC will
expand its research footprint to address timely and industry-relevant challenges
in wireless communications and networking. The research thrusts of the Virginia
Tech site include spectrum sharing among heterogeneous wireless technologies,
security and privacy in emerging wireless technologies, and medium access
control for emerging wireless technologies. The researchers at Virginia Tech
will investigate challenging problems in the aforementioned thrusts with a
particular focus on problems that are critical to emerging technologies and
applications, such as autonomous or connected vehicles, Internet-of-Things
(IoT), automated spectrum management systems for federal-commercial spectrum
sharing, and unmanned aircraft systems (UAS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this collaborative industry-university center will have a direct effect on
public well-fare, enabling applications such as remote health, smart
transportation, Internet-of-Things (IoT), and high speed broadband access in
rural areas, to name a few. The partnering universities are committed to
broadening participation in BWAC's activities. This is achieved through REU site
programs, participation of under-represented minority students and faculty in
research projects, and involvement of multidisciplinary projects. With its
research, established partnerships, and long history of collaboration between
its members, BWAC will likely create intellectual property and spin-off
companies, leading to job growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead site,
University of Arizona manages the central BWAC project website at
www.bwac.arizona.edu. This website contains various information about the center
including the overview of the Center, mission, industry membership, projects,
meeting announcements and technical data. Center proprietary documents are
managed through secure internal pages requiring access credentials. The data
repository will be managed at the main website with links to the other
university sites. The repository will contain technical papers, project
descriptions, relevant software, testbed details, etc. The repository will be
maintained during the project and for an additional five years beyond its
termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.