* 1822310
* Workshop on Nonpositively Curved Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Kim Ruane, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2019
* USD 27,953.00

A workshop on Nonpositively Curved Groups will take place at Nachsholim in
Israel from May 23-29, 2018. The workshop will be organized by Kim Ruane (Tufts
University) in collaboration with Michah Sageev (Technion) and Daniel Wise
(McGill University). Infinite groups arise in the study of topological spaces
and in geometry. The fundamental group of a topological space is an algebraic
object associated to the space which essentially describes the number and
structure of any "holes" that are there. In geometry, we can study the
symmetries or rigid motions of the space - these also form a group. In Algebraic
Topology and in Geometric Group Theory, there is an exchange of information
whereby the algebra informs the topology or geometry and vice versa. In
mathematics, one often attempts to understand all objects of a particular type
as follows: first understand some fundamental concrete examples and then try to
show that a generic one of these objects is either the same as one of the
fundamental examples or only differs from it in a way that can be easily
described.

In the setting of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the Haken manifolds are those that
contain a 2-sided incompressible surface. In the 1960's, Haken showed that if
such a surface was there, then the original 3-manifold can be completely
described by gluing together finitely many thickened up surfaces in a particular
way. One of the biggest problems left open in 3-manifold topology after the
Geometrization Conjecture was proved by Perelman was the Virtual Haken
Conjecture. This basically asserts that any compact hyperbolic 3-manifold is
either Haken or is closely related to one that is Haken. This was recently shown
to be true by the award winning work of Ian Agol. A key piece of the puzzle was
to show that the fundamental group of any hyperbolic 3-manifold can almost be
realized as a group of symmetries of a nonpositively curved cube complex. This
is a theorem in Geometric Group Theory which has significant consequences in
geometry, topology and in group theory. The role of nonpositive curvature cannot
be overstated and so our workshop aims to explore this connection further. The
theme of the workshop is algebraic, geometric and analytical aspects of groups
that act on CAT(0) spaces by isometries. CAT(0) spaces were introduced by Gromov
in the 1980's as a generalization of Riemannian manifolds of nonpositive
sectional curvature and encompass a rich class of metric spaces that are not
manifolds. Classical examples of these spaces include symmetric spaces of non-
compact type, Euclidean and hyperbolic buildings, as well as finite Cartesian
products of these. Many examples admit proper group actions, and these groups
are often arithmetic in the classical case. Simplicial trees are the simplest
examples of CAT(0) spaces and the Bass-Serre theory of groups acting on trees is
an important early chapter of geometric group theory. CAT(0) cube complexes are
a natural high dimensional generalization of simplicial trees. These cube
complexes are now famous for their central role in the recent solution of the
Virtual Haken Conjecture for hyperbolic 3-manifolds mentioned above. The
workshop aims to bring together junior and senior people working in the area to
discuss further open problem concerning these metric spaces as well as competing
forms of non-metric combinatorial nonpositive curvature.

Workshop Website: http://cms-math.net.technion.ac.il/nonpositively-curved-
groups-on-the-mediterranean/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.