* 1822831
* Collaborative Research: Human-Technology Partnership Supporting Career Path Exploration and Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

The employment landscape is changing and expanding, creating uncertainty as
individuals navigate decisions regarding career preparation and continuing
education. This project develops technology to provide guidance for college
students to access high quality information and guidance within a large and
complex decision space. The approach includes integrating social support from
human career coaches or peers to increase confidence and motivation in the
problem solving and decision making process. The approach is fundamentally data
driven, built upon computational modeling while informed by theories of human
behavior, embodied within a novel machine learning paradigm termed Socially-
Sensitive Reinforcement Learning (SSRL). Based on this new paradigm, the system
will generate guidance to support students while being sensitive to student
needs and preferences so that there is a high probability that students will
accept and benefit from the guidance. The project targets nontraditional
students who embark upon or advance STEM career paths and aims to broaden
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to both
human-computer interaction and machine learning and takes an interdisciplinary
approach in its modeling of human interaction and sociotechnical support for
learning. It comprises a three pronged solution: (1) a computational modeling
strand proposes new computational paradigms that continually map best practices
and inform data-driven recommendations in support of effective decision making;
(2) a behavioral research strand provides insight through qualitative and
quantitative investigations, uncovering properties of recommendations as well as
recommenders that are associated with whether guidance is accepted and how it
influences success in career advancement; and (3) an intelligent coach
development strand embodies findings from the other two strands in the
CareerScope Intelligent Coach Agent (ICA), designed as a sociotechnical solution
leading to impact student decision making. The partnership with Western
Governor's University (WGU) facilitates transition of research into practice at
large scale through research with WGU students and deployment on the WGU
platform. While the research will be housed within a single platform, the
technical innovations will ultimately be integrated into a wide range of
platforms. The results of this project will broaden understanding of the
limitations and opportunities for ICAs to guide learners, particularly non-
traditional learners, through their career paths. These results can inform both
online and brick-and-mortar universities how to best coach/train/mentor students
or integrate peer/professional mentorship and peer interaction into current
advising practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.