* 1822556
* University of Minnesota Duluth R/V Blue Heron Ship Operations - CY 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Richard Ricketts, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,177,770.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a request for funds for Shipboard
Operations on the RV Blue Heron, an 86ft-research&lt;br/&gt;vessel that is owned
by the University of Minnesota and operated by the Large Lakes Observatory
(LLO).&lt;br/&gt;The award will cover the 2018 to 2022 field seasons, with
annual reports providing detailed information&lt;br/&gt;for the 2019 to 2022
seasons. During the 2018 calendar year, two NSF-peered reviewed funded projects
have requested&lt;br/&gt;the ship for 22 days:&lt;br/&gt;* Samuel Kelly (Univ.
of Minnesota): 9 days, 'Collaborative research: Coastal inertial-band
dynamics:&lt;br/&gt;separating forced and free responses in a natural
laboratory' (OCE/PO-1635560).&lt;br/&gt;* Tedy Ozersky (Univ. of Minnesota): 13
days, 'Ecosystem-scale responses of coupled C-N-P cycles to&lt;br/&gt;dramatic
shifts in benthic communities: the Upper Great Lakes'
(OCE/CO-1737368).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Work done aboard the R/V Blue Heron is in support of NSF funded
research programs. The intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merit for these research programs
is normally reviewed separately as part of a research proposal to
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;Kelly's project (OCE/PO-1635560) will quantify coastal kinetic-
energy pathways using realistic&lt;br/&gt;numerical simulations and extensive
direct observations of winds, turbulence and near-inertial waves&lt;br/&gt;along
lacustrine coastlines and rough coastal bathymetry. The project will improve our
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;near inertial motions throughout the coastal ocean
and in large lakes. Ozersky's project (OCE/CO-&lt;br/&gt;1737368) will study the
effects of invasive zebra and quagga mussels on the biology and chemistry of
the&lt;br/&gt;Great Lakes. The impact of benthic communities on carbon, nitrogen
and phosphorus in freshwater&lt;br/&gt;systems at the ecosystem level are
understudied and the mechanisms for how these nutrients are
affected&lt;br/&gt;by the introduction of dreissenid mussel invasives are
unclear. Ozersky's work will advance the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the ecology
of the Great Lakes and improve models of sediment-water
column&lt;br/&gt;interactions in aquatic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two projects will involve students in all aspects of the research. In addition
to facilitating research&lt;br/&gt;projects on the Great Lakes, the R/V Blue
Heron has numerous educational or 'class cruises' during the&lt;br/&gt;year (9
during 2017), enabling undergraduate and graduate students to participate in
work on a research&lt;br/&gt;vessel with equipment typically used on larger,
ocean going, research vessels. Beyond the class cruises,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
and graduate students participate on almost every RV Blue Heron cruise as
research&lt;br/&gt;assistants and, sometimes, chief scientist. Additionally, we
have hosted Chief Scientist Training cruises&lt;br/&gt;over the last four years,
during which early career scientists (senior graduate students, post-docs, and
1st&lt;br/&gt;year faculty) are educated about UNOLS and directly immersed in
planning and undertaking a scientific&lt;br/&gt;expedition. Dockside, we give
tours to University of Minnesota students, undergraduates from
other&lt;br/&gt;institutions and have established a dock-side monthly tour and
seminar series for members of the general&lt;br/&gt;public. Over the last five
years, approximately 4,500 members of the public have toured the vessel
as&lt;br/&gt;part of the seminar series.&lt;br/&gt;Regarding specific broader
impacts, Kelly's project (OCE/PO-1635560) will help improve
the&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of numerical models used in coastal settings.
Ozersky's project (OCE/CO-1737368) will&lt;br/&gt;create online content for
educators and the public, and will host outreach events at Duluth's Great
Lakes&lt;br/&gt;Aquarium, Milwaukee's Discovery World Science Museum and
Chicago's Shedd Aquarium and Navy&lt;br/&gt;Pier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.