* 1822144
* IUCRC Phase II at The Ohio State University:  Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center - Ma2JIC
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Boian Alexandrov, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,072,630.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) at The Ohio
State University, in conjunction with its partner universities, has successfully
established a platform to promote the synergistic collaboration between world
leading industrial and academic organizations to develop and apply fundamental
knowledge in the areas of materials joining and additive manufacturing, as well
as educating the next generation of leading and diverse scientists and engineers
in the area of advanced manufacturing. Materials joining and additive
manufacturing are critical enabling technologies essential to maintaining US
leadership in manufacturing and to expand its workforce. When combined, these
intrinsically related technologies impact virtually every segment of the US
industry. Ma2JIC develops R&amp;D projects that are critical to its industry and
government partners and provide students with scientific, engineering and
leadership skills that allow them to contribute to society. The center
scientific activities include conventional and advanced materials welding and
joining, metallic additive manufacturing, fundamental materials science,
integrated computational materials engineering, and fitness-for-
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ma2JIC's large, diverse and synergistic industrial
membership supports an interesting portfolio of research projects in four thrust
areas, namely 1) Material Performance, 2) Weldability/Manufacturability Testing
and Evaluation, 3) Modeling, 4) Additive Manufacturing and Processes Innovation.
The Materials Performance thrust area involves structural materials and
manufacturing processes related projects that have an important effect on the
mechanical, functional and environmental performance of the products, along with
focuses on extending the lifetime of critical components, cost reduction and
reliability. The Weldability/Manufactutability Testing and Evaluation thrust
area seeks to develop testing methods for validating new materials and processes
and support the agile development of new manufacturing-amenable materials. The
Modeling thrust area concentrates on the development and use of integrated
computational materials engineering (ICME) tools that expedite and reduce the
cost of joining and additive manufacturing technologies deployment to industry,
and rigorously consider the complex interactions between materials and
processes. The Additive Manufacturing (AM) and Process Innovation thrust area
addresses fundamental aspects of metal deposition processes and the development
of new joining/manufacturing processes that address the challenges of current
and future manufacturing demands involving advanced materials. The results of
the center R&amp;D projects significantly enhance applications of existing
materials as well as enables the use of advanced materials in a wide range of
demanding industrial applications, substantially benefiting the U.S. economy and
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.