* 1822932
* SPX: A Geometry and Architecture Agnostic Scalable Framework for N-body Problems with Oscillatory Potentials
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 674,492.00

Solutions to equations governing electromagnetics and acoustics have enabled
crucial technologies such as wireless communication devices, passive and active
RF-IDs, optical and high-speed devices, sonar and radar emitters in automobiles,
microwaves, medical diagnostic, and imaging tools, among several others.
Advances in these technologies rely on understanding the underlying wave physics
in sufficient detail. This task is increasingly challenging given the increase
in geometric complexity (smaller and more complex features) and wider range of
operating wave frequencies thereby requiring more precision and detail to
achieve optimal performance. The primary goal of this project is to develop a
geometry and architecture agnostic scalable framework for N-body problems with
oscillatory (wave) potentials through synergistic research in both numerical
methods and parallel algorithms. In collaboration with domain scientists, the
resulting framework's utility will be demonstrated via applications in
electromagnetic radiation, acoustic imaging, and nano-photonics. In order to
ensure the widest possible dissemination, outcomes of the proposed research
including technical reports, codes, user manuals and test cases will be made
available through a dedicated website. The interdisciplinary nature of this
project will provide ample opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate
students in leading edge research that cuts across applied mathematics, high
performance computing, and electrical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
enabler of the framework to be developed in this project is the Helmholtz
(oscillatory potential) variant of the Fast Multipole Method (FMM). While rapid
solution to Laplace equations using FMM has had a profound impact on several
disciplines, from gravitational physics to molecular dynamics to geophysics to
electrical engineering, the algorithms and software for the Helmholtz variant is
lagging far behind. Leveraging massive parallelism to enable the evaluation of
oscillatory potentials at unprecedented speed and scales forms the main
intellectual contributions of this project. The project approach is comprised of
the following objectives: (i) Development of an innovative adaptive numerical
scheme to overcome the computational and memory bottlenecks of FMM for
oscillatory potentials, (ii) Novel load balancing and auto-tuning algorithms
optimized to achieve high performance for a given problem instance and hardware
architecture, (iii) A hybrid parallel implementation that will leverage task
parallelism to reduce communication overheads and achieve portability on
emerging distributed memory architectures, and (iv) Evaluation of the
capabilities and performance of the resulting software through multi-scale
modeling of a diverse set of Helmholtz systems. The numerical methods and
parallel algorithms developed in this project will be implemented in an open-
source software called HFMM-XScale, which will be designed as a modular software
for easy integration into existing domain specific solvers. As such, HFMM-XScale
is anticipated to have a broad impact on the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.