* 1822768
* Teachers are the Learners: Providing Automated Feedback on Classroom Inter-Personal Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Erin Ottmar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 775,969.00

The quality of teacher-student interactions in school classrooms both predicts
and impacts students' learning outcomes. Training teachers to perceive subtle
interactions and interpersonal classroom dynamics more accurately can help them
to implement more effective interactions in their own classrooms. Contemporary
methods of training teachers to understand classroom interactions are based
mostly on watching classroom observation videos of other teachers, which have
been annotated for different dimensions ("positive climate", "teacher
sensitivity", etc.). Only rarely do teachers receive personalized feedback on
their own classroom interactions captured in video, and when they do, it is
sparse - typically one comment for every 15-minute video segment without any
details. This project will automate classroom observations using a system called
Automatic Classroom Observation Recognition neural Network (ACORN). This system
will integrate multimodal features consisting of facial expression, eye gaze,
auditory emotion, speech, and language in order to assess classroom dynamics
automatically. As a complement to ACORN, the researchers will also develop a
Classroom Observation Interactive Learning System (COILS) that trains teachers
to perceive classroom dynamics more precisely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACORN will
be trained and tested on two coded classroom observation datasets of hundreds of
pre-school and elementary school teachers across the USA. Moreover, based on the
ACORN prototype, COILS will be developed. COILS will then be evaluated in a
study on 50 pre-service teachers. The research questions are: 1) Will the
observation training with COILS help them perceive classroom interactions more
precisely? 2) How well will ACORN perform vs human coders? and 3) How well can
the machine learned automated subjective activity perform in the new domain of
classroom dynamics? The researchers will also explore different machine learning
computational architectures that can utilize modest-sized data sets to
accurately learn from multi-modal data. If successful, both ACORN and COILS can
be extended from pre-service teachers to train in-service teachers in
understanding classroom dynamics to improve their
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.