* 1822094
* Phase II IUCRC George Mason University: Center for Cybersecurity Analytics and Automation CCAA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Sushil Jajodia, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 649,120.00

Cyber warfare has become a major threat to national security, and the increasing
sophistication of cyber attacks calls for innovative analytical and automation
capabilities to face advanced, persistent, and evolving adversaries. The Center
for Cybersecurity Analytics and Automation (CCAA) will develop a range of such
new capabilities through a collaborative and multidisciplinary approach
involving three university sites and a broad range of industry and government
sponsors. At the core of the Center's strategy is the goal to advance the state
of art in sense-making, decision making, and resilience in order to enable
systems to sustain cyber missions against sophisticated attacks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CCAA brings together experts in cybersecurity, formal
modeling, and data-driven analytics to advance cyber defense on multiple fronts,
namely, (a) robust and scalable sense-making for dynamic and predictive cyber
analytics using large-scale heterogeneous cyber artifacts, (b) adaptive and
autonomic decision-making for creating defense strategies and courses of action
that are provably correct and operationally safe using mission requirements,
security policies, guidelines, and system configurations, and (c) making
resilience and agility inherent properties of cyber and cyber physical systems
to enable real-time deterrence, deception, and mitigation. The George Mason
University site will provide expertise in attack modeling, software security,
and stochastic optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's research will
advance the state of the art in cyber defense against the most sophisticated
threats. Through an increased focus on technology transfer, CCAA will enable
organizations to deploy new tools and analytical capabilities to effectively and
efficiently secure their systems against advanced threats capable of
circumventing traditional defenses. Students at all levels will be actively
involved in the research and will have ample opportunities to engage with
industry sponsors and other university sites trough internships and extended
cross-site visits. Participation of undergraduate and high school students,
female students, and underrepresented minorities will also be actively promoted.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center will create and maintain a center-wide
repository to make research products such as datasets, code, tools, experimental
results, and draft manuscripts available to all of the Center's members. The
repository will be accessible through the Center's website (http://www.ccaa-
nsf.org/ ). Consistent with the Center's bylaws and with any applicable
requirements of individual universities or NSF, several of these products will
be made available to the broader research and industry communities. The
repository will be actively maintained during the entire duration of the Phase
II effort, and it will remain online beyond the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.