* 1822306
* 44th Northeast Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Kenneth Barbee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2019
* USD 19,048.00

This award supports the 44th Northeast Bioengineering Conference, a regional
conference that provides an opportunity to undergraduate and graduate student
researchers in the field of biomedical engineering to present their research to
a broad audience. The conference has particular impact because it allows
students who do not have the funding to attend a national scientific meeting to
present their work to fellow students, regional faculty, and representatives
from industry. The conference will be held on March 28-30, 2018, at Drexel
University. The award primarily supports a reduction in student registration
fees for all attendees, allowing the conference to be even more affordable. The
ability to participate in conferences such as this encourages students to pursue
graduate school and pursue an academic career.

The conference expects to attract about 400 attendees from around the Northeast
region of the United States, with 60 - 75% expected to be students. Over 60% of
the platform presentations will be given by trainees, in addition to 150 poster
presentations. In addition to scientific presentations, sessions on career
development in biomedical engineering will be included to specifically support
professional development of the trainees. Key Note and Plenary speakers will be
used to highlight cutting edge areas of research in both academia and industry.
Themes of the presentations will include: Biomedical Engineering
Entrepreneurship; Immunoengineering; Pediatric Bioengineering; Neuroengineering;
and Mechanobiology.