* 1822414
* Building Capacity for Interdisciplinary Quantitative Reasoning Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Andrea Young, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 10/31/2022
* USD 297,715.00

Developing student?s quantitative reasoning skills is essential for training
numerically literate citizens who can flourish in an increasingly data-driven
world. A growing body of literature suggests that including quantitative
reasoning courses in different disciplines throughout a curriculum may help
students to better learn quantitative reasoning. As a part of the Catalyst
general education curriculum at Ripon College, all first-year students enroll in
Catalyst 120: Quantitative Reasoning. By design, this course has a common set of
learning outcomes and assignments, but is taught by faculty in different
disciplines, including Biology, Theatre, Psychology, and Communication. This
project aims to further examine the effectiveness of a multidisciplinary
approach to teaching quantitative reasoning. Specifically, the project will
examine the role of specific faculty professional development strategies for
improving the ability of faculty at a small liberal arts college to teach
quantitative reasoning. Project leaders will corporate professional development
activities for faculty members and study the effectiveness of these activities
for helping faculty teach quantitative reasoning. Thus, the project may develop
an evidence-based model that other institutions could use to implement robust
quantitative reasoning across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
designed to develop and study the effectiveness of an interdisciplinary approach
to teaching quantitative reasoning as well as the impact of increasing
institutional capacity to provide this instruction through communities of
practice. During the first two years, project leaders will initiate a series of
Faculty Learning Communities to further develop faculty expertise in teaching
quantitative reasoning using evidence-based pedagogies, to create innovative
quantitative reasoning materials in a variety of disciplines, and to put these
materials into practice in their Catalyst curriculum. In the third year, the
project team will work with several faculty members in non-quantitative
disciplines to create quantitatively focused courses within their fields. A
validated quantitative reasoning instrument will be used to measure student
learning gains, and members of the project team will create a new tool for
evaluating interdisciplinary quantitative skills. The project team expects that
comprehensive institutional change will result from this project and will study
this change through faculty surveys, interviews, and review of curricular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.