* 1822197
* Acquisition of an SEM-CL Detector for Research and Education in Geology and Geological Engineering at the Colorado School of Mines
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Katharina Pfaff, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 81,287.00

A New State-Of-The-Art Cathodoluminescence Imaging System for Colorado School of
Mines

This National Science Foundation grant supports the purchase of a state-of-the-
art cathodoluminescence detector to be attached to an existing scanning electron
microscope at the Department of Geology and Geological Engineering of the
Colorado School of Mines. The new detector creates color images when electrons
are focused on materials at very small scale. It will be used in economic
geology, tectonics, oil and gas reservoir studies, and environmental
geochemistry. Some examples include minerals in precious metal deposits to
understand ore formation and imaging minerals to determine geological ages. The
new detector will also be used in teaching undergraduate and graduate students
at Colorado School of Mines. It will also benefit researchers and students at
four other Colorado universities and colleges. The instrument will be available
to staff and citizen scientists to enhance museum exhibits at Colorado School of
Mines Geology Museum and the Denver Museum of Nature and Science.

This NSF Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art cathodoluminescence detector to
be attached to a recently commissioned field-emission scanning electron
microscope at the Department of Geology and Geological Engineering of the
Colorado School of Mines. The new detector will allow high-resolution and high-
sensitivity imaging of the luminescence of natural and synthetic materials from
the nanometer to centimeter scale. The new analytical capabilities will be
primarily used in pure and applied research in economic geology, tectonics,
reservoir characterization, and environmental geochemistry. Emphasis will be
placed on the development of new workflows for correlative microscopy allowing
the study of growth and alteration textures in minerals. Applications will
include the visualization of the distribution of intrinsic and extrinsic defects
in quartz at the micro- to nanoscales to better understand how temperature,
pressure, and salinity changes in hydrothermal fluids forming base and precious
metal deposits result in quartz precipitation and dissolution. Imaging with the
new detector will be employed to distinguish compositional and potential age
domains in zircons from sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks prior to
U-Pb geochronological analysis, allowing selection of the most suitable
geochronology method and to identify locations for in-situ dating in the case of
complexly zoned zircon crystals. The new detector will also be used as a
teaching resource to further the learning experience of undergraduate and
graduate students at Colorado School of Mines. The new analytical capabilities
will complement electron beam instrumentation available elsewhere in the Rocky
Mountain Region, benefiting researchers and educators at four other Colorado
universities and colleges. The instrumentation will be made available to staff
and citizen scientists to image luminescent minerals to enhance museum exhibits
at Colorado School of Mines Geology Museum and the Denver Museum of Nature and
Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.