* 1822046
* Workshop for Chairs of STEM Departments: Improving Undergraduate STEM Teaching and Learning in Research Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Tobin Smith, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,031.00

Since 2011, the Association of American Universities (AAU), a coalition of 62
distinguished research universities in the United States and Canada, has engaged
in a major initiative to improve the quality of undergraduate STEM education at
AAU member universities. It has focused on improving STEM education by
encouraging faculty members to use teaching methods that have been proven to be
effective. The academic departments of these universities are central to making
improvements in undergraduate teaching and learning, because the culture and
norms within departments greatly influence how courses are taught. The chairs of
the STEM departments benefit from guidance about how to cultivate departmental
cultures that value and encourage the use of evidence-based teaching practices,
and how to reward faculty members for innovative teaching efforts. To provide
such guidance, this project will conduct a two-day workshop in October 2018 for
STEM department chairs from AAU universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will be designed to assist department chairs in identifying challenges and
practical solutions related to implementing long-lasting teaching improvements.
Participants will learn about successful strategies that have been used to
facilitate department-wide reform of undergraduate STEM teaching and learning.
The information and discussions will be designed to prompt the chairs to think
more deeply about their roles in encouraging and implementing reform efforts in
their departments and across their campuses. Subsequent actions of the chairs in
their departments has the potential to improve undergraduate STEM teaching and
learning on the AAU member campuses and develop visible models for other
institutions. The findings and conclusions from the workshop will be widely
shared with other department chairs, faculty members, and senior leaders at AAU
institutions, as well as the broader higher education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.