* 1822477
* Leverage Augmented Reality for Safety Education in the Logistics Industry
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Karen Chen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 749,542.00

The project will design and research an immersive and personalized education
approach by leveraging augmented reality (AR) to support workers' understanding
of risk factors associated with their work, and encourage workers to perform
tasks using appropriate body motion. The project will develop an AR-assisted
posture training procedure for minimizing biomechanical exposures on the low
back and the shoulder, as injuries of those two body regions are the most common
in logistics industry. The research will expand knowledge in AR-assisted
education and training in terms of work safety promotion, motor adaptation, and
transfer of learning. The AR infrastructure can also used to provide just-in-
time work procedure training and has potential applications in high school and
college courses in physics and biomechanics. The project will advance research
in to motor learning, such as sports training and tele-rehabilitation. The
overall outcome will advance human-technology system in body motion education
and learning science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will reconstruct a
virtual instructor demonstrating the recommended and non-recommended body
motions that are commonly seen in material handling. AR, depth sensing, and
biomechanical modeling will be integrated to deliver knowledge on work-related
biomechanical exposures on joints and muscles. Workers will be able to observe
the virtual instructor overlaid on the actual physical workplace from various
view angles through AR goggles. The system will be designed to enhance workers'
understanding of work-related risks via visualization of abstract biomechanical
exposures. Biomechanical exposures, such as forces exerted on the joints and the
muscles at work, will be visually integrated with the virtual instructor. The
innovative geometric representation of biomechanical exposures will assist
learners in visualizing abstract mechanics quantities. The AR user interface and
the biomechanical visualization scheme will be iteratively refined through a
series of usability evaluations and operational tests to ensure worker's
understanding of the risk in musculo-skeletal disorder. The research will also
examine worker learning and transfer of learning in AR-assisted safety education
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.