* 1822377
* 2018 Salt and Water Stress of Plants GRC: Abiotic Stress and the future of Agriculture Conference: June 3 - June 8, 2018 in Waterville Valley, Waterville Valley, NH
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Jose Dinneny, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 14,800.00

Global changes due to increasing temperatures and greater variation in climate
and precipitation patterns will have major (negative) impacts on food, fuel and
fiber production in the United States and globally. Water deficit and salinity
are two of the most important environmental stresses affecting agricultural
systems, with water deficit from drought being the leading cause of loss in
agricultural productivity. The 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Salt and Water
Stress in Plants, which takes place June 2 - 8 in Waterville Valley, NH, USA,
will bring together specialists from across the globe who study how plants
survive droughts, floods, and salinity stress. The emphasis of the conference is
to foster translation of in-depth knowledge of plant stress tolerance mechanisms
into agricultural applications. The participants and speakers are at the
forefront of the integration of basic knowledge and new technology with
agriculture to alleviate the negative impacts of climate change on food
production. The Salt and Water Stress of Plants Gordon Research Conference has a
reputation for allowing participants to share their work and ideas prior to
publication, thus stimulating innovation and more rapid transfer of knowledge
into agricultural practice. The conference is also renowned for bringing
together scientists from all parts of the globe and highlighting
female/underrepresented presenters. A pre-conference seminar will engage
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, ensuring that our future
scientists are keenly aware of the issues facing world food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Salt
&amp; Water Stress in Plants provides a biennial opportunity for effective
exchange of unpublished information and ideas between molecular biologists,
physiologists, breeders, policy-makers and industrial representatives from all
over the world. It facilitates interactions that are essential for translation
of laboratory discoveries to field trials. The 2018 theme will emphasize
translating our understanding of abiotic stress responses and tolerance of
plants to practical agricultural advances. Planned activities will foster
interactions among a diversity of scientists working in plant biology and
agriculture on the urgent challenge of plant abiotic stress. A 1.5 day Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) designed specifically for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers will precede the main program. This award will support
participants in both events, with a commitment to promoting gender balance and
enhancing participation of individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.