* 1822457
* The 2018 Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2019
* David Dumas, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,000.00

The 16th annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference is to be held
at The University of Illinois at Chicago on April 7-8, 2018. It is specifically
aimed at graduate students, and many of the talks will be delivered by student
participants. The conference will represent a large body of students in
different stages of their Ph.D., and will provide a venue for students from a
diverse collection of institutions and geographic regions to come together and
interact. It aims to create a highly collaborative environment that will
stimulate research and foster lasting connections between researchers at
particularly crucial moments early in their careers. The conference will also
provide a venue for students to hear about cutting edge research from
established senior leaders and early career faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal goal for this conference is to give graduate students the opportunity
to present their research. Particular attention will be paid to ensure that a
broad collection of topics are represented, so that rising generations of
mathematicians are aware of the current frontiers of geometry and topology. To
this end, there will also be talks by distinguished plenary speakers Ian Agol
(University of California, Berkeley), Natasa Sesum (Rutgers University), and
Shmuel Weinberger (University of Chicago), and early career faculty speakers
Justin Curry (University at Albany, SUNY), Priyam Patel (University of
California, Santa Barbara), Andrew Sanders (Heidelberg University), Jenya Sapir
(Binghamton University), and Caglar Uyanik (Vanderbilt University). These
presentations will cover a range of topics in topology and geometry including
topological data analysis, homotopy theory, low dimensional topology, geometric
group theory, geometric analysis, geometric topology, and dynamics. The talks
provide opportunities for early career researchers to personally engage with
experts outside of their home university, expanding and consolidating the
network of mathematical scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference website
is: https://www.math.uic.edu/gstgc2018/