* 1822190
* IUCRC Phase II: University at Buffalo: Center for Identification Technology Research CITeR
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Venugopal Govindaraju, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 630,806.00

The Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) is an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center focused on developing identity
systems. A provable and verifiable identity is a necessity in modern society and
the foundation for reliable identity systems. A confirmed identity allows one to
work, maintain a bank account, and drive a car. It also facilitates a safe
society, allowing authorities to identify bad actors, such as suspected
terrorists on no-fly lists. In partnership with government and industry
stakeholders, CITeR advances the state of the art in human identification
capabilities through coordinated university research related to
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CITeR is focused on developing technologies for
providing, confirming, and determining identity. CITeR's core research focuses
on identity systems resting on firm pillars of trust, privacy, security, and
reliability. The focus of the SUNY University at Buffalo (UB) site is on
innovative applications of traditional, soft and behavioral biometrics,
biometric template security, multi-modality fusion, behavioral biometrics,
emerging biometrics (brain, heart, cognitive etc.), and novel biometric test
phantoms, and this complements the strengths of the other university sites.
CITeR affiliates will also benefit from being able to benchmark and assess the
effectiveness of various biometric technologies in real
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UB site will further CITeR's objective to
serve as a comprehensive academic center serving the growing identification
technology research and outreach needs of the public and private sectors. Led by
faculty, UB students, graduate and undergraduate, will actively engage in STEM
outreach programs that use biometrics research as a draw to pique the interest
of K-12 students under the BEAM (Buffalo Area Engineering Awareness for
Minorities) program. UB faculty will work with the NSF-AGEP (The Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate) program whose goal is to increase the
number of underrepresented students and postdocs preparing for faculty
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CITeR is committed to data sharing and intends to
maintain a project repository well beyond the current duration of the grant.
Information regarding all data sets generated from CITeR projects will be
archived at the single center-wide repository at
https://citer.clarkson.edu/biometric-dataset-collections/ Project results such
as publications and tools will be disseminated through the center portal
maintained at the lead site https://citer.clarkson.edu/ Open sourced code will
be disseminated through github repositories for individual projects and links
will be shared through the central CITeR portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.