* 1822015
* Tropical/Extratropical Interaction Mechanisms at the Intraseasonal Time Scale
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Steven Feldstein, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 613,489.00

This project has the potential to lead to an improvement of the subseasonal (2-6
week) probabilistic weather forecasts of temperature and precipitation for North
America. Support for this outcome is based upon the previous research by the
team on the influence of tropical weather on mid-latitude weather, which has
contributed to the development of the probabilistic subseasonal weather forecast
method used by NOAA. This project will also train a graduate student to become
an independent scientist. Besides participating in the usual activities of
publishing papers and giving conference presentations, the team will work with
personnel at Penn State's Center for Science and the Schools to conduct a five-
day workshop on subseasonal to seasonal (S2S) prediction for middle and high
school teachers from low socioeconomic and racially diverse urban and rural
Pennsylvania school districts that serve populations highly underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and math fields. The teachers will attend
lectures on the techniques used for S2S forecasting, and participate in relevant
inquiry-based activities. The team will provide follow-up support as the
teachers implement the workshop activities in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the tropics, the dominant pattern on the
intraseasonal time scale, the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), is characterized
by organized precipitation systems that propagate eastward encircling the
tropics on a timescale of 30-70 days. The importance of the MJO for forecasting
is evidenced by the use of the state of the MJO in week-3 and week-4
probabilistic forecasts by the NOAA/Climate Prediction Center. Although much
progress has been made during the past three decades toward understanding how
tropical convective heating influences the weather in mid-latitudes, there are
still important unaddressed questions. This project will focus on questions that
have not yet been investigated or have received little previous attention:
(1)investigation of how Rossby waves are excited by MJO-related convection in
the tropics propagate pole-ward,and impact weather in the mid-latitudes; (2)
variation in the horizontal and vertical structure of the latent heat released
in convections within the MJO event, and its impact in a key region, the central
subtropical North Pacific; and (3) role of inertio-gravity waves excited by MJO-
related convections in connecting tropical convections to weather over large
distances across the Earth, e.g., teleconnection patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will also address the following questions: Why
does the high latitude component within teleconnection patterns persist for a
much longer time period than do their lower latitude counterparts? What is the
impact of inertio-gravity waves excited by the MJO on mid-latitude weather? The
topic is particularly important because active teleconnection patterns have a
large influence on the weather up to 6 weeks later. The approach includes the
use of observational datasets and computer model calculations. The computer
model will be used to isolate and to better understand the key physical
processes that are responsible for the tropical-extratropical
teleconnections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.