* 1822787
* Uncertainty and Youth Well-being
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Caitlin Patler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 449,999.00

This study expands scientific understanding of how an increase in uncertainty
affects youth well-being. In a community in which some youth experience
uncertainty and others do not, there is an opportunity to analyze whether, how,
and to what extent changes in uncertainty affect youth. The findings from this
study will inform discussions at the federal, state, and local levels about ways
to increase well-being among youth, who face varying levels of uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use multiple waves of representative
California statewide data collected via the California Health Interview Survey
from 2007-2016 (n=238,000), with subsequent years added as they are released.
The project will estimate the impact of uncertainty by comparing youth who are
and are not subject to uncertainty. It will follow both groups of youth
longitudinally. Study outcomes include employment status, educational enrollment
and attainment, and various measures of physical and psychological well-being.
In addition, the project will examine spillover effects to the broader
community. To further analyze findings, the project will produce an original
longitudinal survey and in-depth interview study of 502 young people from the
community in California. The project will compare key outcomes of these youth
over the period between 2014 and 2020, thus allowing causal inferences regarding
the impact of earlier events on later outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.