* 1822246
* Elucidating Multiparametric Nanoparticle - Intestinal Membrane Interactions in an In Vitro Model System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Bjoern Reinhard, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2021
* USD 325,038.00

Nanotechnology is the science and engineering discipline that utilizes the size-
dependent properties of materials with dimensions of a few billionths of a meter
to enhance their optical, electrical and chemical properties. The elementary
building blocks of this discipline, engineered nanomaterials, are poised to find
broad use in consumer products, but they have a potential for exposure to
animals and humans. Since the interactions of nanomaterials with living
organisms are insufficiently understood, there is a need for the development of
appropriate assays that help to understand the interactions of engineered
nanomaterials with living systems and identify potential risks. The main goals
of this proposal are to implement an experimental model that improves the
current knowledge of how ingested nanomaterials interact with the small
intestine and to clarify what role general nanomaterial properties, such as
size, shape and surface charge have in these interactions. The knowledge
obtained in this project will eventually help minimize the possible adverse
health impacts of ingested nanoparticles. In addition to its scientific mission,
the project also has clear education and outreach components. The project forms
the basis for at least one PhD thesis in the area of nanotechnology.
Furthermore, workshops and seminars will be developed that introduce college and
high school students as well as interested teachers to the subject matter of the
proposal. The course material will be disseminated through the world-wide-web
and educate the public about nanotechnology in consumer products and provide a
scientific basis for the evaluation of potential health risks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The ultrafine size of nanoparticles is associated with a large
surface-to-volume ratio, which could lead to toxic interactions with cellular
systems. Although it is accepted that interactions between human intestinal
cells and engineered nanomaterials depend on multiple material properties, it is
still not clear if and how individual material properties synergistically
enhance their cytotoxic effects. This proposal will address this important
question on two levels of investigation. A systematic screening of membrane
damage and transmembrane transport for an extended library of well characterized
gold nanoparticles, will make it possible to correlate nanoparticle morphology,
size and surface charge with adverse effects on the intestinal membrane. In a
second step, novel imaging methods, such as plasmon coupling microscopy, will be
applied to monitor and image nanoparticle-cell interactions, intracellular
nanoparticle distributions, and nanoparticle transmembrane transport.
Electromagnetic interactions between the gold nanoparticles make it possible to
not only track individual nanoparticles in the intestinal membrane, but also to
monitor their association into larger units as function of location and time.
This gain in information content, when combined with conventional fluorescence
microscopy, will elucidate the mechanisms underlying the interactions between
nanoparticles and the intestinal membrane for characteristic nanoparticle size,
shape, and surface charge combinations. Overall, the proposed experiments will
provide the quantitative foundation for developing accurate computational models
for evaluating the effects of nanoparticles on intestinal
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.