* 1822297
* Conference proposal:  2018 Joint Conference of the Society for Economic Botany and Society of Ethnobiology.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Eve Emshwiller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,986.00

This award provides partial support for a combined annual meeting of the Society
for Economic Botany and the Society of Ethnobiology, held at the University of
Wisconsin, Madison. The Society for Economic Botany fosters and encourages
scientific research, education, and related activities on the past, present, and
future uses of plants, and the relationship between plants and people. The
Society of Ethnobiology promotes the understanding of past and present
relationships between humans and their biological worlds. The theme of the 2018
conference will be Food Security, Sovereignty, & Traditional Knowledge. Bringing
these two groups together around this theme will permit the exchange of
information and opportunities for resolution of differences that may exist
between Western scientific and indigenous knowledge perspectives and create new
interdisciplinary collaborations for future research. This effort is important
because having access to indigenous knowledge is critical for ensuring the
development of future sustainable foods, pharmaceuticals, and other resources
that will benefit all Americans. To ensure future food and plant security,
researchers from universities, governmental, and non-governmental organizations
are working to conserve seeds of crops in germplasm banks. At the same time,
indigenous nations are working to protect their food, water, and seeds.
Inadequate communication between these two groups risks creating unnecessary
barriers and the loss of important information. The conference will provide the
opportunity for scholars, practitioners, and advocates to share their
understandings of issues that are critical to the wellbeing and survival of
people around the world. Conference outcomes will also further social science
theories of how different cognitive understanding of the natural world lead to
critical differences in human behavior in relation to nature. Funds will support
the participation of invited speakers at the plenary symposium, professional
development of students through travel scholarships and a mentoring lunch, and
broadened participation of underrepresented groups in social and biological
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.