* 1822007
* EAGER: Automated Watermark and Moldmate Identification
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Charles Johnson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Identification of watermarks in antique (pre-1750) laid paper is a vital
forensic in determining the date and origin of its production. For artworks on
paper, watermarks are a key element in dating and authentication. Classifying
and distinguishing watermarks is a difficult, time-consuming task even for paper
analysis experts. Recent research has shown that a computer-based decision tree
can reduce dramatically the time expended in the task of watermark
identification and the concomitant identification of sheets of paper made on the
same mold, while at the same time increasing the confidence in the result. The
application of digital image processing to this task is one example of the new
field of computational art history, which has exploded over the past decade.
Through this project, automation using digital image processing can scale up the
task of watermark and moldmate identification to handle the universe of the
hundreds of individual watermarks in the papers of prints and drawings of
Rembrandt and his pupils and allow expansion of this identification beyond these
artworks in major museums to the thousands in smaller museums and private
collections. This is expected to energize the expansion of this valuable
forensic to the thousands of watermarks in laid paper used in artworks on paper
by other pre-1750 artists. Advances in computational art history stemming from
this project will offer a path for the general population, which is growing
quite comfortable with the expansion of computer usage in everyday life, to
engage with art in a new and appealing way. Art history is one subfield within
cultural heritage that has delayed the longest in joining the emergence of the
digital science and humanities. The success of this project will be a major
enabler for further trans-disciplinary activities between the humanities and the
sciences, thereby decreasing the separation of their two cultures, which is
vital as the digitization of all aspects of daily life gains dominance at a
scorching pace.

This project continues the pioneering efforts in the new field of computational
art history that is broadening acceptance of digital image processing as a vital
tool in art history research as it tremendously expands the intellectual reach
of art historians. As the first tools are developed in this nascent field and
more scientists and engineers are drawn to the challenges of these problems, the
specific needs of art historians will undoubtedly reveal new tasks requiring
advances in the underlying science of digital image processing. This connection
between computation and the visual humanities also offers a powerful link to
combat the widening gulf in education at all levels between engineering science
and the humanities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.