* 1822920
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Distributed Database Management with Logical Leases and Hardware Transactional Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Srini Devadas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Database systems are the foundation of critical applications that maintain large
amounts of data. Since single-processor performance plateaued a decade ago,
increasing the number of processors or servers has become the only viable way of
improving performance in distributed database management systems. Scalability is
a daunting challenge in these systems due to the complex coordination among the
large number of parallel tasks---a problem that this project seeks to solve.
Most existing database systems determine the order among parallel tasks using
conventional physical time. These systems require managing distributed locks,
which leads to blocking and computation overhead. Other systems use logical
time, which can be thought of as position in an order, to eliminate locking, but
require centralized generation of the ordering, which is a serious scalability
bottleneck as core count increases. This project breaks the abstraction of
physical time and replaces it with a new definition of time that incorporates
both logical and physical aspects. "Physiological" time, termed physiological
time for ease of pronunciation, uses logical timestamps to order events and then
breaks ties using physical time. This enables novel dependency-avoiding
approaches to improving system performance and scalability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies physiological time to three
components in a distributed database system. (1) At hardware level, a new
hardware transaction memory (HTM) mechanism will be built, which allows more
effective data movement in multi-core processors' caches. (2) A new distributed
concurrency control protocol will be designed and implemented to coordinate
large numbers of parallel tasks in a distributed database. (3) An efficient
parallel indexing data structure will be proposed for both multi-core and
distributed databases. All three parts of the project will be prototyped and
deployed in hardware/software testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.