* 1822055
* Phase I IUCRC Auburn University: Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking (FiWIN) Center for Heterogeneous Mobile Data Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thaddeus Roppel, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,994.00

The Fiber-Wireless Integration and Networking (FiWIN) Center for Heterogeneous
Mobile Data Communications is an NSF Industry &amp; University Cooperative
Research Program (I/UCRC) center led by Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT).
Based on recognized research leadership and accumulated expertise in integrated
fiber-wireless access technologies, FiWIN is favorably positioned to explore
emerging access network architectures, functional designs of network elements,
and optimizing system interfaces and operations for next generation mobile
communication systems. FiWIN has successfully completed two years in operation,
while this project is to establish a new addition of Auburn University (AU) as a
Member Site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of AU broadens both technical
expertise and, inevitably, new outcomes that can only be attributed to the
"synergy" between GIT and AU. The FiWIN Center will continue to grow in
visionary leadership, dedicated and well-rounded students, and the expanded
interdisciplinary expertise. AU will contribute supplementary expertise focusing
on: i) Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit (RFIC) design and future generation
wireless systems, ii) innovative wireless applications such as unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAV), and iii) the AU Radio-frequency identification (RFID) Laboratory
will contribute to Internet of Things (IoT) research with applications to
storage, retail, and supply chain management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is part of a broad and ambitious collaborative effort between academia and
industry to develop novel techniques to harvest the potential of heterogeneous
mobile data communications enabled by the fifth generation wireless. It also
strives to broaden participation from underrepresented groups. Graduate students
will gain first-hand experience with industrial research projects. The outcomes
from this project will be introduced into AU courses and an incoming textbook,
and in particular, will enhance the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology (ABET) accredited Bachelor of Wireless Engineering (BWE) curriculum
at Auburn University. Various venues will be explored for industrial
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A reference library will be maintained and
be accessible to center members. It will contain experimental data and research
products, in addition to Center documents such as NSF Annual Reports, Level of
Interest and Feedback Evaluation (LIFE) Form Reports, Center Publications,
Industrial Advisory Board (IAB) Presentations and Posters, Membership Agreement
document, By-Laws document, and Center Action Items. An interactive web-based
server will be used for sharing scientific data produced from the project with
the IAB and the public. A single Center-wide repository will be maintained for
the center, at http://fiwin.org, which will be maintained throughout the project
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.