* 1822146
* Phase I IUCRC at Colorado School of Mines: Center to Advance the Science of Exploration to Reclamation in Mining (CASERM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Richard Wendlandt, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,357,798.00

Mining is intrinsic to modern society's transition to a sustainable existence.
Meeting the global demand for earth resources represents a grand challenge. The
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Subsurface Earth
Resource Models is a collaborative effort between Colorado School of Mines,
Virginia Tech, and industry partners. The Center's activities will transform the
way geoscience data are used in the exploration and mining industry sector,
beginning with the mineral exploration stage and continuing through mine closure
and environmental remediation. Research activities of the Center will
fundamentally change the way global exploration and mining of natural resources
is done, replacing industry experience- and empiricism-based decisions with
innovative science and technology-based solutions that inform decision making,
increase the chances of exploration success, and reduce financial risk. The
goals of the Center will promote socio-economic prosperity and help to reduce
the environmental impact of mining. Workforce development is an essential
component of the Center activities and will include graduate and undergraduate
students, and industry employee participation in research activities and
training opportunities. The Center will strengthen and promote cross-
disciplinary discoveries in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, computational
science and statistics. Knowledge transfer to the geothermal industry sector
will form one of the Center's key activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Advanced Subsurface Earth Resource Models is focused on advancing the
exploration/mining industry sector through a cooperative partnership conducting
pre-competitive research and workforce development programs that benefit
industry, academia, and society. The purpose and long-term vision of this Center
is directed toward challenges in developing 3-D geologic models for mineral
deposits, integrating diverse geoscience data, to inform decision making and
minimize geological risk, beginning with locating and mining subsurface earth
resources and continuing through mine closure and environmental remediation.
Four research thrusts are envisioned: (1) development of geophysical and
geochemical instrumentation, analysis, and interpretation methods for enhanced
characterization of rock properties; (2) integration, scaling, and inversion of
diverse geological, petrophysical, and geophysical data types of dissimilar
spatial resolution and distribution to identify and characterize earth
resources; (3) development of information methodologies for reducing risk
associated with decision making; and (4) computational imaging and development
of graphical and exploratory data analysis solutions and visualization tools.
Achieving this broad vision requires interdisciplinary collaborations: Mines'
expertise in economic geology, geochemistry, mineralogy, petrophysics, high
performance computing, and applied mathematics, including geo-statistics,
spatial statistics, inversion, and numerical methods, and strong traditional
ties to mineral resource industry sectors will promote Center
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.