* 1822266
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamic Socio-economic Systems and Cultural Ecosystem Services: The case of oyster aquaculture.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Laura Shaffer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,200.00

The research supported by this award will investigate cultural ecosystem
services. Ecosystem services, the benefits provided by an ecosystem, are one
basis for assigning value to healthy ecosystems. Services include the capacity
of an ecosystem to provide food and water, to help mitigate environmental
impacts, to produce essential nutrients, and to provide cultural opportunities
and experiences. Cultural ecosystem services, such as fishing and birdwatching,
are hard to price, however, and consequently have received less attention even
though they may outweigh other services in terms of perceived importance. To
enhance understanding of cultural ecosystem services, the researcher will
investigate fishing-related cultural services and the impacts that may result
from the introduction of aquaculture to supplement or replace declining
fisheries. The research is important because fisheries throughout the United
States are threatened. Communities risk losing the industry that shaped their
towns, local identities, and associated jobs unless alternatives are introduced
that can match all of the services associated with their declining fishery,
including the highly valued cultural services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be undertaken by University of Maryland anthropology doctoral
student Adriane Michaelis, who is supervised by Dr. Laura J. Shaffer. The
researcher has chosen to focus on oyster aquaculture, which, although known to
provide many of the services associated with wild oyster fisheries, has not been
studied from the perspective of its associated cultural services. The research
has a comparative design. Data collection will take place in three culturally
distinctive regions -- the Chesapeake Bay, the Gulf of Mexico, and coastal New
England --where aquaculture of the eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica) now
occurs. The research is framed with three overarching questions: 1) What are the
cultural services obtained through oyster aquaculture and how do they rank
amongst related ecosystem services? 2) How do these cultural services vary
regionally and according to different participant attributes? 3) Can oyster
aquaculture provide the same types of cultural services as public fisheries? The
researcher will gather data through a mix of ethnographic methods including
through semi-structured interviews with oyster farmers, commercial fishermen,
and community members; participant observation; photovoice; and a Q-sort survey
using a standard platform. By looking at the effects of shifting from public to
private fisheries, findings from the research will contribute to improved social
scientific understanding of socio-ecological systems as dynamic systems.
Findings will also help resource managers expand their understanding of the
costs and benefits of different management choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.