* 1822124
* Phase I IUCRC at The Ohio State University:  Center for Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Carolyn Sommerich, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 149,997.00

The purpose of this Site is to create a more comprehensive, quantitative
understanding of causal pathways for the development of musculoskeletal
disorders (MSDs) in the occupational environment, which are known to be complex
and multi-factorial. Knowledge gained from research performed at this Site will
lead to the identification of interventions that will more effectively mediate
injury risk and injury severity. This Site is needed because, not only are MSDs
a major cause of lost work time and the leading cause of disability worldwide,
but current treatments for many types of MSDs often are difficult or
unsuccessful. This Site will be an addition to the Center for Disruptive
Musculoskeletal Innovations (CDMI), which was created to develop interventions
that could develop more cost-effective treatments. However, it has been well
established that MSD prevention is far more cost effective than treatment. Thus,
the intervention concepts to be generated by this Site will have applications to
occupational workplace designs, healthcare delivery, sports medicine, the
military, and the service industry. In addition, a better understanding of
causal pathways to MSDs will improve the bases for innovative treatments and
serve as a useful complement to the research currently being conducted by the
CDMI.

This Site proposes to address the impact of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and
the large burden they impose on injured employees, companies, and the U.S.
healthcare industry. It will be unique within the existing IUCRC framework,
since it focuses primarily on MSD prevention efforts as opposed to post-injury
treatments. MSDs continue to burden our society because their causes are multi-
factorial, complex, and often poorly understood. Thus, this Site has three
technical focuses, each of which is aimed to improve our understanding of how
work-related MSDs develop, so that the application of this knowledge can help to
prevent or reduce MSD rates. First, our Site will apply engineering techniques
to quantify and characterize MSD causal pathways and use this knowledge to
intervene in the pathway, thereby preventing or decreasing MSD risks through
workplace and equipment designs to which employees and product consumers are
exposed. Second, we will conduct needed research to improve existing tools, or
create new tools, which improve the sensitivity and specificity of MSD risk
assessments. Third, we will use this approach to better understand when and how
to return injured employees to the workplace so as to minimize their risk of an
MSD recurrence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.