* 1822830
* Putting Teachers in the Driver's Seat: Using Machine Learning to Personalize Interactions with Students (DRIVER-SEAT)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Anthony Botelho, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 764,317.00

This is a project that will use machine learning to personalize messages about
student homework. The project will apply technologies used by Google's Smart
Reply, a functionality that uses machine learning to generate and suggest human-
like email responses, to provide teachers a quick and effective way to respond
to student online homework. An important part of many State standards is the
need for math students to communicate their ideas through writing. With the
number of schools digitizing their classrooms on the rise, teachers are
inundated with student data. Teachers are often unable to review and provide
feedback in an effective and timely manner. This project will help teachers be
more efficient and at the same time cause more effective student learning. The
Dialogue Reinforcement Infrastructure for Volitional Exploratory Research -
Soliciting Effective Actions from Teachers (DRIVER-SEAT) will be designed to
help teachers more efficiently and effectively communicate with students in a
way that feels personalized, while supported by advances in computer science. By
applying a feature similar to Google's Smart Reply in an educational setting,
DRIVER-SEAT offer teachers suggestions of automated messages that can be used
for more personalized feedback, thereby revolutionizing digital learning by re-
incorporating teachers in an efficient and productive way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enlist teachers to create DRIVER-SEAT.
These teachers will use a prototype equivalent to Google's Smart Reply, to
establish a library of trusted messages that teachers choose to provide their
students. The methodology behind Google's Smart Reply utilizes standard
sequence-to-sequence machine learning techniques to automatically generate
responses, grouping them into 100 clusters (with each cluster representing a
specific semantic intent), and selecting messages from these clusters to suggest
to users. In a similar fashion, sequence-to-sequence deep learning techniques
are used to generate and suggest messages. However, instead of communicating via
email, teachers will be using these messages to provide feedback for their
students' math homework. Based on student performance and system-detected affect
and behavior, three appropriate feedback responses are selected to initiate
interaction with each student. Cooperating teachers will help craft the library
by piloting the prototype system and selecting feedback to send their students.
Library development will enable machine learning to discover how to help
teachers efficiently reply to their students. By implementing this technology,
there is great potential to narrow the achievement gap in mathematics classrooms
across the nation. This effect could then extend to science, technology, and
engineering classrooms in a similar fashion. The transformative aspects of the
proposed work will lead to adjustments in the way teachers and students interact
in online learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.