* 1822703
* Conference: FASEB Summer Research Conference on Post-transcriptional Control of Gene Expression - Mechanisms of RNA Decay, June 2018, Scottsdale, AZ
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Aaron Goldstrohm, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support attendance by early-career scientists at the FASEB
Conference Post-transcriptional Control of Gene Expression - Mechanisms of RNA
Decay to be held June 24-29, 2018 in Scottsdale, AZ. This is an evolving field
powered by technological advances and fascinating discoveries on the role of RNA
decay in controlling gene expression. Meeting objectives include: coalescing the
field to disseminate latest research findings, providing an environment for
establishing research collaborations, engaging a new generation of RNA decay
researchers, and promoting professional development and networking. The meeting
format includes keynote lectures by two leaders in the field, nine scientific
sessions featuring a combination of invited lectures and talks selected from
submitted abstracts, and three poster sessions. In addition, informal
opportunities for engagement will be provided for junior researchers to learn
from established investigators at a 'meet the speakers' lunch and a career and
professional development panel discussion with senior researchers from both
academia, industry, and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA decay plays a
central role in regulation of gene expression, and this meeting will bring
together a broad group of researchers in the field. Meeting objectives include:
disseminating latest research findings, providing an environment for
establishing research collaborations, engaging a new generation of RNA decay
researchers, and promoting professional development and networking. The size of
the conference is expected to be small (100-150 attendees), which should enable
productive discussions on an array of topics, including: 5' and 3' events in
mRNA decay; translation-coupled mRNA decay; quality control mechanisms; small
RNAs; regulation of RNA decay; ribonucleases; RNA decay in development and
disease; and polyadenosine and other tails. The meeting will bring provide an
excellent forum for junior investigators, including those from underrepresented
groups, to hear about latest research in the U.S. and abroad, to meet and talk
with leaders in the field, and to have an opportunity to present and receive
feedback on their own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.