* 1822263
* Workshop: Microbial Diversity Molecules to Modeling Across Biological Scales; Summers, Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jocelyn Malamy, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 246,066.00

Microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses and other single cell organisms, are
emerging as key engineering components for solving global societal problems,
ranging from human health, to energy, to providing clean water to more than one
billion people who currently live without it. This is because, during their
nearly 4-billion-year history, microbes have "invented" numerous metabolic
reactions that have transformed the Earth's environment. To understand these
processes, their impacts on the ecosystem, and to harness them for societal
benefits requires a multidisciplinary approach. Microbial Diversity is an
advanced research training program at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL)
that augments traditional PhD and postdoctoral training through an intensive 6.5
week, immersive experience that occurs in the peak summer months when prominent
scientists across biological disciplines convene at MBL. This research-training
program teaches cutting-edge methods and concepts that impact microbial ecology,
ecosystem function and animal-associated microbiomes. To accomplish these goals,
participants will receive broad research training at the forefront of
microbiological sciences, research ethics and scientific outreach to the public.
This experience has broad impacts for the following reasons: 1) The
transformative nature of the program enhances retention in research and academic
positions; 2) Mentoring postdoctoral trainees in curriculum development provides
valuable teaching experience; 3) Participants from underrepresented groups in
science will contribute towards the diversification of the scientific workforce.
Research products that will emerge from the course include publicly-available
resources and cultured isolates of bacteria, viruses and other microorganisms.
Many students from this research-training program go on to be leaders in
research that incorporates microbial biodiversity, and in at the intersection of
science and society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research-training experience
integrates training across biological scales; from understanding one metabolic
pathway in a single organism, to dynamics of single cells in a population, to
understanding the impact of microbes on the ecosystem scale. The goal of this
program is to integrate training from the disciplines of microbiology, ecology,
evolution, chemistry, computational science, and bioinformatics in order to
shape the future leaders of microbial diversity science. This is accomplished by
integrating modeling, experimentation, and function with emerging cellular
properties across broad spatio-temporal scales in order to be able to predict
the behavior of living cells in natural systems. In the next three years,
specific training will be offered in: (i) cultivation that leverages information
from the vast, publicly-available sequence databases, with a focus on novel
eukaryotes, viruses, and microbial consortia, (ii) isolating and characterizing
the role of viruses in microbial diversity, function and ecology; (iii)
quantitative tools and modeling of high-resolution changes of metabolic fluxes
in time and space. The objectives of this research-training experience are as
follows: (i) Participants will receive broad research training in transformative
theoretical and applied approaches at the forefront of microbiological sciences,
through a combination of classroom, workshop, and laboratory-based didactic
activities; (ii) Intensive and ongoing longitudinal explorations of marine,
freshwater and host-associated microbial communities will be integrated to
identify microbial dynamics over a five-year time series of publicly available
data, and (iii) Postdoctoral researchers will receive direct experience in
active learning in the classroom and laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.