* 1822271
* I-Corps: Multi-Variate Shrinkage Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Nancy Saucier, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
elimination or reduction of metrology and post processing analysis that is
currently a standard requirement of polymer part manufacturing. This process
improvement that will be facilitated by sensor technology will reduce
manufacturing time and cost by 20-40%, improve part quality consistency, and
improve molding productivity by 100%. Each percentage point improvement in
productivity corresponds to cost savings in excess of more than $1 billion per
year in the United States alone while reducing the energy consumption and
environmental waste related to molding, discarding, and/or recycling of
defective plastic parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will enable
the team to determine the ideal parameters of a multivariate shrinkage sensor
for industrial polymer manufacturing. The insights gained from at least one
hundred customer interviews will drive decisions on the commercial potential of
a new multi-mode shrinkage monitoring sensor that will obviate the need for
manual inspections and enable fully automatic production by directly measuring
molded products as they are made, before the mold opens, so that defectives
parts can be automatically diagnoses and recycled. Through I-Corps, the team
will assess current sensor design, its relative value compared to existing
sensors and inspection procedures in the polymer manufacturing industry, and
facilitate identification of customer segments with a critical unmet need for
in-mold shrinkage sensor capability. Further, key learning from the I-Corps
process will drive refinement of sensor development with the goal of developing
a more commercially relevant sensor and provide industrial connections for
sensor testing in the future. This overall enhanced knowledge of the industry
will additionally reduce commercialization risk should a start-up or licensing
opportunity be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.