* 1822800
* A Remote Multimodal Learning Environment to Increase Graphical Information Access for Blind and Visually Impaired Students
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Giudice, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 779,254.00

There are many limitations for students who are blind or visually impaired (BVI)
in accessing complex STEM graphical information in the classroom or workplace.
This longstanding problem arises due to reliance on inaccessible and outdated
learning materials, the need for costly specialized devices, and an adherence to
an outdated educational service model. To address these issues, this project
will investigate the development and evaluation of an innovative remote learning
system based on the use of multiple sensory channels to strategically present
information from auditory, linguistic, touch, and enhanced visual sensing. The
research will focus specifically on the optimization of multimodal information
presentation and perception, separating sensory output based on its unique
information processing characteristics for conveying different types of stimuli.
The first project goal is to increase the quality of STEM instruction for BVI
students by determining perceptually motivated learning supports that promote
non-visual knowledge acquisition of STEM graphical and spatial information
(learning goal). The second project goal is to increase access to graphical and
spatial STEM content through creation of an innovative remote multimodal
interface for communicating the conceptual meaning of visual information
(technology goal). The project outcomes will contribute to theories of non-
visual learning and multisensory processing, and a clear translational path to
development of more efficient, intuitive, and usable multimodal interfaces for
both blind and sighted users. The application of the results will help to
address the severe under-representation of BVI individuals in STEM-related
disciplines, and the 70% unemployment rate of this demographic, by providing a
new, low-cost, and accessible technology platform for communicating non-visual
graphical STEM materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will answer the
following inter-connected questions: 1) What is the best information content to
be conveyed by different modal outputs for maximizing perceptual saliency,
learnability, interpretation, and representation of STEM graphical materials?
Once optimized in the lab, 2) How well does the optimized multimodal learning
system perform in a remote deployment environment in conveying graphical STEM
materials to BVI learners; and 3) Does the remote learning system increase the
level of comprehension of STEM graphical content as compared to traditional BVI
instructional methods? Both quantitative and qualitative data about the
optimization process and the remote technology system will be collected and
analyzed including user response metrics on speed/accuracy, user experience
data, and STEM graphical assessment instruments adapted for BVI students. The
first phase of the research will investigate multimodal information processing
in order to establish best practices for information delivery and non-visual
graphical learning efficiency with experiments comparing graphical information
presented in different modalities for three core STEM graphical themes: graphs,
diagrams, and maps. The second phase of experiments will investigate the remote
learning system's efficacy as well as evaluating user performance on graphical
STEM learning measures and key usability and satisfaction metrics. This project
has the broader goals of increasing independence for BVI learners and other
students with or without disabilities who might benefit from a remote multimodal
learning environment, and the development of a new tool for supporting large-
scale research and assistive technology evaluation with BVI human subjects,
thereby dramatically increasing scientists' ability to recruit and work with a
much larger population of BVI users than is currently possible from lab-based
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.