* 1822021
* Assessing Alterations to Planktonic Community Composition in a Changing Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Rick Reynolds, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 569,542.00

The Arctic Ocean is undergoing rapid environmental change, yet potential impacts
on its living organisms is poorly known. Sparse observations have suggested that
a shift in the composition of Arctic Ocean phytoplankton species may already be
occurring. These types of shifts in the planktonic community can echo throughout
the Arctic food web, affecting higher-level consumers that serve as important
commercial resources or sustenance for northern communities. The proposed work
will develop new optically-based tools to be used in situ and through remote
sensing to understand patterns in planktonic community composition now and in
the future. Graduate and undergraduate student researchers supported by this
project will receive practical training in environmental science through
participation in laboratory and field research, data analysis and
interpretation, and numerical analyses. The investigators will conduct public
outreach in collaboration with educational venues such as the Birch Aquarium at
Scripps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will establish and analyze a
multi-decadal baseline of observations that describes the spatial distributions
of planktonic communities in the western Arctic Ocean with the goal of
developing optical tools and approaches that can be broadly applied to
understand future environmental change in the region. Activities include a
combination of (i) field work in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas through
collaboration with a Japanese research program, (ii) the development of
optically-based algorithms for discerning planktonic community assemblages, and
(iii) application of these algorithms to satellite remote-sensing data. The
field work will include observations of planktonic community structure and
connect these to seawater optical properties in the study area at different
seasonal time periods. In addition, the investigators will use phytoplankton
pigment measurements to infer spatial patterns of planktonic community
composition and address the hypothesis that optical measurements can identify
distinct planktonic assemblages. Finally, the project will develop and validate
algorithms relating seawater optical properties to planktonic community
structure and apply these to a time series of ocean color imagery to generate
spatial maps of plankton community composition within the surface
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.