* 1822206
* Phase II IUCRC at The University of Texas at Austin:  Center for Next Generation Photovoltaics
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 518,473.00

Energy sustainability represents one of the grand challenges facing modern
society, and solar power provides an important source of renewable energy.
Photovoltaics (PVs), or solar cells, are solid-state semiconductor devices that
convert sunlight directly to electricity. The vision and long-term goal of the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Next Generation
Photovoltaics (NGPV) is to help establish PV electricity as a major source of
energy in the United States and the world. NGPV consists of research sites at
The University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin, lead site), Colorado State
University (CSU) and Texas A&amp;M University (College Station and Central
Texas; TAMU). Phase II of NGPV has continued to focus on the rapidly evolving
research and development needs of the PV industry to include PV device
materials, manufacturing and design, and the variety of important soft cost
issues such as balance of systems, device maintenance and operation, deployment,
policy and education. NGPV research focuses on the rapidly evolving research and
development needs of the PV industry, including PV device materials,
manufacturing and design, and the variety of important soft cost issues such as
balance of systems, device maintenance and operation, deployment, policy and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The total global PV capacity is anticipated to
reach 10 TW by 2030, which corresponds to about 5% of the anticipated global
energy consumption. To reach PV deployment of this magnitude, the total cost of
PV systems must be reduced while simultaneously increasing energy conversion
efficiency, reliability and lifetime. The capacity to cost-effectively
manufacture solar cells and balance of systems components must be significantly
increased, and methods to integrate PV into the utility grid must continue to
improve to ensure affordable and reliable electricity. NGPV research at the UT
Austin site is being carried out to address these key technological challenges,
as well as emerging areas of PVs, as in portable power for internet-things
systems, wearable devices, and electric vehicles. The UT Austin site is also
carrying out research on PV energy storage, developing new educational
activities to foster societal appreciation and understanding of emerging PV
technological capability, and exposing K-5 teachers to PVs. NGPV encourages
interaction and communication across disciplines and between academic
researchers and industry partners to catalyze economic growth and create a
diverse, highly trained workforce for the PV industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.