* 1822872
* ROBO-VI: A Virtual-Internship-Based Hybrid Learning Technology to Prepare Traditional and Non-Traditional Students to Work with Collaborative Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* David Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,123.00

Collaborative robots are emerging as a new family of advanced technologies that
are designed to work side-by-side with people in industrial settings. These
robots can improve the productivity and flexibility in manufacturing and
logistics industries, while also assisting workers in repetitive, and unhealthy
or unsafe work conditions. Unlike traditional factory robots that are programmed
and configured by engineers to function independently for long periods of time,
collaborative robots require human workers to frequently interact with the
robot, including training the robot, making the necessary changes in the
environment for the robot to function, and supervising the robot's work to
ensure its successful operation. The integration of collaborative robots into
and operation within existing industrial settings require expert skills that
many workers lack, and that current educational programs do not cover,
highlighting a skills mismatch from the demands of an increasingly automated
future of work. This project will develop an understanding of what skills
workers will need to perform these tasks effectively and to design a hybrid
digital-physical educational technology that will support worker education and
training in these skills in classrooms and industrial-training facilities. The
research team will evaluate the effects of the technology on skill development
among trainees and make recommendations for future job-training programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new hybrid technology will include an expert system
computer program that will provide learners with explanations, visualizations,
and simulations of key concepts and a robotic assistant that will provide
physical demonstrations. This hybrid physical-digital learning environment will
be used in expert-led instruction of traditional and non-traditional students in
collaborative robotics. The research team will (1) develop an empirical model of
expertise in working with collaborative robots through observations of and
interviews with experts and analyses of expert-training programs and (2)
iteratively design, build, and test a digital-physical hybrid learning
environment, integrating an Expert-View Dashboard (EVD), to support expert-led
instruction in educational and industrial-training settings. The resulting
educational technology will provide educators and trainers with a powerful
educational tool that will supplement the development of expertise in working
with autonomous, intelligent, and collaborative technologies to meet the demands
of an increasingly automated jobs landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.