* 1822184
* Planning IUCRC at City College of New York:  Center for Building Energy Smart Technology (BEST)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Fred Moshary, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The Center of Building Energy Smart Technologies (BEST-East) is a partnership
between The City College of New York, New York University and the BEST-West
center node at University of Colorado-Boulder. Through synergistic research and
development between the industry and the academia, the Center seeks to advance
building energy systems to be intelligent and energy efficient. This energy
sector is responsible for the highest energy end-use in the US, about 40% of
total national energy consumption. We will develop and test energy technologies
for environments ranging from single buildings to urban districts. This includes
intelligent building envelope materials and systems, advanced HVAC systems, and
building integrated sustainable energy technologies. These solutions will
optimize energy efficiency, occupant comfort, resiliency in extreme events, and
conservation of natural resources. The Center will represent a unique platform
for collaboration between diverse range of industries and universities, with the
common goal of developing the next generation energy technologies for the built
environment. The Center is committed to training the next generation engineers
and scientists, which will be drawn from across the partnership to work in a
collaborative environment. The Center will thus play a crucial role in improving
the nation?s building infrastructure and energy
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST-East Center will bring together multi-
disciplinary research capabilities of US universities and partner industries to
develop smart technologies that enhance energy sustainability and resiliency for
individual buildings and for urban centers. In order to address the need of the
rich and diverse building industry, the Center will engage in five complementary
thrust research areas including: (i) Smart buildings materials, (ii) Intelligent
building mechanical and electrical energy systems, (iii) Distributed and
renewable energy systems, (iv) City-scale building energy informatics, and (v)
Distributed data sensors and networks for the building energy industry. Research
and development for the proposed Center will be anchored on fundamentals of heat
and mass transport processes at the building and city scales, energy conversion
processes, building materials, information and cyber sciences. The Center will
also include technical innovations on integrated renewable energy technologies,
and advanced building enclosures, fenestration and lighting, and energy
informatics to yield tightly integrated, intelligent, adaptive, and efficient
building energy systems. Moreover, the Center will address pressing energy
efficiency issues in new buildings as well as in existing building stocks that
are in need of remedial and rehabilitation with consideration for the
sustainability impacts and resiliency needs of buildings and
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.