* 1822568
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: An Experimental-Computational Approach to the Integration of Subtasks with a Spinal Reflex Model of Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* John Jeka, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2022
* USD 444,929.00

The evolutionary development of bipedal stance, which freed the hands from
locomotion, is considered a fundamental distinction between humans and our
closest relatives. But two-legged locomotion is far less stable. Engineered
devices frequently solve the stability problem by having a wide base of support,
or concentrating the bulk of its weight lower down. In contrast, the human body
has evolved with most of its mass concentrated higher up in the trunk, making it
inherently unstable and prone to falls. This "mechanically unstable" design is
complemented by a sophisticated neural control system that actively stabilizes
the body. However, the details of how this neural controller solves the complex
control problem of maintaining upright stance, while simultaneously avoiding
obstacles and navigating varied terrain, are not well understood. This current
lack of knowledge is a limiting factor in a range of related fields, from the
development of intelligent prosthetic devices, to humanoid robots that can
navigate complex environments, as well as rehabilitative methods for those with
poor mobility due to neurological disease or injury. This project will use a
combined experimental and computational approach to determine how humans control
upright balance during walking, while navigating around obstacles or adjusting
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While research in human motor control has
established basic principles about how the nervous system generates goal-related
movements, it is unknown how different goals are integrated into a coherent
pattern that addresses all tasks simultaneously. This project will study how
humans combine the control of balance during walking with functional tasks such
as avoiding obstacles and modifying speed and walking direction. The
experimental component of this project will use electric stimulation of the
vestibular system to probe how the neural controller reacts to sensed threats to
upright posture and how these responses change at different points of the gait
cycle. Virtual reality will be used to impose constraints from obstacles and
study how humans integrate such functional tasks with balance control. The
theoretical component of this project will develop a model of the field dynamics
of neural populations regulating balance and establish principles for how the
high-dimensional configuration space of the motor apparatus can be used to
integrate multiple low-dimensional tasks into a coherent movement plan. This
dynamic field model of neural control will be combined with an existing model of
the biomechanics and spinal neurophysiology of human locomotion to generate
predictive simulations of human walking patterns. Achieving a neural account of
locomotion, balance, stepping, and obstacle avoidance using mutually informative
theory and experiment will provide a functional framework for the
neurophysiological basis of locomotion. This functional framework will take into
account the varied demands of daily life activities, foster development of
intelligent robots and devices, and illustrate how stability of locomotion
deteriorates with aging and neurological
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Companion project is being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.