* 1822526
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Reframing Notions of Wet vs. Dry Subduction:  The Search for a Deep Fluid Signature in Subducted Continental Crust Using Coupled O, B, and Fe Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Carrie Menold, Albion College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2023
* USD 75,113.00

Subduction zones represent not only the main mechanism of mass transfer between
the Earth's surface and interior, but also the setting for a majority of large
earthquakes and a source of significant volcanic activity, both of which have
dramatic and direct effects on human civilization. The presence, scale, and
nature of fluids in deep portions of subduction zones are undoubtedly important
factors in the generation of both earthquakes and magma, and therefore must be
identified and characterized. This study will contribute to our current
understanding of deep fluids in subduction zones, and potentially establish a
new method for studying them. It would also, as the title suggests, reframe
notions of wet versus dry subduction, which may open the door to other ideas and
methods for studying subduction zone processes. This project will provide
training and research opportunities for a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students. Outreach activities at local GK-12 schools will expose
potential future scientists to cutting edge Earth
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small volumes of continental crust surrounded by
oceanic crust may be subducted to ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) depths and exhumed in
the early stages of orogeny. These small, subducted blocks of continental crust
can preserve evidence of large-scale, deep subduction fluid metasomatism. This
team hypothesizes that the Tso Morari terrane, a young UHP locality in the NW
Himalaya, represents a small, early-subducted continental mass that likely
experienced metasomatism at UHP in the subduction zone. Recent advances have led
to novel isotopic and geochemical proxies to fingerprint the origin of
subduction-derived fluids and melts both in exhumed subduction materials and arc
magmas. In particular, boron is expected to be enriched in devolatilized fluids
and depleted in the corresponding host rocks with boron isotopic values
providing a sensitive indication of the extent of devolatilization.
Additionally, iron isotope systematics are emerging as a potentially powerful
tracer of the nature of slab derived fluids. This project will combine these
novel proxies with the more established and traditional tracers of subduction
fluids, including oxygen isotopes, thermodynamic and fluid modeling, bulk-rock
geochemistry, ferrous/ferric iron ratios on a suite of UHP rocks and associated
ophiolite/melange from the Tso Morari.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.