* 1822091
* IBSS: Global Urbanization and Housing Affordability: Poverty, Property, and the City
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Zephyr Frank, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 702,963.00

An estimated 330 million urban households worldwide live in substandard or
unaffordable housing. By 2025, that number is expected to climb to 440 million
households, representing 1.6 billion people. This interdisciplinary research
project will analyze the ramifications of accelerating urbanization and rising
housing costs in global perspective. By focusing on several major cities that
are responding to affordable housing shortages in different ways, this project
will provide new understanding regarding the effectiveness and unanticipated
consequences of different government policies. The research team will generate
new data and analyses about processes of global urbanization, the relationship
between housing and poverty, and the large-scale environmental impact of
expanding cities. The project will produce policy-relevant findings regarding
the effectiveness and unanticipated consequences of various strategies,
policies, and responses. The researchers will document how the development of
certain ideas and laws helped to contribute to the current crisis, which will
provide lessons for planners and other decision makers. The project also will
catalogue the human costs of the crisis and record how housing policies work on
a day-to-day basis, offering policy makers new insights into the complex nature
of the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through their analysis of four cities on
four different continents (New York in the U.S., London in the United Kingdom,
Lagos in Nigeria, and Delhi in India), the investigators will identify key
sources of the global affordable housing crisis by exploring the historical
record, present-day strategies of housing provision, and a range of social and
environmental transformations taking place in territories far removed from the
city. They will document multiple consequences of the affordable housing crisis,
including historical processes of dispossession and land enclosure, present-day
survival strategies of low-income families in high-cost cities, and broader
trends of accelerated urbanization. They also will assess why cities have
responded to the affordable housing crisis in vastly different ways as well as
the consequences of those varied responses for low-income families, cities, and
surrounding environments. The investigators will analyze infrastructure and
property relations, urban poverty and housing market dynamics, migration
patterns, and flows of capital and other resources. Historical geoparsing
algorithms will analyze a large textual database of archival sources that
document the worldwide contestation of property rights in the 20th century.
Ethnographic fieldwork in the four focal cities will document the everyday lives
of low-income residents and analyze how different housing policies play out on
the ground level. Macrospatial and geographic methods will map large-scale data
about infrastructural systems to connect cities and their hinterlands,
highlighting territories and resource. This project is supported through the NSF
Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social Sciences Research (IBSS)
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.