* 1822104
* Phase II IUCRC University of Mississippi: Center for Broadband Wireless Access and Applications (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* John Daigle, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 519,533.00

This project is Phase II of the Broadband Wireless Access Center (BWAC), a
multi-university multi-industry organization composed of five universities (the
University of Arizona, Virginia Tech, University of Notre Dame, University of
Mississippi (UM), and the Catholic University of America) and 20+ affiliates
from industry and government. In the past decade, wireless communications has
made major technological leaps. Wireless connectivity is pervasive in society,
leading to a shortage in wireless spectrum, network congestion, cyber-attacks
and personal security issues. The mission of BWAC is to address these challenges
and offer creative solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring to
bear UM research capabilities and real-world industry interest in several BWAC
thrust areas. Center as a whole addresses research areas, including wireless
spectrum sharing, security, and future milli-meter wave technology. UM research
problems address spectrum sharing for heterogeneous wireless systems, network
optimization to mitigate mutual interference in BLE (low energy Bluetooth) and
WiFi systems, and 3 D printing of antennas and the design and fabrication of
closely spaced antennas and antenna arrays using elliptical metasurface
cloaking. Collaboration with industries in the Southeastern U.S. will provide
for our students additional co-op and internship opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this collaborative industry-university
center will have a direct effect on public well-fare, enabling several
applications such as remote health and broadband access in rural areas. The
partnering universities will broaden their activities to include REU site
programs, RET program, participation of under-represented minority students and
faculty in research projects, and involvement of multidisciplinary projects. New
curriculum at UM will have courses on Internet of Things (IoT) systems and
cognitive radios. With its research, established partnerships, and long history
of collaboration between its members, BWAC will likely create intellectual
property and spin-off companies, leading to job growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead site, University of Arizona manages the central
BWAC project website at www.bwac.arizona.edu. This website contains various
information about the center including the overview of the center, mission,
industry membership, projects, meeting announcements and technical data. Center
proprietary documents are managed through a secure internal pages requiring
access credentials. The data repository will be managed at the main website with
links to the other university sites. The repository will contain technical
papers, project descriptions, relevant software, testbed details, etc. The
repository will be maintained during the project and for an additional five
years beyond its termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.