* 1822724
* Immersive virtual learning for worker-robot teamwork on construction sites
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Gale Lucas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

The construction industry is one of the largest industries in the United States,
employing millions of workers, however it is challenged by low productivity
rates, worker shortages, and safety concerns. The industry has a tremendous
opportunity to improve its productivity and safety with the recent advancements
in technology. With the increased level of automation on construction sites,
workers need to learn how to work with these new technologies and gain new
knowledge and engineering skills. The goal of this project is to create and test
a training program delivered through virtual reality (cyberlearning) to educate
and re-educate workers for new work experiences that require collaboration with
robots on construction sites. The project seeks to improve the teamwork among
workers and robots on construction sites, focusing on more than one specific
skill set and providing a comprehensive learning experience. The project is
significant because it is a pioneering effort in providing learning
opportunities to workers with varying levels of language proficiency and
education, preparing them for work at the human-technology frontier. Fundamental
questions addressed by the project include: 1) How does cyberlearning increase
workers' knowledge, safety behavior and trust in automation compared to the
traditional training methods? 2) How do individual differences impact workers'
cyberlearning? 3) How does trust in automation change based on the construction
task? 4) How does cyberlearning affect productivity and safety on construction
sites? 5) Does the knowledge and level of trust gained through cyberlearning
carry over to actual construction sites? 6) How does cyberlearning influence the
development of next generation of construction automation? Through the
exploration of these research questions, this project provides evidence for the
utility of cost-effective training programs for vocational workforce of the
construction industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous learning scenarios and
types of construction robots are included in the cyberlearning platform, which
is developed in Task 1. A construction site is simulated via the use of discrete
event simulations and immersive virtual environments where construction workers
interact with robots on a given task. To move away from today's lab-based hands-
on training, the cyberlearning environment incorporates dynamic construction
work environments, such as multiple tasks and crews sharing the same space and
conditions, for example, uneven terrain, dust, rain through simulations and by
using accurate models of construction sites. The work advances knowledge on the
impact of cyberlearning for worker-robot teamwork at two levels: user-level and
site-level. For the user-level investigations in Task 2, the work explores: 1)
the extent to which cyberlearning increases workers' knowledge, safety behavior,
and trust in automation, 2) how individual differences moderate workers'
learning and 3) how trust-in-automation changes based on task type. For the
site-level investigations in Task 3, the work explores: 1) the extent to which
cyberlearning impacts productivity, safety, and trust-in-automation compared to
in-person training across all workers on construction sites, and 2) how to both
improve the cyberlearning environment and the construction robots for deployment
on construction sites. Finally, through simulation-based studies in Task 4, the
work explores how human-robot interactions impact construction tasks and
workflows, safety procedures and productivity. The cyberlearning program is
designed to maximize the extent to which the workers accept and trust
construction robots, while at the same time freeing up human resources,
improving productivity and safety, both of which are important to both
individual workers and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.