* 1822150
* Phase II IUCRC University of North Carolina Charlotte: Center for Cybersecurity Analytics and Automation CCAA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Bei-Tseng Chu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 514,111.00

With the increasing magnitude and sophistication of cyber attacks, cyber warfare
has become a major threat to national security. However, the cybersecurity state
of the art is still far from providing sufficient protection, not only for
Internet enterprise services but also for critical infrastructure services, such
as in the financial and energy sectors. With the exponential increase of attack
surface and the complete reliance on human analysis and response, the time for
detection and mitigation of cyber attacks have been significantly increasing
(e.g., can take up to several months). In addition, the cost of deploying
cybersecurity has been tremendously increasing as it is becoming very resource
and labor intensive. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The University of North Carolina
Charlotte (UNC Charlotte) is leading the research and industry community in NSF
IUCRC Center on Cybersecurity Analytics and Automation (CCAA) to address these
challenges. Our goal is to build the critical mass of inter-disciplinary
academic researchers, industry partners, and government agencies for advancing
the science and state-of-the-art of cybersecurity analytics and automation by
developing innovative sense-making and decision-making capabilities for
autonomous and adaptive cyber defense that requires minimal human involvement
with provable and measurable security and resiliency properties. We consider
both formal- and data-driven analytics of cybersecurity artifacts for seamlessly
integrating sense-making and decision-making for adaptive and autonomous cyber
defense. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CCAA brings together experts in formal and data-
driven cybersecurity to advance cyber defense on multiple fronts, namely, (a)
developing dynamic and predictive cyber risk analytics using heterogeneous cyber
artifacts, (b) developing adaptive and autonomic decision-making for provably
correct and safe defense strategies according to the mission requirements, and
system configurations and (c) integrating cyber resilience and agility as
inherent properties of cyber and cyber-physical system security. The UNC
Charlotte site will lead the research and management activities and provides
profound technical contributions to CCAA in formal methods for configuration
verification, automated risk quantification and mitigation, adaptive learning,
cyber threat analytics, and cyber agility. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Center
will create and maintain a center-wide repository to make all products of the
research ? datasets, code, tools, experimental results, draft manuscripts, etc.
? available to all Center?s members. The repository will be accessible through
the Center?s website (http://www.ccaa-nsf.org/). Consistently with the Center?s
bylaws and with any applicable NSF or individual universities? requirements,
several of these products will be made available to the broader research and
industry community. The repository will be actively maintained during the
duration of the Phase II effort, and it can be accessed
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.