* 1822861
* Human/AI Co-Orchestration of Dynamically-Differentiated Collaborative Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nikol Rummel, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 797,995.00

This project will create and demonstrate new technology that supports
dynamically-differentiated instruction for the classroom of the future. This new
vision centers on carefully-designed partnerships between teachers, students,
and artificial intelligence (AI). AI-powered learning software will support
students during problem-solving practice, providing either individual guidance
(using standard intelligent tutoring technology) or guidance so students can
effectively collaborate and tutor each other. These learning activities are
constantly adjusted to fit each student's needs, including switching between
individual or collaborative learning. The teacher "orchestrates" (instigates,
oversees, and regulates) this dynamic process. New tools will enhance the
teacher's awareness of students' classroom progress. The goal is to have highly
effective and efficient learning processes for all students, and effective
"orchestration support" for teachers. We will implement and test this vision in
the context of AI-enhanced mathematics learning in middle school. The proposed
work will greatly enhance current understanding of how to design effective AI-
based "co-orchestration" tools that draw on complementary strengths of teachers,
students/peers, and AI agents to make the vision of the dynamically-
differentiated classroom feasible. It will provide insight into the new
classroom dynamics that arise. The work may ultimately contribute to more
individualized K-12 education. The work will create a testbed that could be used
to explore and rigorously test a wide range of interesting hypotheses regarding
co-orchestration and dynamic differentiation of individual and collaborative
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective orchestration of dynamically-
differentiated instruction poses significant challenges in terms of design and
technical implementation. Although existing AI-based learning technologies
support forms of dynamic differentiation of instruction, they tend not to
support dynamic combinations of individual and collaborative learning; in fact,
most only support one of these two learning modes. In addition, existing teacher
support tools tend to focus only on enhancing teacher awareness, not on
supporting teachers' in-the-moment decision-making and action, and not on
supporting dynamic interleaving of individual and collaborative learning. In the
proposed work, we tackle this challenge by integrating and extending four
strands of work: intelligent tutoring systems technology; a learning environment
to support combinations of individual and collaborative learning; adaptive
technology support for mutual peer tutoring; and a mixed reality tool ("smart
glasses") to support teacher/AI co-orchestration. Building on this foundation,
we create and demonstrate technology support for dynamically-differentiated
instruction by three strands of work. First, we create AI-based tutoring
software capable of supporting both individual learners and students doing
mutual peer tutoring. Second, we develop a tool to support the intelligent,
real-time co-orchestration, between students, teachers, and AI agents, of
dynamically differentiated combinations of collaborative learning and individual
learning. We do so through design-based research, prototyping, and classroom
piloting. Third, we evaluate the newly-created technology for dynamically-
differentiated collaborative classroom in schools, to gain an initial
understanding of its benefits and challenges, and the changes in classroom
practices and learning outcomes that it brings about.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.