* 1822030
* AAU PhD Program and Career Outcome Data Workshop
* EDU,DGE
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Tobin Smith, Association of American Universities
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 10/31/2018
* USD 37,167.00

The need to reform doctoral education in the United States has been the subject
of a number of national studies over the past 25 years. One particular challenge
that has been noted focuses on career pathways. Graduate students generally are
not exposed to the breadth of career pathways that are open to Ph.D. recipients,
thereby hampering students from making informed decisions about their
educational paths and professional preparation. Accurate and transparent program
and career outcomes data are necessary to enable students to identify and direct
their studies toward their desired career goals. This National Science
Foundation award to the Association of American Universities (AAU) will support
a workshop that will bring together representatives from a number of
institutions currently engaged in efforts to document and make publicly
available data on doctoral program admission, completion, and career outcome
measures; scholars conducting research on doctoral career pathways; and
university administrators charged with overseeing graduate education. The goal
of the workshop is to survey the existing landscape for understanding doctoral
education outcomes, foster synergies among participants, and determine next
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-and-a-half-day workshop will support
discussions among participants regarding methodologies used in data collection,
how collected data is intended or not intended to be used, and what efforts can
be undertaken to increase communication across existing efforts, standardize
approaches, and improve documentation and availability of data on doctoral
education and career outcomes. Representatives from a number of major efforts to
collect and analyze doctoral educational outcomes data, administrative leaders
at doctoral-granting institutions, and leaders of efforts on broadening career
pathways for students will be invited to participate. The workshop will include
panel presentations and facilitated discussions. Access to reliable, accurate,
and transparent data is an essential starting point for discussions that can
lead to effective decision making. The immediate goal of this workshop is to
determine direct steps that can make such data standardized and available to the
community and stakeholders. Ultimately, the expectation is that this will lead
to work that will identify and mitigate institutional, cultural, and
disciplinary barriers that may prevent doctoral students from identifying,
exploring, and preparing for a wide range of career
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources (EHR) Core Research (ECR) program and the NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program. The ECR program (NSF 15-509) focuses on
fundamental research in STEM education by providing funds in critical research
areas that are essential, broad and enduring. The NRT Program (17-585/18-507) is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of new, potentially
transformative models or approaches for STEM graduate education training that
address changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.