* 1822040
* Topology Student Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Dan Margalit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports participation in the Topology Students Workshop (TSW) held
at the Georgia Institute of Technology during June 4-8, 2018. This is a five-day
research and professional development workshop for graduate students in the
fields of geometric group theory, geometry, and topology, designed to expose
them to a wide range of current research, and to help build their communication,
networking, and problem-sharing skills. Approximately sixty students will
participate, guided by ten mentors, who come from a wide range of career stages
and research backgrounds within this field. The conference provides essential
training for the next generation of scientists, giving the participants many
tools that will help them to succeed as scientists at the highest levels in
graduate school and beyond. The professional development and research sides of
the workshop run in tandem, with mentors giving guidance in both areas. The
workshop emphasizes important career skills for mathematicians that are
typically not taught in graduate school, including networking and etiquette, the
job and grant application process, effective communication and research skills,
and a panel discussion on career paths. The guidance is intended to be
particularly beneficial to students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical topics presented at TSW will cover a broad
range within geometry and topology, including contact and symplectic topology,
three-manifolds, hyperbolic geometry, group actions, and complex dynamics. The
research talks will model good communication and will also introduce research
areas and relevant problems to students who are embarking on a research career.
For many of the students, the TSW is the first conference at which they are
presenting their own results; the workshop is designed to facilitate this
experience. For instance, the first professional development session is an
introduction to conferences and how best to benefit from them. The goal is to
build confidence and research potential among students. The skills addressed
here can be especially beneficial to students from minority groups, as indicated
from responses from participants in previous iterations of the program. The
panel discussion on career paths involves mathematicians from organizations such
as NSA, Amazon, Google, and private high schools. Effective communication is a
major theme: two evening sessions are devoted to workshop presentations in small
groups; the final presentations are videotaped and critiqued by those in
attendance. The web site for the conference is
http://tsw.gatech.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.