* 1822295
* RAPID: Memorialization and Community
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Ashley Reichelmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,909.00

This project focuses on understanding how a new memorial, the first of its kind,
affects the immediate community surrounding it. Memorialization in the United
States has been a growing trend over the past few decades. To date, there has
been limited research on how memorials affect relationships between groups and
how they affect the attitudes and behaviors of individuals. This project
explores how the representation of past violence is interpreted and responded to
by those who regularly interact with it. Nationally, the results will provide
the opportunity to determine the role and use of memorialization in promoting
positive intergroup relations. The project advances the nation's prosperity and
welfare by helping us to understand better how the practice of memorialization
mediates how our nation grapples with the darkest moments of its past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A two-wave longitudinal survey of the local city's
residents will be used around the opening of a new memorial to capture a pre-
and post- measure of social and political attitudes. The survey will be used to:
(1) assess how the memorial affects the community and individuals socially,
emotionally, and politically; (2) explore how the memorial's representation
affects attitudes toward intergroup relations; (3) reveal how that individuals'
social positions (i.e., race, class, gender, etc.) influence how they interpret
and interact with the memorial; and, (4) explicitly measure social and geo-
spatial effects of a physical representation of violence. Whether the results
demonstrate a net positive or a net negative effect of the memorial, the
research will highlight the impact on present identity representations and
intergroup relations. Findings also will be useful to those involved in the
opening and managing of such memorials, and those considering their
construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.