* 1822136
* Use of Artificial Intelligence towards Automation of Analog Seismogram Digitization
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Miaki Ishii, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2021
* USD 154,017.00

Seismometers have been recording ground motion since the late 1800s, and about
100 years of the recordings are in analog form (e.g., paper recordings) that
cannot be examined using modern techniques. These data contain information about
earthquakes, volcano eruptions, subsurface changes, changes in weather pattern,
to name the few, and are vital for understanding various phenomena that affect
the Earth and how they evolve over time. This project aims to make a significant
step forward in converting these analog data into usable digital format by
introducing artificial intelligence to the conversion process. Currently, there
is a software that takes a record image and generates digital seismograms, but
it requires substantial human interaction making this process slow, impractical,
or impossible. Successful implementation of artificial intelligence will allow
more data to be processed quickly for use by the scientific community, which is
a significant broader impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will start by
examining the digitized analyses to determine and build the training database to
be used for the construction of the neural network. The investigators will also
identify steps that will benefit most from implementation of artificial
intelligence procedures to decrease human interaction and improve accuracy of
the digitization of seismograms. Neural networks for image classification and
object identification are now available and will be examined to find the
algorithm that is most suitable for the seismogram digitization process. The
improved digitization software will be openly available to increase users and
provide a robust tool to convert analog seismogram images to research-quality
digital seismograms. It will enable the seismological community to retrieve data
that for application of modern analyses, and open opportunities for new types of
research to be done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.