* 1822478
* CRCNS Research Proposal:  Collaborative Research: Wiring synaptic chain networks for precise timing during development
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Michael Long, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Skilled behaviors such as singing and playing the piano require precise timing.
The primary goal of this project is to use theoretical and experimental
approaches to understand the network properties of neurons that can produce the
extremely precise activity necessary to enable these actions. Such networks are
likely to be wired during the development of the brain, but the precise
mechanisms involved remain a mystery. Previous computational models and
experimental observations suggest that the wiring process is gradual. The
investigators of this project will study how individual neurons are incorporated
into the network. Of particular interest are postnatally born neurons, which
have more immature properties compared with other neurons within the circuit,
including a higher degree of spontaneous activity, which potentially facilitates
their recruitment into the network. These ideas will be tested by experimentally
tagging and manipulating immature neurons, as well as by constructing
computational models and simulating the network growth process. The findings may
shed light on how functional neuronal networks develop. The research may also
help to formulate strategies of repairing dysfunctional or injured brain
networks through manipulation of neuron maturity. This research will involve a
wide range of innovative experimental and computational techniques and provide
opportunities for students to gain expertise in electrophysiology, neural data
analysis, and modern methods of computational neuroscience. The principal
investigators will train postdoctoral researchers as well as graduate students,
undergraduates, and summer high school interns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model
system used in this project is the motor control circuitry of the zebra finch, a
songbird whose adult courtship song consists of a highly repeatable sequence of
vocal elements (or motif) sung with millisecond precision. The timing of song is
controlled by a premotor forebrain region called HVC (proper name). Each
premotor HVC neuron fires once per motif with sub-millisecond timing jitter
across renditions. As a population, these neurons drive downstream song
production circuits to produce specific acoustic patterns. During development,
precise timing within HVC gradually emerges while the bird is learning to
perform his song. Previous experimental observations suggest that neurons are
gradually incorporated into the network generating song-relevant neural
sequences, potentially from the newly born neurons that are robustly added to
HVC during this period. This project aims to investigate the cellular and
synaptic mechanisms underlying the development of the sequence generating
network in HVC. The central hypothesis of this work is that these spontaneously
active, newly born neurons are preferentially added to the leading edge of the
growing timing network. This hypothesis will be tested with a combined
experimental and computational modeling approach: (1) directly imaging the
dynamics of network integration of newly born neurons in vivo through a targeted
retroviral method; (2) constructing a computational model of HVC that is
constrained by these observations and using the model to investigate the
mechanisms of the network growth; and (3) measuring the cellular and synaptic
properties of newly born neurons and their spontaneous activity as they
mature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.