* 1822492
* Ship Operations R/V Atlantic Explorer
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 25,464,754.00

Funding is requested for Ship Operations support for the Research Vessel
Atlantic Explorer for the period from 2018 with a five-year budget until the end
of 2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R/V Atlantic Explorer is a general-purpose
research ship owned and operated by the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
(BIOS) and is part of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF). BIOS is a U.S. 501 (c)
3 and 509 (a) not-for profit research and educational institution incorporated
in the state of New York, and geographically located on the island of Bermuda.
The mission of the ship is to support funded science research. RV Atlantic
Explorer has 204 days funded in 2018. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
supports scientific users of R/V Atlantic Explorer, and primarily NSF funded
research projects. The major research projects that use R/V Atlantic Explorer
are oceanographic time-series efforts, ancillary users of the ship conducting
independent and collaborative research through opportunities provided to sample
the deep ocean, and independent users of the ship undertaking research in the
North Atlantic Ocean. R/V Atlantic Explorer supports scientific research and
technology development that improves scientific knowledge of societal relevant
environmental issues. The oceanographic time- series and other scientific
research programs directly contribute to improved understanding of such global
issues as: (1) global climate change; (2) the complex interaction and feedback
between climate phenomena, global warming, ocean biogeochemistry and ecosystem
variability and health; (3) ocean warming, stratification, and ocean
deoxygenation; and, (4) the variability of greenhouse gases such as CO2, the
exchange of CO2 between ocean and atmosphere, variability of carbon sources and
sinks, and ocean acidification. The mission of the ship is to support funded
science research. The vessel is scheduled for 204 days at sea in 2018. These
days are primarily in support of National Science Foundation funded science. R/V
Atlantic Explorer will support scientific research in the oligotrophic
subtropical gyre of the North Atlantic Ocean. This region is an important
modulator of the oceanic cycling of biogeochemical (N, P) and radiatively
important elements (e.g., CO2), air-sea heat and salt transport as well as
climate. The ease of access to these deep waters has allowed R/V Atlantic
Explorer to significantly contribute to national efforts to improve our
understanding of ocean processes. Three nationally and internationally important
oceanographic time-series programs have and will be supported by R/V Atlantic
Explorer operations, including: (1) Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS)
research program begun in 1988; (2) Hydrostation S research program begun in
1954, and; (3) Ocean Flux Program (OFP) begun in 1978&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.