* 1822135
* IUCRC Planning University of Colorado Boulder: Center for Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Shivakant Mishra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Internet of Things (IoT) marks the dawn of a technological revolution that
rivals the industrial revolution. In this new era, intelligent computing becomes
anticipatory, proactive, and adaptive. The next big growth in IoT systems will
come from pushing Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI) to the edge of the
network, where latency is critical, and mobility, privacy, and context awareness
are essential qualities of the application. This proposal will study the
feasibility of establishing an industry university collaborative research center
focused on PPI that will enable an entirely new class of intelligent
applications that is predictive instead of reactive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed PPI Center will enrich the educational resources and toolsets for
adding, modernizing, tuning, and suggesting intelligence in software
applications for the IoT. The Colorado Site will lead activities under two
thrusts: (1) Edge and Cloud Computing. Is it possible to identify and develop a
small set of fundamental system-level services at the middleware layer to
integrate mobile nodes, IoT devices and edge servers? (2) Programming Languages
and Verification. Can new techniques be created that enable software developers
to effectively create rich PPI applications that, by construction, are secure,
privacy-preserving, and reliable? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With their rich array of
sensors, camera, and GPS all integrated in a convenient form, IoT devices offer
exciting new applications and services, never before possible on consumer
devices. But these can be harnessed only if intelligence becomes a commodity.
PPI will enable novel applications that will help the U.S. maintain and expand
its leadership in computing. The proposed Center is committed to broadening
participation in computing through, for example, summer camps focusing on
programming for novices. To improve the retention of underrepresented
populations, the proposed Center will work with technology associations to
showcase PPI applications that help humanity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
Center on Pervasive Personalized Intelligence will be composed of Oregon State
University, the University of Colorado Boulder, and industry partners. The
proposed PPI Center will maintain a catalog of members, projects, meeting
materials, program information, publications, data, code, and results at
ppicenter.org. The website will be made available indefinitely or until the
Center transitions to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.