* 1822112
* Planning IUCRC at Case Western Reserve University:  Center for Industrial Energy Efficiency (CIEE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Industrial energy consumption is significant and accounts for approximately one-
third of total U.S. energy consumptions. For the energy currently consumed in
industry, about 64.4% is wasted, based on the U.S. Department of Energy's
statistical data. There is a great potential to improve the energy efficiency of
industrial operations to reduce the energy consumption, lower the utility cost
and cut greenhouse gas emissions. This project is to plan for the establishment
of an Industry-University Cooperative Research Center, by reaching out to
potential manufacturing companies, utility companies and energy service
companies which are interested in conducting collaborative research with CWRU
faculty on industrial energy efficiency. The vision of the planned IUCRC is to
establish a national/international research center dedicated to advancing the
knowledge and techniques needed to improve industrial energy efficiency to
enhance the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing industry in the global economy
and to mitigate the carbon emissions from U.S. industrial sector.
Simultaneously, the proposed IUCRC will develop advanced educational program to
train a large cohort of engineering students. This planned IUCRC will generate
significant impacts on the industrial operations and academic research on
industrial energy efficiency, through joint efforts with Purdue University.

The proposed IUCRC at CWRU will focus on improving energy efficiency of
manufacturing companies, in collaborations with utility companies and energy
service companies. The research objectives of this IUCRC are to: (1). Develop
scientific modeling tools and experimental techniques for identifying the in-
depth energy saving opportunities in industrial manufacturing systems. (2).
Develop applicable control algorithms and tools for effectively reducing the
energy consumption in industrial manufacturing systems. (3). Develop data
analytics approaches and decision-support tools for supporting policy-making and
strategy-planning on Industrial Energy Efficiency. (4). Develop educational
programs for workforce training on Industrial Energy Efficiency. The planning
project will leverage the expertise of CWRU faculty members in industrial energy
efficiency, manufacturing system optimization, adaptive process control, and
energy data analytics, to harness existing relationships of CWRU with industry
to identify possible partners for the IUCRC and utilize an inclusive feedback
process between researchers and potential members to determine the strategic
direction of research projects to be conducted. The research results obtained
from the center will provide novel insights into current industrial operations
for in-depth energy savings, plant-wide implementations, and public policy
support.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.