* 1822550
* CRCNS Research Project: Solving the neural code of Hydra
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Rafael Yuste, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2022
* USD 697,512.00

One way to decipher a complex biological problem, such as understanding how the
brain works, is by using a simpler system that enables greater experimental or
computational access. Hydra is a small, transparent relative of the jellyfish,
and represents the first animals to have evolved a nervous system.
Correspondingly, the nervous system of Hydra is very simple, with a few hundred
neurons forming a net which tiles the body of the animal, without ganglia or
brain. In spite of this simplicity, Hydra's nerve net generates a rich range of
nimble behaviors, including contracting, elongating, bending, searching and
somersaulting. Recently, the investigators of this project developed genetically
altered Hydra strains in which the activity of neurons and muscles causes them
to generate a light signal. Thus, the investigators can directly observe the
activation of every neuron and muscle cells in an animal while it is behaving.
Because of this, they can use statistical methods to analyze how neural activity
drives movements. They discover basic principles of how simple nervous systems
control muscles to produce behaviors. Given that Hydra has no brain, this
project may reveal how complex movement can be organized without any central
coordination. Further, Hydra has an extraordinary ability to regrow: its cells
are constantly being replaced, and a complete Hydra body can reform from even
very small pieces of the animal. Understanding how the nerve net of Hydra
continues to produce stable behavior in the face of rapid turnover may advance
understanding of how nervous systems can repair themselves. The study of Hydra
with an integrated imaging/computational approach serves as an appealing
platform for outreach opportunities. The research introduces members of the
general public to neuroimaging and essential biology and mathematical
neuroscience. It also provides training opportunities for researchers at all
levels. The Hydra system is deeply integrated into summer courses at the Marine
Biological Laboratory and provides cross-cutting projects for students from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to decipher the
relation between the activity of a nervous system, the muscles it controls and
the behavior the muscles generate using the cnidarian Hydra. The investigators
focus on decoding the neural basis of a few elementary behaviors that can be
rigorously identified and that are generated by the endodermal and ectodermal
nerve nets. The investigators use calcium imaging of every neuron and every
muscle cell in mounted Hydra preparations during contractile behaviors. To
analyze the required data sets, the investigators develop algorithms to track
cells in the moving, deforming animal and apply dimensionality reduction methods
to discover spatiotemporal patterns of movement corresponding to muscle
activation patterns. The end product is a quantitative model that explains how
contractile behaviors are generated. As another deliverable, the techniques
developed to track neurons and discover spatiotemporal patterns are made widely
available in an open source platform and may be of use in other systems. This
proposed work will help establish Hydra as a model neural system for which a
complete accounting of neural activity and behavior may be rigorously
approached.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.