* 1822245
* Meeting: 2018 Institute on Teaching and Learning, Physiology Educator's Community of Practice Fellowships
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Marsha Matyas, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

Science educators benefit from ongoing professional development to learn about
and implement evidence-based practices in teaching, learning, and assessment in
their classrooms. To this end, the American Physiological Society convenes a
biennial Institute on Teaching and Learning to provide postsecondary educators
an opportunity to share education research and best practices relating to
improving science teaching and learning. This year's institute will be held June
18-22, 2018 in Madison, Wisconsin. This project will support twenty physiology
educators to attend the Institute and to participate in a year-long immersion in
the Physiology Educators Community of Practice, which engages in online
professional development activities including discussion groups and online
courses about the scholarship of teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fellowships will support the participation of trainees (graduate students and
postdocs), early career educators, community college faculty, and faculty from
underrepresented groups or minority-serving institutions in the 2018 Institute
of Teaching and Learning. The Institute will address topics such as best
practices in teaching, scholarship of teaching and learning, integrating
research into undergraduate classrooms, and assessment of activities. More than
half of the planned institute speakers are female, and more than 10% are members
of underrepresented groups. Candidates for the fellowship will be current
members of the American Physiological Society (APA), who submit an abstract for
the meeting and a fellowship application. An organizing committee, comprised of
faculty from different institutional types and representatives of the APA, will
review applications and select fellowship recipients. Fellows will be expected
to attend the 2018 Institute of Teaching and Learning and to participate in
professional development activities throughout the subsequent
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.