* 1822232
* Rejuvenating the English Lexicon Project
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* David Balota, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2021
* USD 23,074.00

Two decades ago, the National Science Foundation supported the development of
the English Lexicon Project (ELP), a critical database for researchers exploring
how people read. The ELP affords measures of word recognition for over 40,000
words across over 1200 participants that were collected at six universities.
Importantly, these data are made available to the wider research community via a
user-friendly website at elexicon.wust.edu. Using the database, researchers can
select stimuli with specific characteristics for experiments exploring the
nature of reading and its neural underpinnings. Moreover, the database has been
important in identifying new variables that influence the reading process. The
impact of this database on research is exemplified by the over 1600 (google
scholar) citations to the original (2007) publication describing the project.
The website is accessed approximately 250 times each week from researchers
worldwide. This is a prime example of how big data can have a substantial impact
on a theoretically important area that has clear applied implications, i.e., how
individuals read words. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ELP is being run on an
outdated computer that has outlived its life expectancy and the original
software interface is no longer supported. This proposal is to rewrite the
programs for the user interface using current software supported by a virtual
computer system within the Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences at
Washington University. This will ensure the database remains available to the
psycholinguistic community.