* 1822737
* CRI: II-New: A Software Defined Infrastructure for Cross-Layer Research on Reconfigurable Architecture and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Whalley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 07/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Rapid advances in computer technologies bring many disruptive changes to
conventional wisdoms of software and hardware systems. Such disruption requires
the increasing attention and efforts from computing researchers to develop
commensurate software and hardware tools that can facilitate the service of
computer technologies to the applications and end users. Significant research on
computer architecture, network, and storage systems is needed to meet these
requirements. The Department of Computer Science at Florida State University has
been carrying out many systems research projects that could make use of cutting-
edge equipment on software defined networking, processor and memory
architectures, high-bandwidth storage devices, and reconfigurable computer
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the need, this project develops a
software-defined, reconfigurable infrastructure called NoleLand. It features
advanced manycore processors, software-defined networking, and 3D Xpoint High
Bandwidth Memory devices for computer systems research. These capabilities
enable cross-layer research projects on performance, scalability, and resilience
of large-scale systems, as well as the development of software-defined file and
storage systems for data-intensive applications. In addition, NoleLand provides
an incubator for more collaborative opportunities and multidisciplinary research
projects. Furthermore, NoleLand helps recruit more under-represented Hispanic
and African-American students and prepares them for professional careers. It
delivers a state-of-the-art infrastructure that significantly strengthens
computing research and education activities at the Florida State University and
the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.