* 1822026
* Phase II IUCRC at University of North Carolina, Charlotte:  Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Thomas Suleski, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2024
* USD 646,341.00

The Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) is a partnership between the University of
North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC Charlotte) and the University of Rochester
(UR). CeFO is advancing research and education in the science, engineering, and
applications of freeform optics through dedicated, long-term partnerships with
industry and government laboratories. CeFO is motivated by the need for compact,
affordable, high-performance optical systems to support the precision
technologies of the 21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freeform optics
specifically enables compact optical solutions for complex light mapping as well
as folding optical systems in three-dimensions. Applications with immediate
benefit include 3-D imaging and visualization, augmented and virtual reality,
infrared and military optical systems, efficient automotive and LED lighting,
energy research, remote sensing, semiconductor manufacturing and inspection, and
medical and assistive technologies. CeFO enables freeform optics to permeate the
marketplace through integration of fundamental and applied research and
significant advances in design, fabrication, and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CeFO creates a fertile, dynamic, inclusive
multidisciplinary environment to move this technology to the forefront. The
partner universities are dedicated to the recruitment and retention of women and
students from underrepresented groups (i.e. 34% underrepresented students in
CeFO in Spring 2017) to create a diverse and skilled workforce for the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Freeform Optics (CeFO) vertically
integrates mathematics, materials science, optical science, optical instrument
design, optomechanics, and precision optical manufacturing, measurement, and
testing to transform the optics industry in the 21st century. CeFO constitutes a
unique research environment combining the strengths of two world class research
universities with specialized experiences, insights, and interdisciplinary
talents for designing, building and measuring advanced optical systems. UNC
Charlotte's expertise in fabrication, metrology and precision opto-mechanical
design complements the University of Rochester's excellence in optical theory,
design, and metrology. Research topics of immediate interest to industry include
the mathematical description of freeform surfaces, the quantification of mid-
spatial frequency errors on optical performance, and wave-based modeling of
freeform systems and new bases for 3D optical design. Additional challenges
include use of difficult optical materials, characterization and elimination of
mid-spatial frequency errors, volume manufacturing (e.g. replication, molding,
3D printing), and advanced metrology for freeform surfaces. Freeform optical
systems will enable innovation in sensing, imaging, visualization and diagnostic
instrumentation by directing light in 3D. The partner Universities demonstrate
excellent records in recruiting women and minority students (&gt;30% of graduate
students in the program). Students work with CeFO industrial members to
communicate and transfer key enabling technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.