* 1822436
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Coordinated, Behaviorally-Aware Recovery for Transportation and Power Disruptions (CBAR-tpd)
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Pamela Murray-Tuite, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 814,441.00

This project will develop an approach for coordinated restoration of
infrastructure services following disruptive events in interdependent power and
transportation systems. This approach accommodates behavior adaptation in the
recovery of physical aspects of infrastructure. This adaptation is not well
understood or integrated with current restoration plans. By better understanding
adaptive behaviors and their dependence on different infrastructures and
coordinating recovery across these infrastructures, such a framework can help
households return to productive activities faster. For instance, if employees
cannot commute, they may work remotely if power is available. This approach to
infrastructure restoration has the potential to substantially improve the
efficiency of post-disaster return to productive daily life. If infrastructure
recovery is coordinated and focuses on actual needs, restoration also may be
more cost effective. To help realize these benefits, the project's team of civil
engineers, social scientists, and computer scientists will convey research
results through practitioner-oriented seminars held with FEMA, state emergency
management agencies, transportation authorities, and electric power utilities.
The multi-disciplinary approach and outreach activities developed for Virginia
Tech's Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity and the University of
Michigan's Detroit-Area Pre-College Engineering Program will help broaden the
research participation of underrepresented groups and attract new students to
the respective fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the project's
objectives include: developing improved methods for collecting, analyzing, and
archiving tweets and webpages - integrated with data collected from official or
specialized sources - in support of understanding the interplay of behavior and
power and transportation infrastructures in disruptions; collecting novel data
with activity diaries that incorporate adaptation and use of technologies;
determining how the nature of information about infrastructure disruptions and
the way in which individuals process this information shape responses to
disruptions and preferred tradeoffs; identifying how these behavior adaptations
induce or magnify substitutive interdependencies between transportation and
power systems; and developing recovery strategies that coordinate among the
infrastructures and account for adaptation. To achieve these objectives, the
study will use social media, official utility and transport information, and
activity panel surveys to develop behavioral and infrastructure outage models
that feed a coordinated, behaviorally-aware power and transport recovery model
using optimization and agent based modeling. The project team's approach
specifically examines the adaptation of individuals who pursue alternate means
to accomplish an activity goal and the interdependence between power and
transportation infrastructure that results from this adaptation during
disruptions. This approach is applied to a case study in a metropolitan
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.