* 1822670
* R/V Atlantis Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Albert Suchy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 46,094,395.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) requests funding to support NSF
funded scientific research on R/V Atlantis n 2018. The proposed operations will
provide access for over 10 NSF Principal Investigators (PIs) to conduct multiple
research sea voyages throughout the year. 85% of the 303 day scheduled will
support NSF and OOI programs. NASA, NOAA, and ONR will support the other 15% of
R/V Atlantis ship time in 2018. R/V Atlantis will enter 2018 on a voyage
supporting the Navy's assistance to Argentina in the search for its missing
submarine the ARA San Juan. R/V Atlantis will work back from the South Atlantic
Ocean to Woods Hole conducting voyages for NSF and NOAA along the way. On
departing Woods Hole, R/V Atlantis will work in the Atlantic conducting Alvin
and Sentry ops before returning to Woods Hole in the summer. R/V Atlantis will
depart Woods Hole in late summer to conduct Alvin and Jason ops in the Atlantic
before finishing the year in the Pacific conducting Alvin and Sentry ops for NSF
sponsored PIs to the end of the year. R/V Atlantis will then go to dry-dock for
a regulatory docking through the first quarter of CY
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects supported by operations
on R/V Atlantis in 2018 have been rigorously evaluated for scientific and
intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant review and award
process. The competitive nature of the award granting process ensures a very
high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the discoveries made by
the research programs supported by R/V Atlantis will enhance understanding of
the oceans and address a broad range of important scientific questions. The goal
of this proposal is to provide funding support to safely and productively
operate and maintain R/V Atlantis in 2018 and to ensure it is maintained to
support its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential prerequisite for
safe and successful scientific missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WHOI research
vessels provide at-sea laboratories necessary to effectively and safely take
science to sea. This community includes senior oceanographic scientists, post-
doctoral and doctoral students, graduate and undergrad students as well as
engineers, technicians, and teachers. These intellectual endeavors have
broadened our understanding and have spurred on new questions and scientific
theory. Research supported by R/V Atlantis will be important in understanding
the Earth's climate and how it changes over time. In 2018 R/V Atlantis will
deploy Alvin, Jason and Sentry to conduct operations in the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans and obtain water column samples in both Oceans. Educational and outreach
programs will be featured on these voyages. All of these intellectual endeavors
will continue to broaden our understanding of the oceans, stimulate new
questions, and confirm scientific theory for years to come, benefiting society
at large. Oceanographic expeditions are an extension of university classrooms
and are an extraordinary educational experience. Voyages expose participants to
new ideas, teach fundamental scientific principles through observation and
practice, and inevitably raise questions that stimulate new thinking about how
the oceans work. An increased awareness of our responsibility to bring this
science into the classroom and to the public has resulted in the development of
new avenues to share these scientific findings. The cruise web site concept has
effectively reached classrooms with real-time images, data and two-way
communication between scientists and students in schools across the country.
These efforts have extended the sea-going experience from a handful of
participants to thousands of students in classrooms across the country, as well
as to the general public. Scientists on WHOI vessels will use this tool to
present their data through web-based approaches either at their home institution
or through web sites maintained by community organizations. The WHOI web site,
http://www.whoi.edu, has pioneered efforts to present the results of research
expeditions to the public. Outreach programs continuing in 2018 from WHOI
vessels with the Perkins School for the Blind and Disabled represent cutting
edge efforts to broaden the experience of conducting research at sea to every
American&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.