* 1822215
* Field-Theoretic Simulations: Polarization Phenomena and Coherent States
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 415,479.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research, software
development, and education aimed at understanding two broad classes of emerging
soft materials: ion-containing polymers and supramolecular polymers. These are
materials that have great promise in emerging technology areas such as
batteries, fuel cells, and lightweight vehicles and aircraft. Polymers are
large, linear molecules that are ubiquitous in daily life in the form of
plastics, rubbers, and textiles. However, their properties and processing
behavior can be significantly changed by the incorporation of ions (electrical
charges) along their backbones, or by the introduction of small chemical units
that can participate in reversible chemical bonds, such as hydrogen bonds. This
project aims to develop the theoretical and computer simulation tools necessary
to understand the physical properties of these systems and to tailor them for
applications. Both types of polymer systems have defied conventional theoretical
and computational approaches either because of the large size and high
concentration of the polymers, or the complexity of the electrostatic charge
interactions and reversible bonds. This project will tackle these difficulties
by modeling the polymers using "field theory" frameworks adapted from the
theoretical physics literature. The PIs will further develop numerical
algorithms that enable efficient computer simulations of the polymer field
theory models. The fundamental understanding and the software tools emerging
from the project will accelerate the rational design of this fascinating class
of soft materials. Broader impacts of the proposed research include a
continuance of the PIs' involvement in graduate, undergraduate, and post-
doctoral training in theoretical and computational polymer science.
Theoretically-oriented students will be exposed to broader soft materials
disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The knowledge gained under the
proposed project will be leveraged through the Complex Fluids Design Consortium
at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership that is addressing the
computational design of commercially relevant polymer formulations. The
participants will further contribute to the vibrant education and outreach
programs of UCSB's Materials Research Science and Engineering Center.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research, software
development, and education aimed at understanding two broad classes of emerging
soft materials: ion-containing polymers and supramolecular polymers This project
will build on recent developments by the PIs of the "field-theoretic simulation"
method, enabling direct numerical investigations of field theory models of
polymers and soft materials without resorting to the mean-field approximation.
The proposed research aims to make fundamental, transformative advances in
understanding and methodology by providing a computationally efficient framework
in which charge correlation and polarization phenomena can be explored without
approximation in field-theoretic models. This will enable breakthrough studies
of broad classes of ion- containing, inhomogeneous soft matter. A second thrust
involves the development of "coherent states" field theory representations of
supramolecular polymer models and robust numerical methods for simulating them.
Such simulations will provide comprehensive guidelines for understanding the
interplay of self-assembly and supramolecular bonding equilibria in this complex
and emerging class of materials. In the context of polarizable field theory,
models and efficient algorithms will be developed for simulating polymeric
systems containing ions, permanent dipoles, and polarizable segments. These will
be used to investigate the structure and phase behavior of ion-containing block
copolymers, ionomers and polymeric ionic liquids, and inhomogeneous
polyelectrolyte complexes. Electric field-induced phenomena in these important
classes of systems will be further elucidated. The second thrust relates to
coherent-states polymer field theory, a long neglected representation of
interacting polymers inspired by second-quantized field theory. The proposed
work aims to develop and optimize algorithms for simulations of coherent states
models and apply those algorithms to fundamental studies of reversibly bonding,
supramolecular polymers. The work will explore relationships between variables
such as bonding equilibrium constants, stoichiometry and polymer architecture,
and self-assembly behavior and thermodynamic properties. A focus will be on
multi-component, inhomogeneous supramolecular systems, for which little
understanding and few material design guidelines exist. Broader impacts of the
proposed research include a continuance of the PIs' involvement in graduate,
undergraduate, and post-doctoral training in theoretical and computational
polymer science. Theoretically-oriented students will be exposed to broader soft
materials disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB
in chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The knowledge gained under
the proposed project will be leveraged through the Complex Fluids Design
Consortium at UCSB, an industry-national lab-academic partnership that is
addressing the computational design of commercially relevant polymer
formulations. The participants will further contribute to the vibrant education
and outreach programs of UCSB's Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.