* 1822002
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Long Term Effect of Immigration on Political Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 30,682.00

Under the direction of Takeshi Inomata, Juan Manuel Palomo of the University of
Arizona will undertake research to understand the impact of political
centralization and social inequalities on diet and migration patterns.
Archaeological investigation allows scholars to generate relevant insights about
processes of social inequality and political centralization over extended
periods of time in human history, which include the emergence of sedentary
communities, the development of larger polities, and their disintegrations.
Previous scholarship has found that migration can be important during the
process of political centralization, where on some occasions non-local
individuals are drawn to big centers as the power and influence of those cities
increased. Scholars are interested in examining the role that these migrations
had during the development of social inequalities and political growth. Diet can
play an important role for studying political centralization and social
inequality because it not only provides us information about health, but also
social class, ethnic groups, and lifestyle affiliations. By studying ancient
populations, places of origin and cultural landscapes, the researchers can begin
identifying and differentiating ethnic groups, social class, lifestyles, dietary
practices, and other social complexities of human culture. The results of the
proposed research will contribute to the study of migration, diet, social
inequalities, political centralization, as well as to that of the emergence and
decline of centralized polities not only in Mesoamerica but also in other parts
of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Palomo will examine social inequality
and political centralization processes at critical moments of the human history,
which include the emergence of sedentary communities, the development of larger
polities, and their disintegrations. To address these issues, the scholars are
examining two more specific questions: 1) How were social inequality and
political centralization reflected in dietary practices? 2) How were changes in
social inequality and political centralization associated with those in-
migrations and external relations? To examine these questions, the research team
will conduct a multi-isotopic analysis on the skeletal remains of 86 sampled
individuals from the Mayan archaeological site of Ceibal that date from the
Middle Preclassic to the Terminal Classic periods. During the analysis, the
researchers will create and promote education and training opportunities for
students. Carbon and nitrogen isotopic data will allow the scholars to examine
whether changes in social inequality and political centralization were
accompanied by those in the diet. Oxygen, strontium, and lead isotopic analysis
will be used to examine whether Ceibal attracted more migrants and whether there
were more hostile external relations during the periods of growing political
centralization or during the establishment of political
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.