* 1822391
* Panel Study on Transparency and Reproducibility for NCSES Statistics and a Workshop on the Implications of Convergence for Measuring the S&amp;E Workforce and the S&amp;E Enterpris
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Brian Harris-Kojetin, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Sinibaldi
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,249,813.00

The National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) is the
nation's leading provider of statistical data on U.S. Science &amp; Engineering
(S&amp;E), including data on research and development, the S&amp;E workforce,
the condition and progress of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) education, and U.S. competitiveness in these areas. NCSES conducts a
large number of surveys to measure these characteristics; however, social and
technological changes, such as declining survey response rates, constrained
budget and staff resources, and alternative sources of data from non-government
sources, are making surveys more expensive to conduct and less useful. The
Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) of the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine will conduct two projects for NCSES to improve the
relevance and usefulness of its statistical programs and help it address a
changing world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project is focused on better
measurement of scientific work. Because many of the most pressing questions
confronting science and society today -- in fields ranging from cell research
and nanotechnology to environmental studies and beyond -- are large and complex
problems which are inherently interdisciplinary in character, they require
collaborative research using multiple methods and approaches from different
disciplines. This has been referred to as convergent research, and it is vital
that NCSES be able to accurately measure convergent research to inform science
policy about the patterns of this research and how it links to scientific
advances. However, measurement of this work is difficult because there is no
single accepted definition. To assist NCSES in being able to gather useful data
on the extent of convergence in scientific training and research, CNSTAT will
convene a workshop to identify and discuss issues in measuring convergence and
its implications for the science and engineering (S&amp;E) workforce and the
S&amp;E enterprise more broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project is
focused on expanding the kinds of data NCSES uses for its statistical program,
to potentially incorporate the use of administrative records and other data sets
to produce statistics that are relevant, timely, and of high quality for the
science policy and research communities. However, using these data sources
requires transparency in the sources, quality of data, and methods used so users
are able to assess whether the statistics produced are fit for their intended
purposes, and for comparison with results from other agencies and countries. In
June, 2017, NSF supported a CNSTAT workshop that examined various aspects of
transparency and reproducibility of data products from federal statistical
agencies, and it was clear that the current approaches to transparency and
reproducibility could be improved. Presentations from other countries
highlighted the development of a variety of tools, which could be useful for
achieving greater transparency and supporting greater use and reuse of
statistical data in the United States. CNSTAT will conduct a consensus study
that will provide a thorough assessment of these tools and potential benefits to
NCSES, and provide recommendations on developing standards for transparency and
reproducibility of NCSES statistics to help data users and maximize the public
benefits from NCSES statistical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.