* 1822137
* Phase II IUCRC Unversity of Texas at Dallas: Center for Security and Software Engineering (S2ERC)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

As software is integrated more frequently into every aspect of our lives, as its
failure in operations causes increasingly devastating consequences, as schedules
and budgets are continually reduced despite the need for high-quality reliable
and secure software, it is critical to have cooperative research teamwork
between academia and industry. The University of Texas at Dallas IUCRC site
emphasizes technology development as well as transfer on software testing and
quality assurance. It matches the mission of the Security and Software
Engineering Research Center (S2ERC). Hence, there is strong synergy in having
this site become one of the major university sites of S2ERC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members of this site have extensive expertise and
background in industry collaboration in software testing and verification;
software fault localization and program repair; software reliability, metrics
and risk analysis; programming languages; software security systems; and
software and system safety. The University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) is located
in an area with many high-tech companies that provide excellent opportunities
for conducting academic/industrial cooperative research. UTD has a strong
Software Engineering program offering BS, MS, and PhD degrees. This student
talent base is accessible for work on cooperative software engineering and
security research projects that fall within the scope of this IUCRC site and
S2ERC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The addition of this site to S2ERC will broaden and
improve the Center's research in two of the nation's most important disciplines:
software engineering and security. Membership fees from new industry affiliates
will increase the overall program income of S2ERC. With a larger pool of
funding, the center will be able to attract more proposals in response to
industry needs and develop advanced technology applications for dependable and
secure software development at a reduced cost. This will not only attract
additional companies to join, but also profoundly impact the nation's
technological innovation and improve the country's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site will follow the same data management
plan used by S2ERC. Each project will release its data to the public at the
earliest reasonable time and the access to such data will be available for at
least three years after conclusion of the project. A designated website
(http://paris.utdallas.edu/stqa ) will be used for management and dissemination
of all data generated by research projects sponsored via this site, whereas
S2ERC has a more comprehensive repository that comprises projects within the
center as well as those conducted at other sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.