* 1822975
* CRI: CI-SUSTAIN: Collaborative Research: Sustaining Lemur Project Resources for the Long-Term
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 621,253.00

For more than a decade, the software, datasets, and online services developed
and provided by the Lemur Project have supported and enabled a large body of
academic and commercial research on search engines, information retrieval, and
other areas of computer science that analyze and process human language. This
project makes critical enhancements to Lemur Project infrastructure, operates
the infrastructure for another three years, and positions it for long-term
sustainability. As part of the enhancements, the Galago search engine is
enhanced to provide stronger integration of neural networks and other machine
learning methods. A new dataset, ClueWeb2020, is developed to replace the
widely-used ClueWeb09 and ClueWeb12 datasets. These investments will support
advanced research for the next decade. The advanced search capabilities
developed for the project's open-source Indri and Galago search engines, which
are widely used for research, are added to the open-source Lucene search engine,
which is widely used by industry. New software applications are developed to
simplify migration between Lemur Project search engines and Lucene. These
investments improve the state-of-the-art of software important to industry and
enable researchers to migrate research to more widely-used software. The Lemur
Project's research infrastructure attracted a substantial research user
community because it easily enables leading-edge research. These enhancements
enable researchers in information retrieval and related areas to carry out a
much broader range of experiments and to share their results. Research and
industry development supported by the new Lemur Project software will create a
new generation of more capable search engines for a variety of
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around three types of
activities: Sustaining software, sustaining datasets, and operation. The project
achieves long-term software sustainability by adding support for Indri and
Galago functionality and creating integration and migration paths with the open-
source Lucene search engine, which has large user and volunteer-developer
communities. Research done with Galago or Indri will thus be reproducible in
Lucene and more accessible to Lucene's industry users. The project also extends
the Galago Application Programming Interface to support the newest developments
in neural network (deep learning) document ranking technologies, which now are
being studied widely and expected in a state-of-the-art research system. It
broadens the utility of Ranklib by supporting neural algorithms for better
comparison with high quality learning to rank approaches, and broadens the
utility of the Sifaka text mining application with support for additional
document and machine learning formats. The older ClueWeb09 and ClueWeb12 datsets
are superseded by a new ClueWeb2020 dataset that is designed to last a decade
and support research on newer learning-to-rank and neural network (deep
learning) ranking algorithms. The project maintains and operates the existing
infrastructure, in the form of software maintenance and support; dataset
licensing and distribution; and operation of online search services. The new
Lemur Project infrastructure supports a broad range of Information Retrieval
research, for example, research on retrieval models; how to train learned
rankers; use of semi-structured knowledge bases; result diversification; query
optimization; and distributed search. In particular, it greatly improves support
for research on learned and neural (deep learning) ranking algorithms, which
have become important research topics in recent years. The ClueWeb datasets are
used by a broad human language technologies research community. This project
makes enhancements that sustain this infrastructure for the research community
for at least the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.