* 1822108
* Phase I IUCRC at Virginia Tech: Center for Advanced Subsurface Earth Resource Models (CASERM)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Matthias Chung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 968,817.00

Mining is intrinsic to modern society's transition to a sustainable existence.
Meeting the global demand for earth resources represents a grand challenge. The
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Subsurface Earth
Resource Models is a collaborative effort between Virginia Tech, Colorado School
of Mines, and industry partners. The Center's activities will transform the way
geoscience data are used in the exploration and mining industry sector,
beginning with the mineral exploration stage and continuing through mine closure
and environmental remediation. Research activities of the Center will
fundamentally change the way global exploration and mining of natural resources
is done, replacing industry experience- and empiricism-based decisions with
innovative science and technology-based solutions that inform decision making,
increase the chances of exploration success, and reduce financial risk. The
goals of the Center will promote socio-economic prosperity and help to reduce
the environmental impact of mining. Workforce development is an essential
component of the Center activities and will include graduate and undergraduate
students, and industry employee participation in research activities and
training opportunities. The Center will strengthen and promote cross-
disciplinary discoveries in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, computational
science and statistics. Knowledge transfer to the geothermal industry sector
will form one of the Center?s key activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
for Advanced Subsurface Earth Resource Models is focused on advancing the
exploration/mining industry sector through the establishment of a cooperative
partnership that conducts pre-competitive research and workforce development of
benefit to industry, academia, and society. The purpose and long-term vision of
this Center is directed toward research challenges in the development of 3-D
subsurface geologic models for mineral deposits, integrating diverse geoscience
data, to inform decision making and minimize geological risk. Four research
thrusts are envisioned: (1) development of geophysical and geochemical
instrumentation, analysis and interpretation methods for enhanced
characterization of rock properties; (2) integration, scaling, and inversion of
diverse geological, petrophysical, and geophysical data of dissimilar spatial
resolution and distribution to identify and characterize subsurface earth
resources; (3) development of information methodologies for reducing risk
associated with decision making; and (4) computational imaging and development
of graphical and exploratory data analysis solutions and visualization tools.
Achieving this broad vision requires collaborations from a broad range of
disciplines. Virginia Tech's broad expertise in computational methods, high
performance computing, mining engineering, fluids, seismic acquisition, imaging
and inversion, tomographic imaging, and petrophysics combined with industry
experience will allow for further mining-related
advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.