* 1822207
* Planning IUCRC University of Arizona: Center for Networked Embedded, Smart and Trusted Things (NESTT)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Frederic Zenhausern, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Most public health systems around the world are investing into initiatives
promoting and supporting the convergence of medicine and technology for
improving the healthcare delivery systems. These efforts rely on integrating
sensing, logistics, computing, actuation and communication functionalities in
everyday practices. The University of Arizona will work with Arizona State
University, University of Southern California, University of Connecticut, and
Southern Illinois University to form a new IUCRC for Networked Embedded, Smart
and Trusted Things (NESTT). The vision of NESTT is to contribute to the
development of an equitable, safe and secure connected world. NESTT will achieve
this vision by focusing on creating holistic IoT solutions, integrating
technology disciplines with expertise in medicine, law, business, and
humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to make these transformative
approaches and technologies a reality, machine learning and artificial
intelligence are some of the emerging tools for processing the massive amounts
of IoT data and information that will shift the medical decision making
processes from simple binary modes to complex "nuanced" and "near real-time"
models. UofA NESTT site will co-organized workshops to design industry
specifications and prototype health logistics appliances, wearable sensor
systems, ambient intelligence and A.I. data algorithms that can be integrated
effectively into the regulatory framework and processes of the healthcare
delivery system by enabling the IoT advanced technology solutions planned at the
other NESTT nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is trend in digitalization of
medicine and healthcare, especially with the emergence of the Internet of Things
which will disrupt the healthcare industry in this decade. UA NESTT site will
investigate this digital transformation through the entire value chain, from
discovery to bedside. Health platforms designed to address unmet needs and
improve medical access to underserved large populations will provide useful
solutions to the global healthcare challenges. UA NESTT academic, clinical and
business partners will contribute their expertise to provide contextualization
and standardization of information to offer real-world insights in digital
transformation of the healthcare sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda and
documentation of activities for the NESTT IUCRC planning meetings will be made
available on UofA's website for the Center for Applied Nanobioscience and
Medicine (https://phoenixmed.arizona.edu/anbm ). It will be maintained until the
establishment of NESTT, and then merged with the NESTT
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.