* 1822279
* Conference: Machine Learning in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 10/31/2019
* USD 29,999.00

This award supports the first annual Symposium on Machine Learning in Science
and Engineering (MLSE), held in Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, June 6-8, 2018. The
meeting, initially organized by Carnegie Mellon University and Georgia Tech, is
the first comprehensive and open annual conference bringing together leading
researchers in science and engineering whose work benefits from advances in
machine learning and data science. While machine learning has revolutionized
many areas of biological and biomedical research, its impact across the sciences
and engineering is at an early stage. This symposium will bring together
researchers in a diversity of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
areas focused on applying machine learning to problems of fundamental or applied
nature. Presentations will focus on adapting existing machine learning methods
to current research areas, developing new machine learning algorithms specific
to science and engineering, and identifying new frontiers of research that may
only be pursued using a data-driven approach. The symposium will offer attendees
focused short courses taught by experts in machine learning on a variety of
cutting-edge tools that are critical in advancing these fields. The MLSE
symposium will help catalyze machine learning methodologies and collaborations
across the sciences and engineering, bringing together researchers in a
diversity of STEM areas focused on applying machine learning to fundamental and
applied problems. Presentations will focus on adapting existing machine learning
methods to current research areas, developing new machine learning algorithms
specific to science and engineering, and identifying new frontiers of research
that may only be pursued using a data-driven approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
symposium is anticipated to reach, in its first year, at least 400 direct
participants and attendees, including under-represented minorities, those
attending Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), and low income students local to
the conference venues, or selected to travel to the event based on merit and
need. Several groups within the research community are involved, including a
diverse group of students, early career researchers and faculty. Information
will be widely disseminated on a continuing basis through news items published
via community-specific and broad news release venues. Partial support is being
provided primarily to enable participation by students and young researchers, in
addition to a limited number of tutorial and plenary speakers. The organizers
are committed to promoting participation among underrepresented groups, junior
researchers and students, and including tutorials to widen accessibility to as
large a group of attendees, as possible. The organizers will have an open
competition for these travel awards, selected by a diverse committee, and the
opportunity to apply will be widely disseminated across the relevant
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.