* 1823779
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Supervision in the Face of Sociocultural Divides
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Calvin Morrill, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 13,171.00

Given bipartisan concerns about contemporary incarceration levels in the U.S.,
policymakers and citizens alike are again becoming interested in community
supervision as a promising pathway toward prison downsizing. Most research about
community supervision tends to focus on whether or not it can effectively serve
as an alternative to incarceration. Little prior research addresses a central
challenge arising from the increased interaction between frontline criminal
justice workers and supervised individuals: the challenge of working closely
together across longstanding sociocultural divides. This project aims to provide
insight into the conditions under which empathy and trust can develop and be
sustained across such divides. In turn, this project could help devise safer and
more equitable models for ongoing, sustainable interaction between criminal
justice workers and supervised individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
combines ethnographic, interview and historical methods to study the workings of
community supervision in the liminal spaces amid criminal justice, on the one
hand, and local communities on the other. Focusing on probation work as an
empirical window for observing ongoing interactions between criminal justice
workers and members of supervised communities, the project interrogates how
frontline criminal justice workers understand the cultural and political worlds
of such communities and their attitudes toward the state and the law; as well as
how supervised individuals understand and come to manage their ongoing
interaction with the criminal justice system. Direct observation of interaction
among criminal justice workers and supervised persons supplemented by in-depth
interviews will yield a comprehensive picture of how situated understandings of
sociocultural difference vary and are negotiated between differently-situated
actors and across state institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.