* 1823702
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Changing Documentation Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Julie Chu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 19,578.00

The research supported by this award investigates how changing documentation
practices shape people's ideas about state governance, legal authority, and
citizenship. Ordinary documents, such as driver's licenses and ID cards, can be
critically important in the lives of modern citizens. However, governments
everywhere regularly undertake reforms that create new documents and alter or
eliminate old ones. Previous research has assessed the functionality of reforms,
but less attention has been paid to how the very repetitiveness of reforms
affects the state-citizen relationship. Filling this gap is important because
changes made with the goal of improving technologies or streamlining
bureaucracies may have unintended, negative consequences that could be avoided
if they were better understood before the changes were
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by University of
Chicago anthropology doctoral student, Do Dom Kim, with the oversight of Dr.
Julie Y. Chu. The researchers have sited the project in Shenzhen, China, where
documentation reforms have been occurring frequently and urban redevelopment and
impending mass relocation have made the stakes of documentation practices high.
This heightened importance of documentation will make the object of analysis
easier to isolate for research purposes than in might be in a less
documentation-rich and documentation-centric environment. The researchers will
collect data on how people facing critical life decisions such as eviction,
employment, marriage, and family planning, mobilize documentation in this
quickly changing political, legal, and technological environment. They will
employ a combination of ethnographic methodologies including interviews,
discourse analysis of policy documents, and archival research. Findings from the
research will contribute to scholarship on the state-citizen relationship,
internal displacement, and socialist law. In addition, findings will be shared
policymakers concerned to understand how people adapt to documentation reforms
as well as the long-term sociocultural consequences of constant policy changes,
particularly in the context of migration and urban
redevelopment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.