* 1823072
* Collaborative Research: The Relationship of the Spatial/Temporal Variability of Rain to Scaling
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Arthur Jameson, RJH Scientific Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 211,658.00

Scientists have been studying the non-homogeneity of rainfall for decades.
Simply put, raindrops collide, break apart, cluster, and spread out on their way
to the ground. This introduces a variety of fall speeds, drop sizes, and
instantaneous rainfall intensities that have significant impacts on a wide range
of topics from flood forecasting to erosion to communications system
availability. This research project will take advantage of a newly developed
network of rain sensors to conduct a multitude of studies on rainfall
characteristics. The main societal impacts fall under the umbrella of public
safety and productivity. Rainfall characteristics are important for weather
radars and weather forecast models for flood prediction, and for the prediction
of communications drop-outs along land links and satellites. Undergraduate
students will participate in the research, allowing for development of the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will continue
their studies into the spatial and temporal variability of rainfall with an
enhanced focus on scaling. The team will perform structural and statistical
exploration of rain by collecting and analyzing time series rain observations
over a newly configured network that consists of two 2D video disdrometers
(2DVD), six 1D optical disdrometers (1DVD), and 21 Laser Precipitation Monitors
(LPM). The objectives to be addressed during the work period include: exploring
the frequency of the statistical heterogeneity of rain in a wider variety of
meteorological conditions, comparing 2DVD observations to those interpolated
over a small network of LPMs, characterizing the 1DVD estimates with those of
different neighboring instruments, using 2DVD data to detect structures having
scales relevant to radar Bragg scatter from precipitation, expanding our
understanding of the scaling of DSD and their integrated parameters in
statistically homogeneous conditions and in a variety of different
meteorological conditions, beginning preliminary observations of the effect of
measurements at different heights above ground, and combining 2DVD observations
from two instruments for unique simultaneity studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.