* 1823471
* Student Support for the 2018 International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* William Yeoh, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 03/31/2020
* USD 16,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2018), to be held in Delft, The Netherlands, June
2018. This is the premier international conference for researchers in automated
planning and scheduling research and applications across a fully international
research community. This activity will bring together a broad community of
researchers in the field of AI, and support junior researchers at this critical
early-career stage. These events combine to provide educational opportunities
for students and experienced researchers alike, and are extremely popular among
conference participants. ICAPS is the major international conference that will
figure prominently in the research careers of students who remain involved in
planning and scheduling. Students will gain valuable research insights from the
exchange of technical ideas in this broader venue. In the process, they are
likely to make valuable connections with potential collaborators from around the
world. As intelligent software and embodies systems become more prevalent, it is
clear that advances in planning and scheduling will have significant impact in
virtually any domain imaginable, including transportation, logistics, robotics,
and remote sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.