* 1823795
* Leveraging mPFC engagement to induce improvements in older adults' memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Elizabeth Kensinger, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 10/31/2022
* USD 597,376.00

The demands of the modern world require continuous learning throughout the
lifespan. Even with increasing evidence that there are optimal brain states
(e.g. patterns of synchronous neural activity) for learning and memory, little
is known about how these optimal states may shift across the lifespan or what
may be done to achieve an optimal state during task learning and performance.
The proposed research tests the general hypothesis that training older adults to
use neural circuitry that is relatively preserved in aging may enable them to
continue use of that circuitry when asked to learn or to retrieve information.
The potential impact of this research for the later-life learning is high. It
could lead to new strategies to teach older adults how to maximize their chance
of memory success, especially in scenarios when a learning task is imminent,
such as when in an appointment with a physician. Using social media and in-
person events, this project will provide outreach activities to inform older
adults about scientific findings pertinent to their understanding of brain and
cognitive aging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lateral prefrontal cortex
(IPFC) engagement corresponds with memory success. Older adults recruit IPFC
differently than younger adults, and age seems to alter connections between IPFC
and the medial temporal lobe (MTL) regions critical for successful memory. Older
adults remain able to recruit medial prefrontal lobe regions (mPFC) into memory
networks and show relative preservation of the control processes implemented by
mPFC. Even though later-life learners can recruit mPFC regions in the service of
memory, they often do not; instead, they rely on additional recruitment of lPFC
to compensate. The overarching goal of this project is to test whether older
adults will perform optimally on learning and memory tasks when they can recruit
mPFC into memory networks, and whether they are more likely to do so when that
recruitment is facilitated or primed by tasks that encourage mPFC engagement in
moments that precede encoding (Aim 1) or retrieval (Aim 2). The selected tasks
(e.g. listening to music, reflecting on the self, or retrieving memories) have
separately been shown to enhance older adults' memory performance and to
increase mPFC engagement. Participants will engage in these tasks prior to
undertaking a memory task, with brain activity measured via functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI). It is hypothesized that older adults' behavioral
memory enhancements are mediated by mPFC recruitment, and engaging in these
tasks prior to learning or retrieval will increase memory performance. This
project brings together researchers with complementary expertise in the
cognitive neuroscience of aging and memory, socioemotional memory, use of fMRI
and quantitative methods, and specific experience with the task manipulations to
be used in this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.