* 1823567
* Oceanographic Technical Services, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Steven Hartz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 5,836,276.00

University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) proposes to support technical services on
R/V Sikuliaq, a new, 261-foot, general purpose research vessel operated as part
of the US Academic Research Fleet. The vessel is owned by NSF and operated by
the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. For basic technical services, UAF will
provide three shipboard technicians on each cruise on R/V Sikuliaq to support
seagoing research projects and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified
users items from their pool of shared-use research instrumentation. The ship is
in her fourth year of operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program received the
proposal on 1/13/2018. As required, the report provided information regarding
2017 operations as well as outlining plans and a proposed budget for 2018.
Research vessels in the Academic Fleet provide support for researchers from a
variety of federal and state agencies, as well as some private sponsors. All
users (or the appropriate funding agencies) share support for basic technical
services on the vessel equally, via a day-rate, with each paying a share of the
costs based on fractional usage of the vessel. The rates are negotiated annually
with the NSF Program Manager. The budget in this proposal is for the first year
of a five-year continuing grant. Out years are provided as estimates and the
awards will be negotiated upon receipt of the annual
report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.