* 1823524
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnography of Opioid Addiction Treatment Trajectories and Experiences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Parsa Bastani, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,114.00

The research supported by this award brings anthropological attention to an
issue that has long been dominated by public health researchers: understanding
how healthcare and criminal justice systems shape the well-being of low-income
substance users. Opioid addiction has become a global problem, having reached
epidemic proportions in many countries. Governments have responded with myriad
policies and programs to reduce the impact of opioid use, on society and on the
lives of low-income populations. Unfortunately, sometimes the result is policies
that are inconsistent in their messaging and contradictory in their effects. For
example, low-income opioid users may continue to face harsh criminal laws even
as their access to free and subsidized social services and treatment increases.
Therefore, it is important to understand how low-income opioid users experience
and negotiate these contradictions in order to further national efforts to craft
innovative and effective policies to address this growing social issue.

The research will be conducted by Brown University anthropology doctoral
student, Parsa Bastani, with the oversight of Dr. Katherine A. Mason. The
researcher will use Iran as a case study. Iran is an appropriate site to examine
how contradictory policies are experienced because the country has laws that
subject illicit substance users to both state-mandated care and surveillance,
control, and punishment. This laws have included subjecting anyone who even
appears to be an illicit drug user in public spaces to criminal prosecution,
even if not in possession of drugs at the time of arrest. Recently, the
government amended the laws to mandate that police-apprehended substance users
undergo mandatory detoxification while detained in specialized carceral centers
followed by aftercare in reintegration-oriented harm reduction and
rehabilitation facilities. The researcher will undertake twelve months of
ethnographic research to investigate how low-income opioid users experience and
respond to being simultaneously criminalized and cared for by the state. He will
collect data through semi-structured interviews, participant-observation, and
document analysis, to examine: 1) Experiences of criminalization: how do low-
income substance users encounter and navigate the criminal justice system? 2)
Experiences of care: what impact does care infrastructure have on low-income
substance users' experiences with social marginalization? 3) Experiences of
addiction: What are low income substance users' moral dispositions toward their
drug usage? What do they make of competing moral discourses about addiction?
Findings from this research will contribute to understanding the actual effects
of laws about illegal opioid use and the factors that enable and hinder the
reintegration of highly stigmatized populations into society. The research also
will contribute to building more robust social scientific understanding of how
marginalized social actors negotiate conflicting social institutions and moral
discourses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.