* 1823635
* Career Dynamics: A Longitudinal Analysis of US Firms and Households
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Claudia Goldin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2022
* USD 508,507.00

This proposed research will use a large and rich data set to study the sources
of the gender earnings (the gap) that widens over the work cycle. It will focus
on married couples to explore the costs of flexible and lower-hour jobs, the
role of geographic moves that favor one member of the couple over the other, and
the relative impact on women of working for lesser-paying firms versus lower
wage growth within firms to explain the gap. Despite progress in education and
the workplace, women still earn less than men, even when adjusted for education,
hours of work, and experience. The Bureau of Labor Statistics' gender earnings
gap in the US is around 20 percent for full-time workers. The gap, however, is
not a single number. Rather, it is a shifting statistic across lifetimes. The
earnings gap for women relative to comparable men is small directly after
education is completed. However, the gap widens substantially with family
formation, particularly among the most educated. Reducing or eliminating the
gender earnings gap has surfaced recently as an issue of vital policy
importance. The results of this research will improve the efficiency of the
labor market, hence spur economic growth as well as lead to gender equity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will construct, and use a large and
extraordinary dataset to explore the complicated dynamics of the gender earnings
gap (the gap). The research will broaden and deepen our understanding of the
widening gender earnings gap by following couples, across time and around
critical events, such as marriage and births. The research will use the
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) dataset linked to the US Census,
CPS, and ACS survey data. The LEHD gives longitudinal information on individual
employee earnings by firm. The linkages to census data will provide further
information on the employees and the employment and workplaces of each spouse.
The PIs will also be able to perform event studies of earnings and employment
responses following changes such as marriage, birth, and household residence and
employment moves. The expanded LEHD data platform will make it possible to
estimate the impact of tied-stayer, tied-mover effects, do various types of
event studies, and link firms to their stated family-friendly policies. The
LEHD-Census data makes it possible to analyze important life events and connect
the results to existing firm-level policies that are relevant for policies to
close the gaps in earnings and employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.