* 1823380
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economic Effects of Refugee Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Mandana Limbert, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 25,177.00

The research supported by this award asks: how are agrarian regions that border
conflict-ridden countries affected by forced migration? Social scientists
increasingly recognize that displacement is often long-term. Therefore, policy
makers must pursue alternatives to temporary refugee camps. But to do this
effectively, policy makers need more information about how displaced populations
affect the economic and social conditions of the regions where they settle.
Long-distance migrations to Europe have garnered recent headlines, but refugees
more typically flee to nearby countries, often to regions where they or their
kin have previous social relationships. As governments negotiate the
distribution of responsibility for hosting these displaced populations, finding
sustainable and security-appropriate solutions to today's worldwide migration
crisis has become a matter of concern everywhere, including in the United
States.

The research will be conducted by City University of New York Graduate Center
anthropology doctoral candidate, China Sajadian, advised by Dr. Mandana Limbert.
Sajadian will undertake 12 months of research in Lebanon because Lebanon hosts
the highest number of refugees per capita in the world. Over one-quarter of
Lebanon's population is comprised of displaced Syrians, which makes the effects
of forced migration there appropriately visible for targeted data collection and
analysis. Sajadian will collect data with two primary methods. To document
everyday labor practices and the specific effects of refugee settlement, she
will conduct ethnographic research, including observation and interviews, among
a stratified sample of 250 farmworkers in villages adjacent to the Syrian-
Lebanese border. She also will pursue archival research about the history of
land tenure, labor, and migration in the region. Findings from this research
will inform policy makers about how loss of cross-border mobility for seasonal
farmworkers reconfigures social and economic relations in the country of
settlement. Knowledge of these processes will help policy makers develop
approaches for dealing with refugees that are attentive to the specific
predicaments, livelihood needs, and security challenges of borderland regions.
Findings from the research also will be disseminated through academic
publications and conference presentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.