* 1823616
* Management and Economic Performance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Melissa Dell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 336,360.00

Productivity, innovative capacity, and the ability to transition into new
product spaces vary significantly across firms. These differences are central to
understanding economic development and structural change, and this research
focuses on one potentially important determinant: managerial capital. The
context is post-war Japan, a setting that offers both a large-scale natural
experiment and extremely rich data. During the occupation of Japan, Allied
Forces implemented an "economic purge" of senior managers in large Japanese
firms. Managers who had been employed at any time between 1937 and 1945 at firms
with a net worth of over one hundred million yen were subjected to mandatory
removal from their posts and barred from managerial positions in other large
firms. They typically moved to firms in newer industries, which were not
dominated by large conglomerates. The purge may have lowered economic
performance by depriving Japan's large firms of scarce talent, or alternatively
may have cleared the way for younger, innovative leaders to gain a foothold. It
could have also promoted innovation by channeling talent into newer, rising
industries, which tended to be exempt from the purge. However, if managerial
capital is primarily embedded in organizational norms rather than in
individuals, the purge may have had limited effects. This research estimates the
impacts of the purge by comparing firms whose managers were purged to firms who
barely avoided the purge by being just below the one hundred-million-yen cutoff.
It also examines the performance of the firms to which purged managers moved.
Finally, for those managers at branches that operated in colonial Taiwan, it
examines whether ongoing connections with former Taiwanese employees helped
these employees to subsequently transition into industries related to those of
their former Japanese managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
investigators use a regression discontinuity design to estimate the impacts of
the purge on the firms whose managers were removed and on the firms to which
these managers moved. The latter requires constructing a control group
consisting of firms to which managers just below the cutoff would have plausibly
transitioned had they been purged. This can be done by using archival data to
estimate a model of manager transitions that includes rich individual, firm, and
network level characteristics. This research also exploits the same plausibly
exogenous variation to test whether managerial connections helped Taiwanese
entrepreneurs to also transition into these
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.