* 1823500
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring Psychological Mechanisms Underlying Plea Bargaining Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Melanie Close, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,020.00

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring Psychological Mechanism
Underlying Plea Bargaining Decisions &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 95% of criminal convictions are resolved
through guilty pleas, in which a defendant admits guilt and waives his
constitutional right to a jury trial in exchange for a reduced punishment.
Although the Supreme Court has ruled that plea deals are not inherently
coercive, this project will test whether the plea-bargaining system is coercive
by identifying factors that might hinder defendants? ability to make objective
plea decisions. Using an experimental approach, the project will examine whether
interrogation tactics, such as those that are designed to provide suspects with
misinformation, influence plea decisions; as well, the project will examine the
effect of anxiety and guilt on defendant's plea decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consist of two experimental studies. The
first study will employ online participants to examine how individuals make plea
decisions using hypothetical scenarios in which the guilt or innocence of the
defendant, as well as the interrogation tactics, are varied. The second study
will employ undergraduate students who will be placed in situations involving
real consequences, and where questioning techniques of the students are
manipulated, to determine their likelihood of choosing plea deals. This project
will contribute to the body of research on the influence of interrogation
techniques on the plea-bargaining process and the circumstances under which
criminal defendants waive their right to a trial in favor of a plea
deal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.