* 1823882
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: BROADENING PARTICIPATION AND PERSPECTIVES IN THE STUDY OF CRIME AND JUSTICE
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Rod Brunson, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 249,410.00

The Racial Democracy, Crime and Justice Network (RDCJN) is a collaboration among
a group of scholars from diverse backgrounds, disciplines, and career stages
with two overarching goals: (1) broadening participation and perspectives in
research on crime and criminal justice, and (2) strengthening the quality of
research on the relationships among race/ethnicity, crime and criminal justice.
Scientific progress is advanced when diverse scholars participate in its
production. To further this mission, the RDCJN undertakes two primary
activities: coordinating an annual Summer Research Institute (SRI) for early-
career faculty from underrepresented groups; and hosting an annual conference
that brings together scholars of race, crime and justice to further a
comprehensive research agenda and undertake collaborative projects. The SRI
expands diverse participation in STEM fields in an area with significant
underrepresentation of minority scholars: the American Society of Criminology
reports a membership that is just 5.6 percent African American, 5.1 percent
Latino/a, 5.8 percent Asian, and 1 percent American Indian. In 12 years, the SRI
has hosted 90 young scholars, who are publishing and consistently gaining
tenure. Strengthening our understanding of crime and justice outcomes requires
bringing the unique perspectives and methods of underrepresented groups to bear
on these issues, thus enhancing democratization of the academy. The annual RDCJN
workshops integrate the SRI faculty into a national network of scholars, while
also facilitating progress in the interdisciplinary study of race/ethnicity,
crime and justice. To date, RDCJN collaborations have produced nine volumes of
innovative scholarship on this topic, as well as numerous monographs and
articles in leading journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable
eight assistant professors from underrepresented groups to spend three weeks on-
site at the Rutgers University School of Criminal Justice per grant year, during
which time they are partnered with a senior faculty mentor in their topical and
methodological area to facilitate the finalization of a journal article, grant
proposal, or book manuscript. The Principal Investigators and other prominent
scholars will hold professional development workshops on publishing, career
planning, and navigating the academy. The annual RDCJN workshop occurs during
the last two days of the SRI, at which time the SRI Fellows will present their
research and receive feedback from a national network of scholars, integrate
into the larger Network, and join and contribute to a comprehensive,
collaborative research agenda. Project efforts foster the careers of young
scholars from underrepresented groups, ensure their integration and success in
the academy, and integrate them in a Network of scholars undertaking innovative
crime and justice research. Through collaborative, multi-method, and comparative
studies, RDCJN scholars produce original multidisciplinary work that emphasizes
the significance of race/ethnicity for understanding crime and criminal justice,
enhancing our understanding of citizenship and
democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.