* 1823978
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Small-scale transport operators and political action
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,200.00

This project undertakes an anthropological study of the small-scale transport
sector as a window to investigating urban democracy in a post-colonial mega-
city. Thus, the project explores urban democracy for which a study of
transporters provides a unique and valuable vantage point. This proposed project
will be the first to follow the narrative of legal and political claims-making
of these transport operators, as they interact with governmental institutions in
India. Translating 'paper laws' into actionable regulation is critical for all
legal systems. This research queries how these paper laws, rules and regulations
are framed, contested and finally implemented in actual practice. The project
accomplishes this by mapping the every-day co-operation and contestation in
framing regulations between the communities of operator unions, transport
bureaucrats, courts, lawyers, and civic associations to sustain the city-level
operation of the law, within the broader narrative of city politics and
constitutional rights language. Significant contributions to sociolegal research
and anthropology flow from this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
asks: How does the political action of small-scale transport operators--the
auto-rickshaw drivers, cycle-rickshaw pullers, and erstwhile horse carriage
drivers all belonging to the urban working poor, affect democratic processes in
the postcolonial megacity? This study undertakes a historically informed,
ethnographic investigation on the legal and political processes by which these
transport operators become political agents . The research explores how the
working poor participate in and negotiate urban governance, not always through
extra-legal mobilizations and demands, but also by working within the framework
of democratic policymaking, formal politics, and rights language. The study
materials date to 1911, when Delhi became the capital. In its study of
democracy, the project brings center stage the collective and individual claims
for inclusion that the urban working poor make through their political action.
This research, employing both ethnographic and archival methods, will be
conducted in courts and archives in India, colonial archives in the UK,
government offices, and the street in Delhi. This study examines the
entanglement of two fundamental queries in contemporary times: a) how does a
democracy actually function? and b) the nature of urbanization processes in our
cities in times of great economic, social, and environmental precarity. More
specifically, the study investigates how democratic functioning intersects with
the lives of the urban working poor whose work straddles the organized and
unorganized sectors of the economy in a non-western context. The project has
implications for remedial measures to aid underserved, poor workers in urban
environments in the U.S. and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.