* 1823122
* Collaborative Research: Chamber or Conduit - Constraining Explosive Through Effusive Eruption at Cordon Caulle, Chile 2011/12
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Philipp Ruprecht, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2024
* USD 334,966.00

Volcanic eruptions pose one of the principal hazards at tectonically active
continental margins, such as the Pacific northwestern United States, which are
of ever increasing economic and existential importance to expanding populations.
The project will enhance knowledge of the conditions that lead to eruptions of
silica-rich magmas, which can be large and impactful. It will boost
understanding of the fundamental processes that determine the progression of
volcanic eruptions, from inception to cessation, which remains difficult to
forecast. Consequently, the project transcends the purely academic and is
societally relevant by advancing natural hazard assessment capabilities. The
project supports education by enabling the interdisciplinary training of
graduate and undergraduate students as well as a postdoctoral scholar, thus
contributing to the development of a diverse and globally competitive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to advance
fundamental knowledge of how volcanoes work by simulating a volcanic eruption
from initial explosive activity through lava effusion, to termination of the
eruption and post-eruptive inflation, using the 2011/12 Cordon Caulle eruption
in Chile as a case study. For this eruption the run-up, the syn-eruptive
evolution, and the post-eruptive reconfiguration of the volcanic system were
documented in unprecedented detail. The project is multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional. It encompasses geochemistry, petrology and geodesy, in addition
to numerical simulation of magma storage and eruption. At the University of
Nevada, Reno, the focus will be on constraining magma ascent rates and volatile
budgets for the 2011/12 Cordon Caulle eruption using mineral and melt-based
techniques. Furthermore, the contribution of mafic recharge to the eruptive
activity will be explored with respect to the volatile budget. The geochemical
data will be integrated with existing data, additional geodetic observations and
numerical simulations in collaboration with the other institutions. The eruption
was initially explosive and over time eruption rates decreased with activity
shifting from purely explosive to effusive, resulting in the formation of a
large lava flow and shallow laccolith. The current view about these types of
eruptions is that effusive or explosive activity is possible under otherwise
identical conditions and with potentially rapid transitions from one to the
other. A goal of the project is the assessment of conditions resulting in
transitions in eruptive activity in order to test this explosive-effusive
bistability hypothesis. Rapid post-eruptive inflation was observed and a further
goal is to assess the extent to which the system has been driven back toward a
critical state. These goals will be achieved by integrating the different
observational data within extensive physics-based model simulations that will
lead to improvements in model reliability and further our understanding of
underlying processes at Cordon Caulle and similar hazardous volcanic systems
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.