* 1823766
* I-Corps: Embedded Machine Vision for Accurate Gait Analyses and Body Movement Measurements
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Yan Luo, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
revolutionize conventional rehabilitation assistant and body movement assessment
tools with low-cost machine vision based solutions by maximizing the capability
of ubiquitous tablets and 2D cameras, which have significant cost and
accessibility advantage over more expensive 3D cameras. A set of
tablet/smartphone Apps can be developed base on the embedded machine vision
technology, and the team plan to create related services using a subscription
model. This innovation will benefit broad healthcare market, which includes
rehab facilities, surgery/neurology outpatient clinics, physical therapy
clinics, stroke centers, and individuals. Overall, the innovation will make
embedded machine vision technology accessible to and serve many population
groups in the society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
preliminary results that we obtained on a PC platform to identify and track
human body joint points in close to real-time. The prototype leverages novel
machine learning algorithms and high performance processors (graphics processing
units). Our next phase of research is to generate depth map from a 2D camera,
recognize and track body joint points, and score body movements, all on a tablet
platform. The challenges include depth generation with 2D images and efficient
models and algorithms to execute on a resource constraint embedded platform. The
team will leverage embedded deep learning techniques to optimize the algorithms
towards an embedded processor architecture on modern tablets so that the proof-
of-concept can deliver satisfactory performance. The team also plan to work with
a medical doctor and a rehabilitation facility advisor to review and refine the
software features and validate the early prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.