* 1823710
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Networks, Decision Models, and Moral Economies in Ecological Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Anand Pandian, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 25,069.00

Much of the world's commercial food production and consumption today depends on
large-scale industrial agriculture and use of toxic chemicals. Increasing
knowledge about the negative effects of conventional agriculture on health and
the environment as well as deepening food insecurity worldwide have recently
pushed global policy institutions to promote an agroecological model of
cultivation. This model uses ecological principles to produce food with low
inputs and without pesticides or artificial fertilizers. While this alternative
model has been entering policy discourse and practice at global and local
levels, many people all over the world have already been creating alternative
networks around ecological production and consumption. This project, which
trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, aims to understand how these networks operate on the ground by
focusing on the moral decisions and economic considerations of producers and
consumers. In addition to enhancing scientific understanding of ecological
agriculture from an anthropological perspective, the findings would be useful to
policy organizations that seek to establish ecological cultivation as a response
to food insecurity, environmental degradation, and public health concerns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Burge Abiral, under the supervision of Dr. Anand Pandian
of Johns Hopkins University, will explore the new sphere of ecological food
production and consumption that has been forming. This research asks: How do
ecological farmers justify their cultivation choices in using specific
agroecological techniques, as they attend to consumer demand and seek adequate
profit? Through which decisions and strategies are ecological food products
priced and marketed? How do ecological food products get to be valued in the
different phases of the supply chain? How are ecological norms established among
the diverse actors in this food network? The research takes place in Turkey,
where the researcher has identified two distinct groups engaged in production
that can be comparatively studied to analyze more longstanding against nascent
ecological agricultural networks. The project will involve 12 months of multi-
sited ethnographic fieldwork, during which a combination of research techniques,
such as interviews, household surveys, and archival research will be conducted.
This research will inform debates in anthropology and the social sciences
broadly about development, agricultural production, and food security, as well
as economic anthropological debates about moral economies and
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.