* 1823828
* Ethnic Movement, Economy, and Incorporation in a Border Region
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Minjeong Kim, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 173,000.00

This project investigates the conditions of migration, settlement, and
incorporation of people who moved to a bi-national border region from a third
country. The international expansion of multi-national corporations and bi-
national economic border operations has facilitated the increase in people who
are from neither border country but have transborder lives. This project
examines how the unidirectional movement of people and capital investment
contributes to regional border economies, and how community economic networks
shape settlement processes in the border region. The study also will evaluate
how people that are engaged in inter-community social and economic interactions
within both countries are integrated into them, and how community ties,
identity, and political context affect their integration process. The findings
will inform bi-national economic community stakeholders, local government
officials and policymakers, and community leaders on issues of regional
development and strategies for balanced accommodation and integration of a fast-
growing population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves an intensive case
study of border communities that engage in transborder economic activities. The
main objective of the project is to understand the political and economic
contexts of their migration and settlement processes and to identify the factors
that affect their incorporation processes. Data come from: (1) interviews with
three groups of border residents from the community, namely, business operators
on either side of the border and commuters; (2) field observations at community
churches, businesses, and community events related to the regional economy; and
(3) archival research of local and community periodicals related to the regional
economy. The project will provide important insights into the impact of
contemporary economic trade and transnational investment on international
migration and how bi-national economic settings influence people?s inter-
community relations and incorporation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.