* 1823050
* Catalyzing Opportunities for Research in the Earth Sciences (CORES): A Decadal Survey for NSF?s Division of Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,251,154.00

This award provides funds for the CORES study which will help NSF's Division of
Earth Sciences (EAR) set priorities and strategies for its investments in
research, infrastructure and training in the coming decade. Within the past
decade, breakthroughs and discoveries in Earth science have transformed our
understanding of our planet and allowed researchers to investigate, model, and
predict a range of Earth phenomena that range in scale from atomic to planetary,
and over milliseconds to millennia. The Earth sciences are among the most
integrative of sciences, incorporating physical, chemical, biological and social
science approaches to understand the dynamics and processes of our planet, and
address the challenges faced by its inhabitants. Because the Earth sciences
examines processes that support and affect organisms and life and have direct
feedbacks with humans and their evolution, Earth science research has direct
societal, economic, security and environmental impacts. This decadal survey will
help NSF's Division of Earth Sciences to identify research areas that are poised
for significant advance in the near term, and set relevant priorities and
strategies for its investments, with expert advice provided by the National
Academies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CORES study will be completed by the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) Division of
Earth and Life Studies' Board on Earth Sciences and Resources (BESR) and the
Water Science and Technology Board for the NSF Division of Earth Sciences (EAR).
The National Academies will assemble an ad hoc committee of volunteer experts
from the Earth sciences research community. The committee will prepare a
community-based, consensus study that will include: a concise set of high-
priority scientific questions that will advance the Earth sciences over the
coming decade, an analysis of the portfolio of EAR's research infrastructure
investments, and a discussion of how EAR can leverage and complement the
capabilities, expertise and strategic plans of its partners, encourage greater
collaboration and maximize shared use of research assets and data. The peer-
reviewed report will be shared and disseminated publicly with a targeted
audience of the research and technical community, policy and decision makers,
and others with an interest in Earth science and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.