* 1823595
* Meeting: 2018 pre-Association of Biology Laboratory Educators (ABLE) meeting hands-on workshop  for introducing CRISPR-Cas9 technology to undergraduate instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Anil Kumar Challa, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 45,523.00

Genome engineering and editing technologies using CRISPR-Cas9 and other
programmable nucleases are rapidly entering mainstream molecular biology
research. The emergence of these technologies presents a significant challenge
to biological science instructors to provide engaging and effective ways to
introduce these technologies into their classrooms. This workshop aims at
introducing CRISPR-Cas9 technology to instructors in the context of information
flow and the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology, allowing integration of these
new technologies into the biological sciences framework. Workshop participants
will develop hands-on skills for designing and using genome engineering and
editing, and methods for incorporating these technologies into classroom
discussions at their institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
3-day workshop from June 16-18, 2018 at The Ohio State University in Columbus,
Ohio on the development and implementation of CRISPR-Cas9 technology for
undergraduate instructors from different types of institutions as a prelude to
the Association of Biology Laboratory Educators (ABLE). Faculty will be
recruited from all types of undergraduate institutions, including minority-
serving institutions and two-year institutions. Faculty participants will work
together to (a) become conversant with background knowledge and lab skills
relating to CRISPR-Cas9 technology, (b) bring different aspects of the
technology into their classrooms/labs, (c) discuss and create pedagogical
modules suitable to different types of classrooms/labs, and (d) foster and
provide support to undergraduate educators who will disseminate gene
engineering/editing technologies and make innovations in their classrooms/labs.
Specifically, the meeting will encourage the teaching of CRISPR-Cas9
technologies to undergraduates in the context of biological information flow and
the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology. Dissemination plans include posting
workshop materials on CURE net (https://curenet.cnsutexas.edu), a repository of
course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.