* 1823763
* Gateway Groups and Intergroup Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* John Dovidio, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 436,157.00

Globalization and unprecedented shifts in the ethnic and racial make-up of
countries and communities have produced a massive growth in the range of people
with whom we interact. These changes have led to a new and more complex social
landscape. It has increased encounters with people who have multiple social
identities, including different combinations of racial, ethnic, or national
identities. Although people are often threatened by difference, this project
considers how such differences may help to create positive social change and
greater harmony among members of various social groups. The research focuses on
the unique role of people who are recognized as having multiple identities that
represent groups traditionally regarded as fundamentally different. Examples
include American biracial individuals who share their identity with both Blacks
and Whites in the U.S., or Arab citizens of Israel who share their identity with
both Israelis and Palestinians in the Middle East. This unique form of social
identity places members of these groups in-between social categories that are
typically seen in oppositional ways, allowing these individuals to potentially
act as a social gateway to promote positive exchanges between the groups. These
kinds of groups are therefore termed "Gateway Groups".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broad objective of this project is to investigate the potential role that such
Gateway Groups might play in positively transforming intergroup relations. It
provides a novel framework that captures the modern complexity of social
boundaries and social identity. Several studies explore the mechanisms and
boundary conditions necessary to realize the potential of Gateway Groups in a
wide range of social contexts including groups in long-term conflict. The
research specifically applies psychological interventions developed in
laboratory-based research to reduce intergroup tension and conflict and to
promote reconciliation in contexts of immediate social relevance. Five
experiments focus on identifying the processes underlying the influence of
Gateway Groups and the conditions under which they are more or less effective.
The insights from those experiments are then tested in three other studies to
assess the potential of Gateway Groups to improve intergroup relations in
naturalistic settings. Theoretically, this approach moves beyond the common
binary view of "us" versus "them" to offer a broader and more accurate model of
intergroup dynamics. Practically, the research aims to develop interventions
that can be applied generally to reduce intergroup conflict and promote more
harmonious and productive relations between groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.