* 1823658
* Collaborative Research: Early understanding of personal and social causes of intentional action:  A cross-cultural investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Tamar Kushnir, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 289,398.00

In the first few years of life, infants and children rapidly learn about the
social world by observing and interacting with the people in their immediate
environment. These people are the first source of information as children begin
to learn about human behavior and social norms shaping that behavior. The goal
of this study is to examine how contextual factors influence the manner in which
children interpret the behavioral intentions of others. With a focus on social-
cognitive development, this study addresses how children learn about the goals
and desires of others and how children learn about the rules and norms of
various social groups. In this global age, individuals are increasingly required
to understand multiple worldviews. This study will foster skills needed to
promote positive social behaviors and sensitivity to the norms and values of
different cultural groups in the United States, which, in turn, will reduce
harmful stereotyping and misunderstandings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the perspectives, norms, and conventions of various individuals will help
children develop a better understanding of their own place in the social world.
This study investigates the mechanisms underlying the process by which children
acquire this understanding. The study also examines cultural differences and
similarities in how children interpret intentional actions over the first five
years of life. This will be accomplished by tracking emerging developmental
changes in understandings of personal and social causes of intentional action at
three time points starting in infancy and continuing on to the preschool years.
Two cultural groups will be compared: European- and Chinese-Americans. The study
also involves examining how infants, toddlers, and preschoolers employ
statistical learning mechanisms in interpreting behavior. The methodological
approach consists of a critical third party generalization task; this means that
having learned about the behaviors (and intentions) of one person, investigators
will determine whether infants and children are able to predict the behaviors
(and intentions) of an unfamiliar person. A statistical learning measure will be
used to determine how infants and children across cultures use statistical
information to infer goals and desires of individuals. For example, if a young
child grows up in a culture in which actions are governed by common cultural
norms and practices as opposed to personal preferences, and thus observes
consistency across individuals, that child may learn, over time, that observed
intentional actions are frequently generalizable across individuals. In
contrast, if a young child grows up in a culture in which actions are frequently
expressions of idiosyncratic personal tastes, and thus, observes variability
across individuals, then, that child may learn over time that intentional
actions are not necessarily generalizable across individuals. Three age groups
will be assessed: infants (ages 11-13 months), toddlers (ages 28-32 months) and
preschoolers (ages 3-5 years). Central questions posed include: Are children's
predictions regarding the intentions of others a function of the sociocultural
group to which the children belong? At what age do socioculturally-based
inferences begin to surface?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.