* 1823771
* Collaborative Research: Examining Compliance with Rights Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Courtney Hillebrecht, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 159,322.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Examining Compliance with Rights
Regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The protection of human
rights, including women's rights, is a cornerstone of economic development,
social progress, and the promotion of peace around the globe. While numerous
international institutions seek to protect women's rights, it remains unclear
if, when, and how these institutions can effectively safeguard women?s rights.
Understanding the processes by which political leaders and citizens mobilize
around international women's rights laws and institutions is critical for
improving the efficacy of these institutions. Accordingly, this project will
focus on state compliance with international human rights rulings and
recommendations on women's rights issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine the rulings and recommendations of the European Court of Human Rights,
the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and the UN
Universal Periodic Review that are handed down to European states on issues of
women's rights. As well, the research will draw on interviews and case studies
in Denmark, The Netherlands, Norway, and Spain, each of which has strong
democratic institutions but varying levels of compliance with international
women's rights institutions' recommendations. The project will create and
disseminate a new dataset on women's rights recommendations, the Women's Rights
Recommendation Digital Database, which will be used for a battery of statistical
tests to identify the factors that affect compliance with international women?s
rights recommendations. The database, statistical analyses, interviews, and case
studies will provide insight into the macro-level factors that impact the
effectiveness of women's rights institutions and the processes behind compliance
with international women's rights recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.