* 1823405
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Exploring and Advancing the State of the Art in Robust Science in Gravitational Wave Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 04/30/2020
* USD 75,000.00

Science is increasingly based on computation for science simulations, data
management and analysis, instrument control and collaboration. For scientific
results generated through computation to be considered robust and become widely
accepted, the computational techniques should be automated, reproducible and
trustworthy. By exploring the practices of gravitational-wave astronomy
researchers working on the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
(LIGO) project, this project seeks to create a set of case studies documenting
broadly applicable methods for reproducible computational science. Specifically,
the project will explore and articulate what reproducibility, automation, and
trust mean with respect to computation-based research in gravitational-wave
astronomy, identify, implement and validate a set of experimental practices,
that will include computational techniques, and finally, evaluate how these
experimental practices can be extended to other science domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust computational science builds on rigorous methods
and is composed of three key elements: (1) reproducibility, which enables the
verification and leveraging of scientists' findings; (2) automation, which
speeds up the exploration of alternative solutions and the processing of large
amounts of data while reducing the introduction of errors; and (3) trust,
providing security and reliability for software and data, while supplying the
necessary attributes for confidence in the scientist's own results and results
from others. This project explores robust science in the LIGO project through
the following activities within the context of gravitational-wave astronomy: (1)
articulating the roles of reproducibility, automation, and trust in
gravitational-wave astronomy; (2) identifying, implementing and validating a set
of experimental practices, including computational techniques; and (3) advancing
towards the project's vision of general computational methods for robust science
by evaluating how the experimental practices can be extended to other science
domains. The project will develop and use a survey to collect information about
LIGO workflows that are composed of a series of experimental, computational, and
data manipulation steps. The analysis of the survey will result in a document
that describes what reproducibility means in the LIGO context and help identify
potential improvements in LIGO's practices. The project will generalize these
findings by documenting a mapping of LIGOÃ•s original and enhanced approach to
other science workflows including those of the molecular dynamics and
bioinformatics communities. The final project document will target a broad
audience that includes researchers and students at various levels of education,
with the goal of introducing them to the concept of robust computational
research, and the underlying concepts of reproducibility, automation and trust,
teaching them to access code, data, and workflow information to regenerate
findings, learn about the scientific methods, and to engage in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.