* 1823324
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing evolutionary theories of leadership in a population of transitional foragers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Edward Hagen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 24,350.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the nature of leadership
in human societies. All societies have leaders but the forms, functions, and
effects of leadership vary from society to society. For the vast majority of
human evolutionary history, people lived as hunter-gatherers in small nomadic
bands and had social structures likely characterized by high degrees of
egalitarianism, a lack of inherited social distinctions, and a cultural ethos of
sharing. Leadership under these conditions would be quite different from
leadership in contemporary societies, which are larger and less homogeneous.
Therefore, to understand the origins and development of leadership, the roots of
contemporary leadership forms, it is necessary to collect data in the few small-
scale societies that remain. The research is important because leadership is a
major force in shaping human behavior, health, culture, and society. A complete
understanding of human leadership begins with a detailed understanding of
leadership in small-scale egalitarian societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted by Washington State University doctoral student,
Zachary Garfield, with oversight by Dr. Edward H. Hagen. The researchers will
test four evolutionary theories of leadership among the Chabu, a population of
approximately 2,000 recently settled Ethiopian hunter-gatherers who now subsist
on a mix of hunting, gathering, horticulture, and cash crops. The Chabu recently
adopted the Kebele system, a local administrative unit of the Ethiopian
government in which the community elects multiple leaders to fulfill several
internal and external functions. Hence, there is a unique opportunity to
investigate leadership among a contemporary egalitarian society currently
transitioning to a more hierarchical social structure within the male-dominated
Ethiopian state. The four theoretical models of leadership to be investigated
are (1) the egalitarian forager model, (2) the dominance-prestige model, (3) the
wealth inequality model, and (4) collective action models of leadership. Data
will be collected using self-report, peer-ratings, anthropometry, and free-
listing for a sample of approximately 250 individuals. These data will be used
to test preregistered predictions and other analyses. Findings from this
research will contribute to improving theories of leadership currently based
primarily on contemporary Western societies. Findings will also be communicated
to help organizations concerned with developing new forms of leadership to meet
business and public service objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.