* 1823896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Memory Entrepreneurship and Community
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Daniel Reed, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 3,543.00

The research supported by this award investigates how communities navigate the
heritage travel industry. Non-business travel contributed $7.6 trillion dollars
to the global economy and $500 billion dollars to the United States economy in
2016. However, for some communities, heritage travel can be a blessing and a
curse. On one hand, it promises needed economic support and cultural
preservation. Yet, these economic opportunities may require sometimes demeaning
commodification and standardization of local identities. Understanding why
people participate in heritage travel and the strategies they use to channel its
opportunities productively, will inform programs and policies to represent more
justly the diverse economic, social, and cultural interests of local communities
in the United States. Findings from the research will also help social
scientists better understand the effects of heritage entrepreneurship and the
future of American cultural diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be undertaken by Indiana University doctoral student Douglas D. Peach, with the
support and oversight of Dr. Daniel B. Reed. The research will be conducted in
coastal South Carolina, where non-business travel is the region's largest
employer. The researcher will focus on Gullah Geechees, a community of African
Americans with a unique culture and language, and will use music and its
performance as the primary lens of investigation. To understand the relationship
between Gullah Geechees and the emergent heritage travel industry, the Co-PI
will focus on the following questions: What are the performative strategies
(such as, branding, aesthetics, historical narratives) used by Gullah Geechees
for identification in heritage entrepreneurship? What factors shape how Gullah
Geechees participate in initiatives surrounding their cultural heritage? The
research will also investigate how African-American travelers and visitors from
Africa, as well as national, state, and local political authorities influence
the contexts of heritage travel in which Gullah Geechees participate. The
research uses three methods for gathering data: participant observation,
interviews, and the collection and analysis of media. This ethnographically
informed study will explain how a minority community manages their heritage,
amidst shifting discourses and culturally appropriate means, for social,
economic, and political mobility. The research will contribute to theories of
cultural diversity as a deliberately constructed rather than a static or given
feature of contemporary societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.