* 1823644
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Legal Institutions on Legal Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Lauren McCarthy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 18,348.00

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Legal Institutions on
Legal Mobilization

Abstract:

Legal institutions are integral to achieving social, economic, and political
mobilization. The process of legal mobilization requires claimants to understand
and perceive their legal rights and means of recourse. The project will assess
citizens' understanding and perception of legal institutions and how such
understanding influences their ability to engage in litigation to pursue their
legal rights. The project will also evaluate the conditions under which citizens
mobilize courts while it explores the conditions under which citizens express
willingness to use courts to mobilize their claims.

The project links the literatures on legal mobilization, judicial impact, and
judicial interpretation under the theoretical rubric of law and society in order
to engage in fieldwork to explore the conditions under which Black South
Africans express willingness to use courts to mobilize their claims. By focusing
on socio-economic rights, the project will focus on how these citizens interpret
their constitutional rights and courts' ability to satisfy those rights, and how
that interpretation affects their choice to use legal strategies. Interviews
will be conducted with citizens who have employed the legal system to pursue
their rights, to ascertain their perceptions of their legal institutions'
ability to protect their constitutional rights. Findings will provide insight
into citizens' perceptions of constitutional rights and of the influences of
legal institutions on legal mobilization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.