* 1823260
* CRI: CI-New: Collaborative Research: Extensible, Software Enabled Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yu David Liu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 366,251.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are an emerging computing platform increasingly
becoming common in our society. Unfortunately, most UAV systems today are either
proprietary, or specific to goals of aviation and robotic missions. This project
will develop an open-source and extensible software infrastructure for UAVs to
promote research and education of this exciting
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal will result in an infrastructure
to allow for extensible UAV software design across the computing stack, spanning
operating systems (OS), virtual machines (VM), compilers, programming languages,
and applications. This significantly shifts the focus of state of the art of UAV
software where refined support is limited to hardware drivers and robotics
control, OS/VM support is primitive, and high-level Application Programming
Interface is minimal. The resulting infrastructure will promote whole-stack
extensibility, portability, resource awareness, and application friendliness of
UAV systems. The infrastructure will enable researchers from non-UAV specific
domains to conduct research on the platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
infrastructure will impact researchers spanning areas of avionics, robotics,
real-time systems, programming languages, and software engineering. Other
beneficiaries of the proposed infrastructure include students and UAV users. The
technologies developed under this award will provide training and research
opportunities for Ph.D. students, master's students, and advanced undergraduates
in UAV education. UAVs, robotics, and aviation are interesting and exciting to
k-12 students. The artifacts from this project will be tailored for student
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.