* 1823509
* Behavioral Nudges in a Wildfire Risk Context: Social Comparison and Community Type
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Patricia Champ, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 389,185.00

Wildfires cost billions of dollars to suppress annually, yet they still
devastate lives, communities, and ecosystems. The government and other entities
invest significantly in supporting wildfire risk mitigation on private property
and related education to the public. This project investigates the efficacy of a
relatively low-cost approach to increase citizens' engagement with these
efforts, potentially increasing their effectiveness. Specifically, the project
involves an experiment examining the extent to which including different types
of wildfire risk assessment information (community-level, parcel-level,
comparative) in the outreach material influences peoples' behavior. The
experiment will also investigate the behavioral effects of including
personalized and social comparison information. The behavioral outcomes measured
in the experiment reflect the kinds of behaviors risk reduction education and
outreach efforts across the nation are intended to promote. If found effective,
the studied approach could be implemented in other areas where parcel level risk
assessments exist, related to a range of hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental design applies different information treatments to direct mailings
that encourages residents to access multiple sources of information provided by
practitioners, including local community meetings. This design allows
exploration of how existing biases may be leveraged to encourage behaviors that
are individually, socially, and environmentally beneficial. From risk
information seeking to mitigation activities, the behavioral outcomes that
result from nudges involving personalization and social comparison will be
measured across different community types in order to assess the role social
context plays in such outcomes. Importantly, the project builds on a unique
researcher-practitioner collaboration to conduct the study in communities in the
wildland-urban interface, where residents face high risk of wildfire-related
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.