* 1823632
* School Punishment, Special Education, and Childhood Behavior Problems
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* David Ramey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 257,777.00

There is growing public and scholarly attention given to changes in school
discipline and special education policies in the United States. Some researchers
suggest that school discipline policies have become increasingly severe,
resulting in a growing number of students receiving school suspensions at all
grade levels. At the same time, as schools expand special education plans to
provide services for children with medically recognized behavior disorders, a
growing number of children are receiving diagnoses and treatment for conditions
such as ADHD. School disciplinary and special education practices are intended
to allow adults to recognize and respond to perceived child misbehavior. As
such, experiences with school punishment, special education, and diagnoses or
treatment for behavior disorders should be appropriate and improve future
behavior. However, there is growing concern that school discipline and special
education practices and interventions intended to improve the learning
environment for all youth are instead applied unevenly across children from
different racial and ethnic backgrounds. NonHispanic White children are more
likely to attend schools with robust special education programs and lower rates
of school punishment than racial and ethnic minority children. Consequently,
racial and ethnic minority children have higher rates of suspension and are less
likely to receive quality special education or medical treatment than White
children. As evidence continues to demonstrate the harmful effects of early
school punishment on academics and behavior, there is a growing push for schools
to adopt approaches to perceived misbehavior that consider underlying behavior
problems and disorders. Understanding how school discipline, special education,
and diagnoses/treatment for behavior problems affect all children, including
marginalized and at-risk youth, will help to craft policies that best serve
children with behavior problems in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is disagreement regarding whether school discipline
and special education improve or disrupt educational progress. Additionally, few
studies consider school punishment and special education or therapy/medication
as opposing or collaborative approaches to child social control. This project
combines data from a sample of at-risk households in large U.S. cities (Fragile
Families Child Wellbeing Study) and district- and school-level data on
disciplinary and special education practices (e.g. Civil Rights Data
Collection). The project uses two broad statistical approaches to answer
multiple questions. First, standard linear and non-linear regression models and
matching models (e.g. propensity score weighting) will be used to estimate how
school discipline and special education policies and practices affect (1) adult
perceptions of child behavior; and (2) child experiences of school suspension
and/ diagnoses/treatment. This will be achieved by comparing children attending
schools with different suspension and special education enrollment rates.
Second, mediation and moderation models, including interaction terms, will be
used to examine whether caregiver and/or teacher perceptions of child behavior
explain the relationships between school discipline and special education
practices, childhood social control experiences, and future behavior problems
and academic achievement. The project will address issues of selection in
mediation and moderation models by using matching techniques, fixed-effects
estimation, and placebo regression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.