* 1823478
* Understanding the Relationship Between Tornadoes and Debris Through Observed and Simulated Radar Data
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sebastian Torres, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 787,353.00

Weather radar observations of tornadoes are a critical tool used by forecasters
in short term forecasts of severe weather events and thus to mitigate the loss
of life and property. Dual polarization radar signatures of tornado debris,
called tornado debris signatures (TDSs), have received substantial attention due
to their potential to remotely detect tornadoes and characterize tornado damage
severity. This research has the potential to help forecasters use real-time
weather radar observations to detect tornadoes and improve the accuracy of
impact-based warnings by providing a better estimate of tornado
damage/intensity, adding information beyond that afforded by reflectivity and
velocity measurements alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to advance
scientific knowledge of how debris characteristics relate to dual polarization
radar measurements and how debris and kinematic processes influence the three-
dimensional distribution of debris and TDS structure. Moreover, the work
provides the first attempt to use radar simulations and observations to explore
promising polarimetric radar algorithms to estimate and mitigate debris
centrifuging errors with the goal of providing more accurate wind measurements
in tornadoes. This research will be carried out using a debris model initially
developed with previous NSF support showing great promise in simulating
realistic TDSs. The use of such a model is crucial because TDSs can change not
only due to the types of surfaces or density of debris over which the tornadoes
pass, but also due to changes internal to the tornado, the tornado-producing
supercell and the near-storm environment, making it difficult to assess the
exact mechanisms responsible for observed changes in TDS or tornado
circulations. The model eliminates these variabilities, and allows determination
of how the TDS changes may be related to the land cover or tornado intensity
while controlling other parameters. The simulations provide a variety of land
cover and debris types to be investigated at different stages in the tornado
life cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.