* 1823652
* Group Travel Grant for the PhD Forum to be Held in Conjunction with IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Nathan Jacobs, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2019
* USD 13,625.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the PhD Forum at the 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision (WACV) in Lake Tahoe, California/Nevada. WACV is the premier annual
conference focused on the applications of computer vision. It is held in the
United States and attended by members of the international research community.
The goal of the PhD Forum is to highlight the work of PhD students working in
computer vision and to give these students an opportunity to discuss their
research and career options with senior researchers in the field. The broader
impacts of this project include supporting the career development of some of the
brightest junior researchers in computer vision, contributing to the research
community in general by drawing attention to an important aspect of graduate
student development, potentially increasing the number of active researchers and
educators in STEM, and ensuring that the computer vision community, through its
recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems that will benefit
society as a whole. The PhD Forum aims to have representation from a diverse
group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic background, academic
institution, and geographic location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support from the
National Science Foundation covers some of the costs for 10 selected US-based
graduate students to attend the conference. Participants and recipients of
travel support are selected by the 2018 WACV PhD Forum Chair. For the graduate
student participants, this event is an opportunity to receive advice on their
research work and career plans from experts from different institutions, with
potentially different perspectives than their research supervisor. For the
participating senior researchers, this is an opportunity to have a meaningful
discussion with a promising young researcher and to give back to the community
through their mentorship. This year's PhD Forum features a poster session and
one-on-one mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.