* 1823316
* Criminal Record Questions on Job Applications as a Self-Selection Mechanism for Applying for Employment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Michael Vuolo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 327,865.00

Individuals with criminal records fare worse at obtaining employment compared to
those with clean records. Experimental evidence shows that employers prefer
those with clean records, and that persons of color with records are
particularly discriminated against. While much is known about employer hiring
preferences, little is known about whether applicants with criminal records
avoid or prefer particular employers. In other words, individuals with criminal
records may not even apply to certain positions due to perceived low odds of
getting the job or because they fear being stigmatized by employers in the
application process. Employment is one of the most critical bonds for preventing
a return to crime. If individuals elect not to apply for certain positions, such
choices will decrease the odds of forming this important bond. Understanding
under what conditions individuals with records choose to apply for jobs is
therefore central to efforts to help individuals reintegrate into society and
prevent crime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research project will interview 140
individuals with criminal records recruited from criminal reentry organizations
and halfway houses in the Columbus, OH metropolitan area. An interview guide and
brief survey were developed through a pilot study completed in 2017. In-depth
interviews will provide nuanced information regarding job search experiences and
choices. The interviews query topics such as experiences with job searches both
before and after having a criminal record, whether criminal records questions or
background check statements on job applications prevent individuals from
applying for positions, how forthcoming individuals are about their record in
the application process, and what types of industries they seek out. The survey
gathers complementary information on socio-demographics, criminal history,
employment history, and personal difficulties in applying for jobs. Respondents
will be re-interviewed six months later in order to understand whether new
experiences in the labor market alter choices among those with records, whether
this differs by background factors related to labor market outcomes such as
race, and the underlying reasons for any changes in choices such as those
related to stigma. This project directly addresses ongoing public policy debates
regarding how best to provide individuals with criminal records a fair
assessment in the job application process so that they can experience the
benefits of the important social bond of employment, best epitomized by the Ban
the Box movement (which seeks to eliminate criminal record questions from job
applications). By moving the discussion from decisions of employers to those of
applicants, these results may fundamentally change the way we think about and
evaluate these policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.