* 1823815
* The Role of Workplace and Legal Context in Employment Discrimination Claims
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* M.V. Lee Badgett, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 294,492.00

Civil rights laws prohibit employers from discriminating against employees based
on protected social categories, such as race, sex, and disability, as well as
newer protected categories that emerge over time. The effectiveness of policies
adding a new protected category will depend on the actions of employees,
employers, and enforcement agencies. Employees gain the right to file
discrimination claims when they believe they have experienced discrimination,
but not all individuals are equally likely to view their workplace grievances as
discrimination or to file a formal charge. Individuals must choose to invoke the
law, and those choices will both reflect and shape cultural understandings of
the law. From the enforcement agency perspective, handling of cases will also
reflect understandings of the law, and legal rulings will develop the body of
law and influence employer actions. The interactions of employees and
enforcement agencies in the enforcement process may result in different
understandings of the law being accepted, modified, or rejected as a new body of
law develops, which will in turn influence the social impact of law. To achieve
the equity goals of civil rights laws, it is important to understand these
interactions, including how the workplace context and public policies influence
which claims are seen as having merit. This knowledge could lead to more
effective enforcement of civil rights law by providing a guide for compliance
evaluations, a factual basis for refinements of agency practices and legal
guidance, and a tool to educate employers on how to avoid discriminatory
practices. The project draws upon confidential data on more than 9,000 charges
of employment discrimination filed by employees with local, state, or federal
agencies, using both qualitative and quantitative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes the development of a new
protected category in federal civil rights law related to a recent expansion in
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's (EEOC) interpretation of sex
discrimination to broaden claims related to gender-stereotyping and other sex-
based actions. The empirical analysis involves a two-pronged project that is
focused on employees and on the handling of charges at the EEOC. First, the
researchers will engage in a qualitative analysis of the narratives filed by
parties charging employment discrimination, to explore variation across
individual characteristics, workplace characteristics, and legal context in the
issues alleged by employees. A qualitative analysis of the discrimination charge
narratives will also help to identify why the EEOC might initially classify a
charge as more or less meritorious as it processes the charge. Second, the
researchers will statistically analyze how the EEOC processes discrimination
charges and whether workplace characteristics, state-level laws, and the
sociopolitical environment affect whether a charge is found to have merit. A
quantitative analysis will allow the use of all charges to identify the effect
of workplace and policy context on the EEOC's contribution to this new body of
law. The project findings could be used to inform the training of attorneys and
human resources professionals to better recognize viable claims of
discrimination and to adopt efforts to prevent
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.