* 1823719
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Change, Stylistic Resources, and Verbal Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Natasha Warner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 5,620.00

Individuals migrate for a wide variety of reasons, including economic pressures,
natural disasters, and political conflict. In some cases, they are able to
return home after the factors which drove them to migrate have receded. However,
in other cases they cannot return. Refugees who have fled political conflict and
resettled in host countries represent one group for which return may be
challenging, or ultimately impossible. Refugees also often lack economic or
social resources that they can utilize after migrating, resulting in lives
marked by precarity and uncertainty. While they may lack access to certain
resources, language is a resource that refugees can creatively use as they
navigate life in their host countries. This linguistic and anthropological
project aims to understand how human beings adapt to long periods of precarity
and uncertainty by examining how refugees use language in myriad social
contexts: to maintain connections to their homes, assimilate themselves into
their host societies, and articulate their needs or desires. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would
broadly disseminating its findings, and innovate more effective methods for
preserving historical and scientific records related to language documentation.
Further, it would broaden the participation of groups underrepresented in
science, and build capacity and scientific infrastructure through international
scientific cooperation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;William Cotter, under the
supervision of Dr. Natasha Warner of the University of Arizona, will explore the
relationship between language, performance, and the construction/retention of
identity and memory in contexts of long-term displacement. Using methods drawn
from linguistics and anthropology, this project investigates refugee language
use through field research conducted with Palestinian refugees in the Jordanian
capital of Amman. This is an apt research setting both because Palestinian
refugee communities have lived in Jordan since 1948 and because many have
acquired formal rights as Jordanian citizens. Through semi-structured
interviews, researchers will first investigate how Arabic dialects spoken by
these refugees have changed over time. Language change is common when
individuals or communities migrate and come into contact with speakers of
different languages or dialects. The audio data from these interviews will be
subjected to statistical analysis to determine how their Arabic dialects have
changed over time. Researchers will compare the results from this portion of the
project to how these refugees use language in the context of performance (e.g.
poetry, songs, telling stories). Examining performance will allow the
researchers to see how Arabic dialects are used across contexts, and how the
stylistic use of language allows refugees to situate themselves as members of
the Palestinian community, while simultaneously navigating their relationship to
the country in which they currently live. Findings from this research will
provide insight into how refugees experience life in the diaspora and how they
use language as a tool to articulate their place in their communities and
integrate themselves into their host country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.