* 1823245
* CRI: II-New: Infrastructure for Robust Interactive Underground Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Qi Han, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2023
* USD 451,102.00

The global community is increasingly exploring underground environments for
sustainable and resilient solutions to societal problems. New opportunities and
challenges in water access, quality, and storage, geothermal energy, and carbon
sequestration collectively point to underground environments as the next
frontier. Underground environments are, however, notoriously hazardous for
humans; accordingly, inspecting underground environments and performing rescues
during underground catastrophes is essential to achieve this new underground
frontier. The proposed infrastructure will support research in human-robot
teaming, networking, planning, and human-robot interaction, as well as
collaborative research with other researchers in other fields and application-
driven research into underground information collection, monitoring, surveying,
rescue, and crisis management. The proposed infrastructure will also be used for
community outreach programs, through workshops, presentations, and partnerships
with area K-12 after-school programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
infrastructure will provide a team of heterogeneous robots for deployment in
underground environments, as well as sensors, networking equipment, and
augmented reality headsets to facilitate their effective use. This
infrastructure will support the institutional theme of research on underground
environments, including underground inspection and search and rescue
applications. This infrastructure will include amphibious, ground, and aerial
robots; robotic arms and grippers to be mounted on ground robots; augmented
reality headsets designed for safety-critical domains; visual, range, and audio
sensors; and networking equipment. These hardware elements will be integrated
together and deployed within the Edgar Mine, an underground research and
evaluation facility owned and operated by the Colorado School of
Mines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.