* 1823517
* FoMR: Post-Silicon Microarchitecture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

High-performance microprocessors are the computational horsepower behind all of
society's infrastructure. The seemingly unending march of their progress, known
to the public as "Moore's Law," has all but slowed owing to semiconductor
technology and manufacturing limits. Continued progress requires breakthroughs
in microarchitecture: the way the microprocessor executes applications, in
particular, the way it unlocks hidden parallelism within them. Researchers have
proposed many exotic microarchitecture enhancements in recent decades, but their
commercialization has been stymied because they are too specialized. Strategies
that speed-up any application were exhausted long ago. All that remains are
strategies that pinpoint specific application behaviors, leading to complex
microarchitecture enhancements that perform exceedingly well on some, but not
all, tasks. This project fundamentally changes the value proposition of any
microarchitecture enhancement. The impacts of this project are: scalable
microprocessor performance in the post-Moore era, working closely with industry
partners to ensure meaningful results and speed technology transfer, and
training students of diverse backgrounds for the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key idea of the project is to tightly couple
the fixed hardware components of a state-of-art microprocessor with
reconfigurable (not fixed) hardware components. The fixed hardware still fetches
and executes instructions in basically the same way. Enhancements programmed
into the reconfigurable hardware intervene to unlock more parallelism in the
instruction stream. Different enhancements can be synthesized into the
reconfigurable hardware as the task at hand changes. Thus, microarchitecture
enhancements are instantly commercializable/deployable. Moreover, taken
altogether, the suite of available and future microarchitecture enhancements
covers a wide range of application behaviors for
acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.