* 1823909
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Phonological Aspects of word-internal Spanish/ English codeswitching
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sara Stefanich, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2023
* USD 14,508.00

One essential goal of research on bilingualism is to understand the ways in
which two or more linguistic systems interact inside a speaker's mind. The
bilingual phenomenon of code-switching, or the use of two languages in a single
linguistic unit, embodies this interaction of linguistic systems. This unit can
be a conversation, a sentence or even a word. Although code-switching was
previously thought to be a 'substandard' use of language, researchers have
determined that it is in fact systematic and rule-governed. Thus, the study of
code-switching provides a unique lens with which to view the rules that
constrain language. A primary question of interest regards the minimal
linguistic unit within which code-switching can occur. While it appears that a
single word can be composed of morphemes (i.e., the smallest meaning-bearing
linguistic unit) from two different languages, researchers have claimed that the
sounds used to produce that word must come from a single language. However,
these claims have never been tested empirically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation project takes a laboratory phonology approach to determining the
minimum linguistic unit within which a bilingual can combine elements from their
two phonological (i.e., sound) systems. Intraword code-switching by Mexican
Spanish/English early bilinguals will be examined using two experimental
paradigms: a production study, and an aural acceptability judgment task. The
results from these experiments will inform whether bilinguals produce
phonologically switched words and accept phonologically switched words as licit
outputs of their linguistic systems, thus confirming or rejecting the hypothesis
that the word is the minimal unit for phonological code-switching. In addition
to its theoretical contributions, dissemination of this research in the local
Chicago community will contribute to the goal of informing the general public
and bilingual educators/administrators about the use of code-switching as a
standard bilingual speech practice that is rule governed like any natural
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.