* 1823636
* Oceanographic Technical Services,Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 4,065,868.00

Bermuda Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS) proposes to support technical services
on R/V Atlantic Explorer, a general purpose, intermediate class research vessel
operated by BIOS as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System research fleet. The proposal requests support for basic services. They
will provide at least two shipboard technicians on most cruises of R/V Atlantic
Explorer to support seagoing research projects and to maintain calibrate and
provide for qualified users items from their pool of shared-use research
instrumentation. In addition, they will utilize technicians via the technician
exchange program and the UNOLS Tech Pool. The costs for the techs will be
deducted from the award. The budget included with this proposal is for the first
year of a 5-year continuing award. The out-years will be negotiated with the
Program with the receipt of the annual report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.