* 1823325
* CRI:II-New: The Living Link Lab: Infrastructure for Enhancing Occupant Experience and Building Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yuan Tian, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 754,568.00

Recent studies have demonstrated the great potential of smart building
applications to optimize building efficiency and occupant comfort. However,
these applications are often building-centric and there are limited formal
characterizations of the interactions between occupants and built environments.
This research infrastructure creates a new sensing testbed called the "Living
Link-Lab" that transforms the University of Virginia (UVA) Cyber-Physical
Systems laboratory (approximately 17,000 square feet) into a testbed for human-
building interaction data collection and experimentation. With occupant-based
wearables, interactive mobile robots, and comprehensive environmental sensors,
this research infrastructure captures several dimensions of variability in
human-building interactions, enabling new occupant-focused building control
techniques. These techniques are prototyped on the testbed and then translated
to other buildings to enhance occupant experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research infrastructure will enable long-term in-situ studies of occupant
behavior, cognition, and interactions in a large collaborative environment, and
it will support researchers from various backgrounds (e.g., engineering,
psychology, architecture, and medicine) in exploring the human-building
technology frontier. This unique sensing testbed provides a complete, real-time
information about environmental changes, occupant behavior, and energy
consumption. The project enables research on novel techniques for (i) enhancing
occupant experience, (ii) energy monitoring, (iii) robotic mobile sensing, (iv)
privacy-preserving sensing, (v) optimized Internet of Things (IoT) networks and
sensors, and (vi) human-autonomy collaboration. The testbed also generates a
comprehensive dataset that enables researchers from a range of backgrounds to
collaborate on novel topics. The application-driven outcomes encourage students
to pursue a computing research career path by demonstrating the real-world
impact potential of the research. Additionally, the testbed enhances education
on smart office spaces and leads to new courses being designed that leverage the
physical testbeds and resulting data streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.