* 1823304
* II-New: Multi-Dimensional Drone Communication Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Dinesh Rajan, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 849,839.00

The next wave of applications for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or drones
range from delivery of consumer goods or Internet connectivity during natural
disasters to defense scenarios such as autonomous combat or search and rescue,
all of which require coordination of multiple entities across various altitudes
from in-flight to ground-based stations. However, there are two important
challenges to realizing such applications. First, positioning many antennas to
communicate in three dimensions is non-trivial since the load capacity in terms
of power and weight is highly restricted, and the drone body may block reception
on the opposite side of the antenna. Second, large-scale antenna arrays are
increasingly being used to increase channel quality in a given direction.
However, there is limited antenna scale on a single UAV, and the challenge of
distributing the antenna array across a drone swarm is extremely complex due to
constant mobility, varying relative positions, and the inability to update the
channel state of all transmitting nodes. In this project, the goal is to build
MuDDI, a Multi-Dimensional Drone Communication Infrastructure, which will enable
indoor and outdoor experimentation with UAVs to address research issues related
to 3-D connectivity, distributed antennas across a drone swarm, and 3-D swarm
formations that optimize the transmission to intended
receivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable these research activities, there are
four key development tasks to design such an infrastructure: (i.) building a
programmable drone platform to enable hybrid beamforming on each drone to enable
directional transmissions across the extremes of all three physical dimensions,
which requires antennas on each face of the drone and switching elements to
dynamically allocate limited radio frequency (RF) processing chains to these
antennas, (ii.) designing a test infrastructure for large-scale distributed
beamforming across UAVs for the experimental analysis of the various channel
feedback mechanisms that have been set forth but have yet to be evaluated on
drones with in-flight vibrations and mobility patterns and various swarm
formations, (iii.) constructing and incorporating a large-scale antenna array
over the surface of the ceiling and surrounding walls to capture various
resulting transmission patterns of a single drone seeking 3-D connectivity,
distributed drone swarm creating various formations, and a massive multiple-
input/multiple-output (MIMO) ground station, and (iv.) integrating a massive
MIMO control station that can enable directional transmissions to, and track the
mobility of in-flight systems, enabling research on the various beam widths and
multi-user beam patterns that may be simultaneously allocated among large
antenna arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.