* 1823741
* Interdisciplinary Postdoctoral Fellowship in Behavioral and Forensic Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Saks, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 237,648.00

Title: Interdisciplinary Postdoctoral Fellowship in Behavioral and Forensic
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support an interdisciplinary postdoctoral fellow who will conduct research under
the mentorship of senior scholars in the fields of behavior sciences and
forensic sciences at Arizona State University. The past decade has seen the
beginning of a major transformation in the field of forensic science. This
postdoctoral fellow's research program will advance scientific understanding at
the nexus of the behavioral sciences and forensic sciences, with a goal to
improve how forensic science is developed, conducted, and communicated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a postdoctoral scholar who will
be engaged in a number of research areas at Arizona State University?s Forensic
Science Initiative Program and Law and Behavioral Science Program for two years.
The research will involve developing ways to test the validity and reliability
of forensic techniques, investigating the human side of forensic judgment, and
helping non-scientists such as jurors, lawyers, and judges understand and
evaluate the quality of forensic science by improving how it is communicated.
The postdoctoral fellow will receive consistent and ongoing mentorship from a
team of scholars with established research records in the area of the fellow?s
work. The goal of this interdisciplinary postdoctoral fellowship is to
facilitate the growth of a scholar working in a critically-understudied area at
the intersection of the behavioral and forensic sciences, in order to advance
scientific understandings of convergence of these important areas of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.