* 1823634
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Psycholinguistic Status of Lone English-Origin Nouns in Spanish: Integrating Sociolinguistic Approaches
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 17,096.00

It is estimated that 53 million Americans speak Spanish, the majority of whom
are bilingual. Spanish-English bilingualism has become a hallmark of communities
across the U.S., from the growing Cuban-American population in Miami, Florida,
to the long-established Mexican-American communities throughout the Southwest,
to the population of the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico. Across these
communities, there is a common linguistic practice that plays a central role in
bilingualism research: language mixing. Defined as the simultaneous use of two
languages within a single conversation, language mixing is viewed by some as
haphazard or indicative of incompetence. However, linguistic research has
demonstrated that language mixing is structured and rule-driven, and that
accomplishing it requires great skill in both languages. Despite its ubiquity
across bilingual communities the world over, however, linguists have yet to
agree on what counts as actual instances of language mixing. Likewise, while
much is known about the social aspects of language mixing, research has only
begun to explore the psychological and cognitive characteristics of language
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation research supported by this award
combines approaches from different subdisciplines in linguistics to provide a
clearer understanding of how bilinguals combine their two languages. The project
focuses on the use of single English nouns of English embedded in otherwise
Spanish sentences--so-called "lone items". By bringing together the rich source
of knowledge on the use of lone items in bilingual speech and modern
psychological techniques, the project will examine how lone items are processed
and comprehended, and how sensitive bilinguals are to grammatical changes in the
use of lone items. Although linguistic understanding of bilingualism has
improved greatly over the past several decades, heavy stigma still surrounds the
use and mixing of two or more languages. The present research will contribute to
the growing body of research showing that language mixing is a skill, and has
social, psychological, and cognitive characteristics that influence human
language understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.