* 1823410
* Influencing Conflict-Related Emotional Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Gross, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 448,689.00

People often respond emotionally to the dramatic socio-political events that are
taking place around the word. This is especially true when such events are
occurring in well-established democracies and at home, and not just in faraway
countries. In many cases, expressing strong emotions can create and perpetuate
conflicts with others who may be responding to these events in very different
ways. Acknowledging the importance of emotions in intergroup conflicts has led
to recent attempts to reduce conflict-related emotions using psychological
interventions. Initial studies show that these efforts can be helpful in
reducing destructive emotions and promoting conflict resolution. However, it is
not typically possible to apply interventions to an entire population. Instead,
interventions must be applied to a portion or subgroup of the population. This
project examines whether reducing a subgroup's emotions can have a long-lasting
influence on the overall group's emotions and level of conflict. The goal of the
project is to find ways to optimize psychological interventions and reduce
harmful conflict.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Three studies use the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict as a case study. The first study examines the unfolding of
negative emotional dynamics within groups. Recent developments in computer
science are utilized to create an online network that allows the examination of
real-time, online interactions. The second study examines how these emotional
dynamics are influenced by emotion regulation interventions applied to different
portions of the group. This will enable the identification of the conditions
under which interventions achieve maximum utility in influencing overall
negative group emotions. The third study tests the long-term effects of the
emotion regulation interventions and assesses how these effects are influenced
by emotional dynamics. The research will make an important contribution to
maximizing the scalability of psychological interventions and achieving the
long-term aim of reducing harmful conflict. Immediate applications resulting
from the project can be facilitated by the Stanford Center for Social
Psychological Answers to Real-World Questions (SPARQ), which provides
consultation to many organizations interested in psychological interventions. A
collaboration with researchers at the Interdisciplinary Center (IDC) in
Herzliya, Israel provides additional opportunities for implementation and
dissemination. The project includes the development of an open source platform
that can be utilized by researchers in many fields, thereby advancing other
areas of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.