* 1823381
* Promoting Science Understanding and Interest through Language Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2025
* Nikole Patson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 393,760.00

Public understanding of science in the United States is notably low, and even
lower among women and individuals in minority groups. Through most of an
individual's life, access to science material will happen outside of a school
setting, making informal science environments such as science museums an
important resource for creating and maintaining interest and access to science
throughout the lifespan. The goal of this research project is to examine how
Language Science can promote better understanding of science as a process and
can spark interest and excitement for science in a museum setting. Language
Science is predicted to be especially effective because of its natural fit with
evidence-based practices of informal science teaching and learning. Moreover, we
predict that it will help create an entry point for science among individuals
who do not identify with classic scientific fields. This project will help us
better understand how different kinds of activities and topic areas influence
the public's understanding of and attitudes towards science, and it will
potentially help us identify a bridge to bring more people into the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to examine how
effective a variety of different Language Science outreach activities (including
participation in live research) are at fostering (1) understanding of scientific
content, (2) understanding of the nature of science (e.g. science as a process),
and (3) interest and excitement to learn more about science. Observational and
survey-based studies will be conducted at the Center of Science and Industry
(COSI) in Columbus, Ohio. The Language Science activities will be drawn from the
set of those currently in use at the Language Sciences Research Lab at the
museum and include a range of language topics and types of interactivity with
the public. Responses to these activities will be compared to a broad base-line
survey of museum visitors, as well as parallel observational and survey-based
studies examining non-language science activities at the museum. Survey items
will include a range of demographic questions and questions about scientific
knowledge, training, and interest. These studies will allow us to determine
which approaches and topics are most effective at promoting positive science
understanding and interest, and especially the extent to which Language Science
is comparable to other scientific domains. Of particular interest will be the
responses of individuals with lower levels of science background and interest.
We predict comparatively greater gains with the Language Science activities
relative to the non-language activities for such individuals. In addition, the
project will include a set of focus group discussions with the faculty and
students who conduct the Language Science activities to explore factors that
encourage participation in such activities and would promote
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.