* 1823767
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Articulations of Local Indigenous Ecology, Identity, and History
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Johnathan Favini, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,160.00

Nature parks often harbor both indigenous people with historic land claims and
plants and animals also considered native to those spaces. The relationship
between the two is usually complementary. However, biologists charged with
protecting natural areas may find that globally developed policies and
approaches to conservation conflict with those of the traditional local
residents. The research supported by this award investigates the underlying
processes that define indigeneity of plants and people, the reasons for
divergences between local and global preservation approaches, and how the two
might be sustainably reconciled.

The research will be carried out by University of Virginia anthropology doctoral
student, Johnathan P. Favini, with the oversight of Dr. James J. Igoe. The
researcher has chosen to conduct the research among Jamaica's Maroon population,
descendants of fugitive Taino and African people who built communities in the
jungled interior. In the 2000s, the forests adjacent to these communities were
opened to bauxite mining, This has brought Maroons into increasing engagement
with conservationists. This situation provides an excellent research opportunity
to investigate how Maroons and conservationists negotiate their different
approaches to ecosystem protection. The researcher will undertake 12 months of
ethnographic research with local and international scientists, as well as in
four Maroon communities. He will collect data through interviews, participant
observation, and analysis of policy reports and media accounts. Findings from
this research will inform policy makers who must find ways to negotiate with
divergent indigenous and scientific groups. The research will also help
anthropologists and biologists improve theoretical understanding of indigeneity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.