* 1823701
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Militarized Development at the Community Level
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Matthew Gutmann, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 16,638.00

What impact do military bases have on the social and economic life for the
communities near which they are situated? Some studies have demonstrated that
military investments can be critical to sustaining robust economies as well as
functional and safe societies. Resources allocated for defense can create
employment in military and civilian sectors, lead to scientific and
technological innovations, and serve an essential public good by ensuring
security at both national and international levels. Less studied is the
military's role in developing the local economies and societies adjacent to
where they are stationed. This project, which trains a student in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores what role the
military and civilian communities play in the production of militarized
development. Further, it would broaden the participation of groups
underrepresented in science, build capacity and scientific infrastructure
through international scientific cooperation, and enhance public scientific
understanding by broadly disseminating findings to organizations engaged in
development practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sertac Sen, under the supervision of
Dr. Matthew Gutmann of Brown University will investigate how militarized
development is socially produced. The study will take place in Corlu, Turkey,
which is an ideal laboratory for examining this question because the military
has been playing an important role in the city's social and economic life. Not
only has Corlu been home to the Fifth Army Corps of the Turkish military for a
long time, but the city has also received additional troops after a failed coup
attempt in 2016, as part of the government's plan to transfer military units
from large Turkish metropoles to smaller Turkish cities to promote development
and national security at the same time. It thus provides us with a critical
comparative framework through the inclusion of ground-up examination of
militarized development in real time (rather than exclusively looking at locales
where military presence have long become an enduring part of civic life). The
investigators will assess the reception and impacts of the military's long-
standing and recently heightened presence in the city from both civilian and
military perspectives. They will do so through participant observation, local
archival research, and interviews with various populations, including the city's
elites, Turkish and Kurdish working-class populations, active and retired
military professionals, civilian defense employees, and local contractors as
well as shopkeepers serving the military. Findings from this research will
provide insights into the role of the military as a development actor, the state
of civil-military relations after politically tumultuous events such as coup
attempts, and the political economy of warfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.