* 1823703
* Collaborative Research: Using Web Data to Study Campaigns and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Martin Kifer, High Point University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 46,753.00

Electoral campaigns are a defining feature of democratic polities-they influence
voters' choices and set expectations for how elected representatives will serve
their constituents. Yet, studying campaigns and their effects is difficult. This
is particularly true when it comes to situations where numerous elections are
taking place in a single country at one time. In this project, the PIs build on
data that have been collected since 2002, analyzing large samples of candidate
websites and conducting surveys of candidate campaigns. These data provide a
holistic picture of a wide range of campaigns-both winners and losers-and offer
scholars and citizens the ability to assess what campaigns do, why they do it,
and how it might relate to subsequent governing. The intellectual merit to the
project is that the data will allow scholars and citizens access to
unprecedented data about how those looking to represent the populace behave and
the type of discourse they employ. The broader impact is that the enhanced
understanding of campaigns that these data will provide will enable
practitioners to identify sources of political change and discuss reforms that
could ultimately improve campaign quality. The project also will involve
students who will learn how to conduct research and be able to use the data in
their own work.

In the United States, citizens choose their representatives in part based on
campaigns. Yet, campaigns are difficult to study as they involve so many
candidates, many of whom run relatively low-cost, small campaigns. One way to
obtain a representative sample of campaign discourse is to rely on candidate
websites since virtually all candidates have websites. Websites also are ideal
insofar as campaigns view them as holistic portraits of messages aimed at
voters. Since 2002, the PIs have coded campaign websites and conducted surveys
of campaigns. The result is an unprecedented data set of campaign behavior over-
time. In this project, the PIs will extend that data into the upcoming election,
which is of particular interest given increased affective polarization and
incivility, and the nationalization of elections. The intellectual merit to the
project is that it will allow scholars and citizens access to data about how
those looking to represent the populace behave and the type of discourse they
employ. Further, it will enable scholars to track the evolution of the Internet
and technology over time, and test theories of campaigns and their effects on
voters and representatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.