* 1823403
* FoMR: Secure, Light-Weight Speculative Engines for Coordinated and Cohesive Speculation in Future Memory Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Paul Gratz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The scaling of computer systems through the next decade poses a grand challenge
due to the slowing down of the decades-long trend of packing more processors
into a given area at the same cost. In this new era, the benefits of improved
manufacturing processes will largely end. Thus, processor performance must be
won through processor design advancement. The goal of this research is to
develop secure techniques to improve processors performance by accurately
speculating on future memory references and data values.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a high level the research leverages light-weight
speculation engines, speculating on program path and data values without the
overheads of a full core, predicting reference patterns and speculating on
read/write sets to alleviate memory latency effects on instruction-level
parallelism (ILP) extraction. This project addresses a critical need for new
architectural techniques which securely improve both power efficiency and ILP.
Furthermore, this project addresses the need for computer engineers at all
levels with an understanding of efficient, secure processor design, as the
computer industry struggles to attract talent with the skills to meet these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.