* 1823547
* Civil Rights Violations and the Democratic Rule of Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Emily Gade, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 248,692.00

In recent years, states among the world's oldest industrialized democracies have
selectively surrendered their commitments to liberal democracy in order to
safeguard against (real or perceived) national security threats. How do state
actors discuss, arrive at, and justify such authorization of extralegal violence
against targeted citizens? The United Kingdom wrestled with this balance between
national security and democratic protections during the period of its "Troubles"
with Northern Ireland. During this time, the U.K. government interned 1,874 un-
convicted Irish Catholic citizens and subjected as many as fourteen to the "five
techniques" of torture. This research leverages an original archival resource --
8,430 recently-declassified pages from the British Prime Minister's security-
related correspondence files (1969-74) -- to analyze the processes by which the
United Kingdom internally justified its extralegal internment and torture
policies. It identifies the government's internal decision-making processes,
compares these internal motivations to the external justifications it publicly
presented to support these violent policies, and seeks to identify themes and
patterns which may apply to other cases of states? deliberations about using
extralegal violence during times of perceived national insecurity. This analysis
advances conflict studies and socio-legal scholarship by 1) providing a nuanced
understanding of how robust democracies erode rule-of-law protections; 2)
identifying the internal-external dimensions of democratic states? authorization
of violence; and 3) contributing historical knowledge of the U.K. "Troubles."
This project increases public-facing scholarship on the complexities of
protecting both democracies' national security interests and their rule-of-law
principles. Its focus on using detention and torture to quell terrorist threats
are particularly relevant to contemporary political debates the world over.

This project combines deductive and inductive qualitative social science methods
with computational science techniques to identify, analyze, and generalize state
justifications for violence, as follows. First, it uses scientific process-
tracing methods to identify a series of hypothesized internal motivations and
justifications that lead state agents to authorize violence against Irish
Catholic citizens. Second, it collects and selectively analyzes additional data
on the U.K. Government's public statements. This allows for the identification
of (in)consistencies between the government's internal and external
justifications for violence. Third, it uses novel natural language processing
(NLP) computational science techniques to: build models that detect
justifications' text patterns, cross-validate qualitative conclusions,
generalize justifications to other cases of state authorizations of violence,
and evaluate the efficacy of NLP for this type of research. This research lays
the groundwork for future text-as-data machine-learning analysis of government
documents. It also applies and advances the frontiers of NLP by examining
whether and how these techniques can be tailored to identify recent or unfolding
threats to democratic principles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.