* 1823037
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Global Address Programming with Accelerators
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Owens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 386,025.00

Large-scale computing today is dominated by parallel computing, where a large
task is divided into many smaller tasks and those smaller tasks run at the same
time. Traditionally each of those tasks run independently up to a common
stopping point, then they halt, exchange information, and continue. This global
stop-and-communicate step is quite expensive. This project instead pursues a
different approach, where individual tasks directly communicate with other tasks
asynchronously, without having to wait for a global stopping point. This
approach is likely to yield better performance on large-scale computing tasks,
specifically on what is becoming the dominant large-scale machine, a
heterogeneous machine with many CPUs and other&lt;br/&gt;many-core processors.
The project will deliver a set of high-performance, open-source data structures
and algorithm implementations to support irregular patterns of communication,
notably those that arise in biology, graph analytics, and sparse linear algebra
for machine learning. These will not only be directly useful for end users but
also demonstrate how to design and engineer primitives for accelerator-equipped
distributed-memory machines. The project also engages application developers
(both in our groups and externally) to make the outcomes broadly
useful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a programming environment
for accelerator-based HPC systems that integrates accelerators into a
Partitioned Global Address Space (PGAS) model, which will allow direct
communication between GPUs in a manner that is well suited to both applications
and the underlying hardware. Specifically, GPU programming will be integrated
with the UPC++ PGAS programming model ("GPUPC++"). The project will thus advance
the state of the art in algorithms, programming models, and low-level support
for the heterogeneous large-scale computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.