* 1823881
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Literacy Effects on Language Acquisition and Sentence Processing in Adult L1 and School-Age Heritage Speakers of Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,032.00

Of the many English Language Learners (ELLs) in American schools today, roughly
75% speak Spanish as their native language. This represents nearly four million
children who speak Spanish at home while attending school in English. The
linguistic variation that these children are exposed to is one possible factor
that may contribute to the persistent achievement gap between school-age ELLs
and their monolingual, English-speaking peers. Research that investigates how
bilingual language development progresses during the school-age period is
critically needed to understand the factors that affect language development at
this age and to develop programs that facilitate linguistic growth and academic
success in all learners. Contrary to historical 'English-only' approaches,
recent evidence suggests that providing ELLs with academic training in their
first and second language leads to better outcomes in both languages. However,
it is less clear what specific aspects of development contribute to this
observation and what their long-term effects into adulthood may be. This study
investigates the impact of literacy in ELLs' first language as one important
component of school-age development that may enhance the ability to comprehend
oral language. The findings of this study will have important consequences for
young ELLs, who commonly acquire reading and writing skills in their second
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a psycholinguistic perspective
to investigate the role of literacy in the language development of school-age
ELLs. It tests the Literacy Enhancement Hypothesis, which claims learning to
read and write improves language comprehension by strengthening an individual's
ability to more efficiently monitor morphological structures. The linguistic
focus is gender and number markers on nouns and participles in Spanish because
these are often important cues for tracking referents in complex sentences, such
as passives, which are more frequent in written than in spoken language. In some
cases, successfully interpreting (im)plausible passive sentences in Spanish
requires listeners to attend to morphosyntactic agreement dependencies between
the verb and its object. Study 1 tests 9-10 year old Spanish-speaking children
(half in dual language, half in English only schools) and Study 2 tests low to
high literate Spanish-speaking adults. Both studies include two identical
experiments. One experiment uses visual world eye tracking techniques to measure
how learning to read and write in Spanish affects these speakers' ability to use
gender markers on past participles in passives sentences to anticipate the
object of a sentence. The other experiment uses event related potentials (ERPs)
to measure if differences in brain responses to critical words in similar
sentences indicate how literacy impacts the use of syntactic and semantic
information during auditory sentence processing. The findings will help improve
understanding of the interaction between literacy and linguistic knowledge, and
how this interaction impacts cognitive processes involved in oral language
comprehension in child and adult bilinguals with different academic language
exposure and experience in their native language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.