* 1823827
* Understanding typologies using Property Analysis: learnability, diachronic change, and formal structure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Nazarre Merchant, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 173,544.00

Languages change over time by accumulating small grammatical differences, and
child language learners must be sensitive to these small differences. A robust
theory of language change must then be able to articulate what are possible
historical language changes and how these changes are transmitted
intergenerationally. This project will address these issues by making concrete
the notion of distance between languages and will determine how learners can
utilize these small distinctions in learning. Dr. Merchant offers that there are
parallels in the way that grammars change over time and learners navigate these
changes to the way that RNA (ribonucleic acid) sequences change over time and
the corresponding phenotypes produced by these RNA sequences. Genetic notions of
distance between phenotypes are directly applicable to notions of distances
between languages, and these distances are directly relevant for explaining
language change. In addition to providing a better understanding of how
languages change and how learners acquire these changes, the project will create
a large repository of analyzed languages allowing researchers to build on the
insights gained in this project. Furthermore, the project will provide valuable
STEM training for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups who will
help to develop the online database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical core of
the project involves developing and extending formal theories of language,
language learning, and language change by incorporating ideas from genetics,
topology, cognitive science, and linguistics. In particular, the project will
accomplish these tasks by developing and expanding three interrelated
components: (1) software tools will be developed that will allow linguists to
calculate and compare formal theories of grammars, determine distances and
adjacencies between languages, including distances arising from the genetic
structure of grammars and those arising from the properties of the grammars (in
the sense of Alber &amp; Prince 2017), and evaluate the outcomes of learning
algorithms that rely on different notions of grammatical distance. (2) An online
repository of diachronically relevant analyzed linguistic systems will be
created. (3) The learning algorithms using ideas of grammatical nearness will be
applied to the analyzed systems of the repository to evaluate diachronically
realistic and informative learning algorithms. This work will produce new models
of language learning, diachronic change, and will contribute a significant body
of publicly available data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.