* 1823762
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Count/Mass Distinction in Native and Non-Native Grammar
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Tania Ionin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,259.00

Language and cognition are deeply related, influencing each other in both
universal and language-specific ways. This dissertation project aims to examine
the relationship between the cognitive object/substance distinction and the
linguistic count/mass distinction. More specifically, this project investigates
how English, Korean and Mandarin Chinese speakers use and interpret count vs.
mass nouns in their native languages and how Korean-speaking and Mandarin-
speaking learners of English as a second language use and interpret count and
mass nouns in English. This project aims to provide insights into what is
universal and what is language-specific in the domain of the count/mass
distinction. This project also has the potential to inform educators, language
teaching professionals and developers of language teaching software about
learners' use of the count/mass distinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet its
goals, this dissertation research will first investigate the relationship
between the object/substance interpretation and the grammar of the count/mass
distinction in English, Korean and Mandarin. Once the properties of the
count/mass distinction in all three languages are established, this research
will examine how Korean-speaking and Mandarin-speaking learners of English
interpret different types of English nouns, as well as how they judge and
process English plural marking (a marker of the count/mass distinction), in both
offline and online (reaction-time) tasks. This project will contribute to the
fields of theoretical linguistics and psycholinguistics by providing information
on grammatical knowledge and processing in both native and non-native language.
Furthermore, this project enhances the understanding of the grammars of East
Asian languages, specifically Korean and Mandarin
Chinese.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.