* 1823569
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2021
* USD 229,865.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) for R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel, and Sally Ride, a 238'
general purpose Ocean Class vessel. Both ships are owned by Navy and operated by
Scripps Institution of Oceanography as part of the US Academic Fleet. The
vessels are scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS). Both vessels support multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all
the world?s ocean basins.

In 2017, REVELLE completed 282 days, 87 (31%) of which were for NSF. In 2018,
she is currently scheduled with 243 days, 146 (60%) of which are for NSF. Sally
Ride completed 189 days in 2017. 10 (6%) of these days were for NSF. In 2018,
Ride is scheduled for 246 total days of which 96 (39%) are for NSF.

The prioritized SSSE request includes the following:

1) Revelle Crane Replacements $388,360 2) Topping Hoist Lift Winch $104,499 3)
Lebus Shell for RIDE $23,892 $516,751

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.