* 1823398
* FoMR: Collaborative Research: Dependent ILP: Dynamic Hoisting and Eager Scheduling of Dependent Instructions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Soner Onder, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 230,744.00

Instruction-level parallelism (ILP) in computing allows different machine-level
instructions within an application to execute in parallel within a micro-
processor. Exploitation of ILP has provided significant performance benefits in
computing, but there has been little improvement in ILP in recent years. This
project proposes a new approach called "eager execution" that could
significantly increase ILP. The success of many applications depends on how
efficiently they can be executed. The proposed eager execution technique will
benefit applications that span those running on mobile devices to large data
applications running on the ever-growing number of data centers. Enabling better
systems at all scales will further enable the ubiquitous computing that
continues to pervade lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach includes
the following advantages: (1) immediately-dependent consumer instructions can be
more quickly delivered to functional units for execution; (2) the execution of
instructions whose source register values have not changed since its last
execution can be detected and redundant computation can be avoided; (3) the
dependency between a producer/consumer pair of instructions can sometimes be
collapsed so they can be simultaneously dispatched for execution; (4) consumer
instructions from multiple paths may be speculatively executed and their results
can be naturally retained in the paradigm to avoid re-execution after a branch
misprediction; and (5) critical instructions can be eagerly executed to improve
performance, which include loads to prefetch cache lines and pre-computation of
branch results to avoid branch misprediction delays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.