* 1823873
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Technological Innovation in Agriculture and Food Security
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Joao Biehl, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 17,514.00

Scientists warn that food security will only become more challenged in the
coming decades as environmental shocks intensify and agriculture grows
increasingly vulnerable to disruption. Amid a new sense of urgency regarding
environmental change and food production, policymakers are deciding how to
allocate development aid to improve food systems under the banner of climate-
smart agriculture (CSA). CSA aims to be an experimental and data-driven
approach, with a focus on introducing new technologies, improved and transgenic
seeds and novel farming techniques among small-scale farmers to mitigate the
effects of rapid environmental change more efficiently. The United States is an
early adopter of the climate-smart concept since 2010 but has only recently
started to direct official development aid toward expressly climate-smart
agricultural (CSA) programs elsewhere, in conjunction with international
organizations, philanthropic foundations, and multinational corporate partners.
To date, the technological and relational content of climate-smart agriculture
in practice has received little in-depth scholarly investigation. Both academics
and practitioners of development puzzle over what climate resilience actually
entails and how its success can be achieved and measured. This study, which
trains a graduate student in methods of rigorous, empirical data collection and
analysis, explores the relationship between climate-smart agriculture and
practices related to food security. Further, this project will build capacity
and scientific infrastructure through international scientific cooperation, and
enhance public scientific understanding by broadly disseminating findings to
organizations engaged in issues related to agricultural development and food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serena Stein, under the supervision of Dr. Joao
Biehl of Princeton University, will investigate how agricultural aid is remade
with experimental, relational, and ethical implications for smallholder farmers,
through a grounded study of three unfolding climate smart projects in Mozambique
in southeastern Africa. Mozambique is an appropriate site for assessing climate-
smart agriculture in practice. The high volume of development aid invested
historically and currently, especially in the area of sustainable development,
makes it an ideal laboratory for evaluating climate-smart agriculture
longitudinally. Climate-smart commitments take place via bilateral aid
partnerships with traditional donors such as the United States, as well as
emerging donors like Brazil, and private corporations. Using ethnographic
methods of participant-observation and interviews with farmer beneficiaries and
development practitioners, the researchers will examine how development
discourse, technology transfer and farming practice is reconfigured when
agricultural aid is mobilized around the climate-smart paradigm. Of particular
interest are the ways that women farmers respond to these initiatives, and the
local perceptions and lived experiences of environmental change, land rights and
food security that emerge in the context of these
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.