* 1823854
* Collaborative Research: Pennsylvania Solitary Confinement Study
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Jessica Simes, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 92,588.00

The U.S. penal population is the largest in the world, but imprisonment in
America is also distinguished by its extensive use of solitary confinement,
defined as incarceration in a cell for 23 hours each day with limited access to
visits from outsiders or rehabilitative programs. Solitary confinement is an
important but understudied part of the experience of punishment in the United
States. The scant available evidence suggests solitary confinement is associated
with poor health and adjustment to society after incarceration. The current
project, the Pennsylvania Solitary Confinement Study (PASS), will analyze
conditions of penal confinement and their effects on health and well-being,
labor force participation after prison release, and recidivism. The project will
provide a multidimensional account of the conditions and effects of extreme
confinement in a large U.S. prison system. The project will also improve our
understanding of how solitary confinement is used, and how it may have
significant and long-lasting effects. A key broader impact of the project is to
enable a research-driven national policy effort to reevaluate the use and
policies of solitary confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Quantitative studies of
the effects of solitary confinement have relied on observational data to
estimate weakly-identified causal effects. The current project will use detailed
statewide prison records (2007-2017) to estimate causal effects of solitary
confinement on long-term outcomes, exploiting the random assignment of hearing
examiners to prison misconduct cases. It combines field surveys of incarcerated
men and prison staff in a solitary confinement unit with a quantitative state-
wide analysis of administrative prison records. The longitudinal survey data
collection combines an analysis of prison records, a survey and neurocognitive
battery administered to incarcerated men (N=117, including a main sample of 99
and a pretest sample of 18) recently admitted to solitary confinement and then
three months later, and interviews with prison staff (N=22). Analysis of this
quasi-experiment will yield estimates of the effect of solitary confinement on
employment and recidivism. Because prior research on solitary confinement has
been based on clinical interviews with small samples often in the context of
litigation, the survey extends research by collecting data at scale with a
standardized instrument. Survey responses at two points in time allows a
comparison of the conditions of solitary confinement with the general prison
population. Thematic analysis of interview transcripts will illuminate the
relationship between prisoners and staff and shed light on the mechanisms by
which solitary confinement produces long-term impacts. The proposed study will
contribute new data and analysis for policymakers and scholars seeking to
understand and address the conditions of penal confinement in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.