* 1823121
* Collaborative Research: Linking turbulent flow dynamics to meandering river migration
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ali Khosronejad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2022
* USD 240,126.00

Rivers are central conduits for life in the US. They are thoroughfares for
shipping, focal points for infrastructure and manufacturing, and oases for
recreation and wildlife. Rivers often migrate as a natural process, one which
has far-reaching consequences: it poses hazards to bridges and other
infrastructure; shifts flooding patterns; and over geologic time, shapes
underground resources, including groundwater and hydrocarbons. This project
advances the field of Earth-surface science by building new tools to forecast
river migration and a new, related curriculum for college science classes. The
project will further diversity in the sciences by supporting a team of women and
men from the mountain west to the east coast, who together represent two state
universities and one Tribal College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A foundation of the
research is a new set of state-of-the-art mathematical simulations using higher-
performance computing techniques. These simulations will capture interactions
between water flow and sediment transport across an unprecedented range of river
shapes. Model predictions will be tested and refined using experiments in a
scale model of a meandering river, and by comparison to geologic data sets. The
research findings will help geologists, engineers, and river scientists to
mitigate river hazards, manage wildlife habitat, and identify natural resources
spanning the changing landscapes of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.