* 1823189
* CAREER: Supports as steric and electronic modifiers of catalysis at single atom metal active sites
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Phillip Christopher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 378,918.00

1554112 &lt;br/&gt;Christopher, Phillip&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Promoting Catalytic
Reactions Via Isolated Metal Atoms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported metal
catalysts, especially those utilizing expensive noble metals such as rhodium
(Rh), are often most effectively utilized when the noble metal is dispersed as
extremely small particles - and in the limit as isolated metal atoms. This study
examines at a fundamental level how interactions between the supporting oxide
material and the active noble metal can be engineered to control the stability
and activity of isolated Rh atoms. Insights from the work will be used to design
catalysts with high selectivity in propylene hydroformylation - an important
industrial reaction currently operated under homogeneous liquid-phase catalytic
conditions. A heterogeneous, gas-phase analog - as sought here - would offer a
lower cost, environmentally friendly alternative. Additionally, the research
will provide opportunities for a broadly diverse student body at UC Riverside to
develop both the analytical and communication skills needed for successful
technical careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on controlling the
selectivity, reactivity, and stability of isolated metal atom catalysts by
varying the oxide support and by functionalizing the support with organosilane
moieties in ways that create electronic and steric structures that replicate
those of single-metal-atom homogeneous catalysts. Central to the study are a
host of techniques involving synthesis, in-situ catalyst transformations, and
analytical methods that will be utilized to create, confirm, and characterize
the isolated atom sites and control their activity and stability. Fundamental
experiments will be carried out using probe molecule spectroscopy, probe
reaction kinetics, in-situ spectroscopy and microscopy, and density functional
theory calculations. While the immediate focus will be on propylene
hydroformylation, the associated fundamental understanding will benefit society
through the design of heterogeneous catalytic processes that are more energy and
environmentally friendly than homogeneous processes. The highly
multidisciplinary nature of the project will provide plentiful opportunities for
students at this Hispanic serving institution to develop skills in presenting
technical information based on carefully reasoned and structured scientific
arguments.