* 1823919
* Expanding access to webcam-based online data collection for developmental research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Laura Schulz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pamela Davis-Kean
* 08/31/2022
* USD 584,445.00

This project will expand, Lookit, an online platform designed to conduct and
promote developmental research. The platform will enable families to participate
in research studies while in their own homes, using their own computers. The
researchers will recruit study participants and make it possible for other
researchers to post studies on the Lookit system; thereby, creating a tool for
researchers, teachers, and doctors to learn how children think and grow. The
project will expand knowledge about child development by making it more
practical for researchers to measure small effects, include appropriate
controls, work with special populations, and/or observe individual differences
across repeated sessions. It will also provide a way to conduct more
reproducible work, so that studies from different laboratories can more reliably
build on each other. Lookit will broaden family participation in developmental
studies, so that research better represents the variety of family structures,
educational backgrounds, and communities of American families. In addition,
Lookit will reduce barriers faced by researchers who study children but do not
have access to laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-person developmental
research is subject to practical constraints that limit which questions can be
addressed. In particular, it is often impractical to work with large numbers of
children in order to measure small or graded effects, recruit special
populations, conduct longitudinal studies, or observe behaviors in homes. The
proposed project aims to reduce these barriers by developing a common resource
for online testing, allowing researchers to post their studies on the Lookit
platform so families can participate at home. The site will be centrally hosted,
with a shared participant userbase, but researchers will control access to their
own data. The researchers will develop the functionality needed to bring the
current system to scale; recruit a large, diverse participant userbase to enable
rapid collection of large datasets online; and refine the researcher interface
and produce training materials for researchers using the
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.