* 1823444
* FoMR: Heterogeneity Under-The-Hood: Leveraging the Decoder for Highly Specialized, Programmer Transparent Microarchitectures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Dean Tullsen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2021
* USD 10,000.00

The need to scale computation capabilities without scaling up energy consumption
is as high as ever. The one-size-fits-all computation model performs well on an
average case but suffers in performance and energy efficiency for many
individual applications. Customization plays a crucial role in processor design
going forward. However, customization outside traditional programming and
execution models has not yet fulfilled its promise. This project provides the
hardware/software interface with diverse capabilities to enable the seamless
adoption of heterogeneous hardware, without breaking traditional programming and
execution models. This work enables new levels of specialization within the
microarchitecture without disrupting the traditional general-purpose programming
interface. The research team will continue increase and support workforce
diversity within their department, continuing and broadening a new set of
initiatives recently introduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
novel, non-intrusive, and programmer-transparent compiler, runtime, and decoder
techniques that will unlock several previously unexplored hardware designs that
not only offer greater throughput and efficiency for multithreaded workloads,
but substantially improve existing levels of single thread performance. This
work introduces two novel architectures: (1) Composite-ISA (Instruction Set
Architecture) Heterogeneous Multicores that can match the gains of multi-ISA
heterogeneity using a single composite-ISA derived from a large superset
x86-like ISA, and (2) Context-Sensitive Decoding that leverages the internal
micro-op translation feature of the modern decoders to seamlessly morph and
tailor execution to changing environmental conditions, without recompilation or
binary translation, and at no significant performance overhead. This level of
customization is especially useful in responding to new malware threats such as
the Meltdown and Spectre vulnerabilities, which could otherwise require complete
hardware redesign and/or incur prohibitively high performance costs due to
software/OS-based mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.