* 1823461
* The Diversity Project-A Transformative Field Research Experience That Engages Students by Empowering Them to Conduct Original Marine Research.
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Paul Barber, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 432,042.00

Studies show that more diverse workforces perform better and enhance overall
productivity. However, diversity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) is much lower than U.S. demographics, representing a growing
threat to the competitiveness of the U.S. science and technology sector. This
project focuses on improving the success and persistence of underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in science, specifically marine science. The innovation of
this work is that, rather than students working on projects developed and
assigned by research faculty, faculty will mentor students through the entire
process of developing, designing and conducting their own research. Preliminary
results indicate that not only does this student-centered model result in
students being more likely to self-identify as scientists, they also produce
research of publishable caliber. As a result, students stay in science and
continue into graduate school and careers in STEM, helping diversify our STEM
workforce and transforming the next generation of marine scientists.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Underrepresented minorities (URMs) are significantly less likely to
participate in STEM careers than other ethnicities, particularly within the
geosciences. This pattern is partially a result of the fact that field
experiences, a foundational activity that promotes retention and fosters careers
in geosciences, can often be exclusionary towards women and URMs. The Diversity
Project (TDP), founded in 2005, was designed to increase diversity in marine
science by providing a transformative international undergraduate research
experience for URMs. Until 2012, TDP employed a traditional top-down research
experience for undergraduates (REU) model where students work on a subset of the
PI's research. However, beginning in 2013, TDP implemented a novel bottom-up,
student-centered approach that focused on maximizing student engagement,
exploration, and excitement. Rather than being assigned projects, students are
mentored through the process of scientific inquiry, starting with observations,
formulating hypotheses, and ending with designing and conducting their own
research to test those hypotheses. Preliminary research suggests that this
bottom-up model results in more students publishing their research, higher
participation in national and international scientific conferences, and
increased interest in graduate school compared to the traditional top-down REU
model. This proposal has two primary goals: 1) To compare the efficacy of
bottom-up and top-down REU field programs in advancing the success of
underrepresented minority students in the geosciences through comparison of
long-term metrics of student success; 2) To assess the impacts (both
quantitatively and qualitatively) of bottom-up and top-down summer field
research programs on the success of URM students in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.