* 1823002
* Origin and Fate of Harmful Algal Blooms in the Warming Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,794,707.00

The Pacific sector of the Arctic Ocean is warming, in particular the shallow
Chukchi Sea. As a result, many organisms may spread into Arctic waters, and some
present significant threats to human and ecosystem health, such as harmful algal
bloom (HAB) species (commonly called red tides). The investigators present
evidence that HABs occur in the Chukchi Sea and we know that the potent
neurotoxins they produce can affect marine mammals, seabirds, and other
resources critical to subsistence harvesters. At the same time, little is known
about the present and future risk from toxic algae to humans in the Pacific
Arctic region. This study will be the first to document the current distribution
of highly toxic HAB species at high resolution over large spatial scales within
the Alaskan Arctic and along its transport pathways and will provide estimates
of areas at high risk of toxicity now and in a warming future. The investigators
will disseminate results via brochures, public lectures, and radio interviews in
native communities, as well as through discussions with local scientists and
managers. The project will contribute to K-12 education through the Woods Hole
Science and Technology Educational Partnership and will provide training for
postdoctoral investigators and graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis underlying this project is that
harmful algal bloom species (HABs) in Alaskan Arctic waters are not only
advected from the south through Bering Strait but are now originating locally on
the Chukchi shelf due to warming temperatures, circulation dynamics, and water
mass structure that influence bloom magnitude, duration, toxicity, and
recurrence. This will be addressed through a joint physical-biological field and
laboratory program to study the relationship between HAB species
distribution/dynamics and the physical environment of the Chukchi Sea region.
The distribution of HAB species on the Chukchi shelf will be mapped in relation
to hydrography and circulation, including a comprehensive survey of the Alaskan
Coastal Current which transports the warmest water in the Chukchi Sea. A range
of molecular and physiological tools will be used to investigate the origin,
connectivity, and fate of HAB populations in the region in the context of large-
scale wind forcing and partitioning of water masses flowing through Bering
Strait and the Chukchi Sea. Cyst and isotope profiling will establish a
historical record of blooms along the major transport pathways to the western
Arctic. Finally, conceptual models of the origin, transport, and fate of HABs in
the Chukchi Sea region will elucidate linkages to the flow pathways, dynamics,
and characteristics of the different water masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.