* 1823672
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal and Regulatory Inconsistency at the Community Level
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Liora Goldensher, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 7,501.00

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal and Regulatory Inconsistency at the
Community Level&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
professions in the U.S exist in a legal context of regulatory inconsistency
across the various jurisdictions in which the practice operates, leading to a
lack of stability regarding the legality of those professions. A prime example
concerns how childbirth occurs in the U.S, as more families seek alternatives to
standard hospital-based, obstetrician-attended medicated birth, such as home
birth. Certified Professional Midwives, the professional providers specifically
trained to provide care to the growing community of families choosing home
birth, are regulated by enormously varied laws and policies. This project will
investigate the legal setting of home birth midwifery in the context of varied
communities of practice and their responses to differing regulatory
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using mixed-methods to analyze the inconsistent
legal environment of home birth, the project will employ an ethnographic
approach, including in-depth interviews and analysis of archival data collected
across varied jurisdictional contexts. The study will investigate responses to a
lack of stability about state treatment of expertise that characterizes the
regulatory context of home birth. The research design includes participant
observation centered around the practices of home birth professionals in several
field sites. Ethnographic research will be supplemented by interviews with
officials charged with regulating the practice of home birth midwifery and with
other members of the professional networks of home birth midwives. Findings will
contribute to an understanding of the relationship between legal consciousness,
regulatory arrangements, and the politics of expertise and professionalization.
Additionally, the project will provide implications of existing regulatory
strategies by illuminating how practitioners respond to the various models of
licensure currently in use across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.