* 1823190
* A Research Agenda for a New Era in Separations Science
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Teresa Fryberger, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2020
* USD 218,000.00

Separations are important activities in trace chemical analysis, which is
central to the chemical, biological, medical, environmental, and related
sciences. In addition, separations processes are essential in the oil and gas,
chemical, paper manufacturing, pharmaceutical, water treatment, and recycling
industries. In these industries, chemical separations are expensive and consume
large amounts of energy. Developing more efficient separation processes could
reduce energy usage and have significant economic benefits to the U.S. economy.
This award provides partial support for a National Academies of Sciences (NAS)
study to develop an agenda for fundamental research in chemical separations
science. The study is being conducted by an ad hoc committee with a range of
expertise across academe, and the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study provides a comprehensive overview of advances made over the last three
decades in the field of separation science and engineering, an assessment of the
state of the field today, and a vision for future research directions. The study
is focused on a molecular scale, with a cross-disciplinary view of the
fundamental science that is common to both analytical chemistry and industrial-
level separations. The study will result in a publicly accessible report that
outlines a strategy for the next era of understanding and innovation in
fundamental separations research, impacting applications in chemical analysis,
energy production, waste management, water treatment, chemical manufacturing,
recovery of critical resources, mining, and paper production. It is anticipated
that the report may facilitate transdisciplinary research involving chemistry,
physics, materials, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Molecular Separations Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, and the Special Projects
Program in the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.