* 1823085
* RAPID: Evaluation of disaster-related science lesson plans to promote learning continuity after Hurricane Maria
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Giovanna Guerrero-Medina, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2019
* USD 186,086.00

Although natural disasters have been used in the past to develop project-based
learning (PBL) lessons, there is a lack of research that examines their use in
the aftermath of a natural disaster. The purpose of this project is to leverage
ongoing efforts related to science education and the current emergency and
disaster recovery landscape in Puerto Rico. The Yale Ciencia Initiative, in
collaboration with Ciencia Puerto Rico, working with the Department of Education
of Puerto Rico will develop culturally relevant project-based science lesson
plans that incorporate the disaster context that can be implemented both inside
and outside of the traditional classroom. The project will allow displaced
students to continue learning under the guidance of teachers, parents or social
workers. The project will train educators in the use of disaster-related
problem-based lessons and assess project implementation and the impact of the
lessons. The final outcome of this aim will be a lesson plan template and
implementation guidelines for other jurisdictions faced by natural disasters.
The project will result in enhanced infrastructure for education by developing
tools and implementation guidelines that other jurisdictions may use to develop
their own lesson plans in advance of natural disasters, so as to assure
continuity of learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess
implementation through observations and rubrics, surveys for parents, educators
and students, and focus groups with each of these populations. To assess the
impact of contextualized PBL lessons, the project will collect survey data,
before and after the educational intervention, to measure changes in students'
content knowledge, as well as in attitudes that are predictive of engagement in
science learning. Results will be compared to matched control groups that
receive either the standard curriculum, which are not contextualized to the
disaster and that does not include PBL, or a PBL lesson plan that does not
incorporate the disaster or the cultural context. At least 30 educators and 200
7th grade students will be exposed during the project period to the
contextualized PBL lesson plan. The resulting feasibility analysis will inform
other jurisdictions preparing their educational systems for natural disasters
and provide evidence for the use of contextualized lesson plans that incorporate
PBL in disaster recovery settings. In addition, the project design will advance
the field of PBL by allowing investigators to examine the impact of integrating
current social/historical contexts to PBL lessons and by examining the
relationship between changes in science attitudes and engagement, with changes
in learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.