* 1823335
* I-Corps:  Exploring Technology Innovation Opportunities for Early Childhood STEM Professional Development
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Alissa Lange, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is vast. Our
product aims to improve early childhood STEM learning by supporting the
preschool workforce. Children's development in math and science at the end of
preschool predicts how well they will do in multiple subjects later in school.
Our professional development tools will empower teachers to provide rich early
STEM experiences so that all children, regardless of background, have the
opportunity to be better students. These experiences also build habits of mind,
inquiry, and interest in STEM, which can result in a stronger, larger, and more
innovative STEM workforce. The business could develop a national footprint that
employs educators and experts from across the country to provide professional
development, online supports and resources, and innovative technology to
educators, school districts, and other preschool education organizations. The
reach and impact of the project could expand rapidly through emerging
technologies. The business can fulfill a massive need in our society to improve
early childhood education by providing quality professional development and
support for those educating our youngest learners.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercial potential of our preschool
professional development model and resources, SciMath-DLL. A variety of methods
for program delivery, including direct to consumer, partnerships with schools,
and outright licensing to schools could be utilized. Our model includes
workshops, model lesson plans, professional learning communities, and individual
reflective coaching across a range of STEM content. SciMath-DLL resulted from
two DRK-12 early childhood STEM education research grants in which we developed
the model and evaluated the positive changes in teachers, coaches, and children.
In the first development project, results showed strong positive impacts on
educators' confidence and teaching and coaching practice, and perceived
improvements in children's skills and learning. Emerging findings from the
second experimental study, show significant gains by the SciMath-DLL educators
in terms of increased knowledge about STEM subjects and how to teach them to
diverse student populations, and improved attitudes and beliefs about the
ability of children to learn and apply STEM concepts. These results suggest that
the SciMath-DLL program improves the quality of teaching, improves the quality
of the help and guidance for teachers, and ultimately improves early childhood
STEM education for children.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.