* 1823506
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disclosure in Plea Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 16,170.00

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disclosure in Plea
Bargaining&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast
majority of criminal cases in the United States are disposed of through plea
bargaining. Yet, the Supreme Court has held that prosecutors are not required to
disclose impeachment evidence to defendants at the plea stage of the process.
This project will employ an experimental approach to test the Supreme Court's
assumption that disclosure of impeachment evidence is not necessary to
defendants. More particularly, the experiments will help determine whether the
effect of disclosure on defense attorney decision making during plea bargaining
differs as a function of evidence type, whether impeachment vs. exculpatory
evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to assess
the impact of pre-plea disclosure of different types of evidence. To do so, the
project will recruit a nationwide sample of practicing defense attorneys and
present them with fictional case files. By experimentally manipulating
participants' access to different types and amounts of impeachment and
exculpatory evidence in mock plea-bargaining scenarios, the project will
systematically test whether impeachment and exculpatory evidence function
differently with respect to their effect on defense attorneys' plea-related
decisions. The project employs the shadow of the trial theoretical framework,
which posits that defense attorneys' plea-related recommendations are primarily
based on their perceived odds of winning at trial. As pre-plea disclosure of
evidence may affect defense attorneys' assessments of the chances of acquittal,
access to exculpatory and impeachment evidence could play a role in a defense
attorney's ability to accurate gauge their odds at trial. As a result, this
project has implications for the application of Sixth Amendment
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.