* 1823235
* CRI: II-New: Mobile Millimeter-Wave MIMO Network Based on CMU Chipscale Beamformers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Larry Carley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 968,543.00

Current "4G" wireless networks will not be able to support the projected mobile
internet traffic, which is projected to grow to 66,000 petabytes (PB) per month
in 2022, up from 94 PB/month in 2010 - a growth rate of 72% per year. The key to
meeting such demand lies in: (1) the exploitation of new millimeter-wave
(mmWave) spectrum above 30 Gigahertz (GHz), and (2) the development of new
hardware and algorithms that enable mmWave communication. However, mmWave
communication networks are in their infancy, with emerging 5G networks expected
to support first generation concepts. Researchers are already looking beyond 5G,
and accordingly, there is intense ongoing research in developing fundamental
technologies and algorithms for future mmWave networks. Unfortunately,
experimental validation and experiment-driven discovery has been largely lacking
due to the unavailability of hardware technologies, compounded by high costs
that can be supported only by large companies. The proposed project seeks to
build new institutional infrastructure that can enable advanced wireless
networking experimentation in the mmWave frequency bands. The resulting testbed
will provide experimentation tools and seed research for the hardware, physical
and network communication communities, and for systems researchers who focus on
localization, autonomous driving, indoor navigation, assistive devices for the
visually impaired etc. This project will offer opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate education, both during the development of the infrastructure, and
during its actual use. In addition, students will develop skills in chip
implementation, printed circuit board design and fabrication, laboratory
characterization skills, using software-defined radios, field-programmable gate
array programming skills, all of which are extremely valuable for a career in
the technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a
first-of-its-kind mmWave multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) capable network
testbed comprising base stations and mobile user modules spanning indoor and
outdoor spaces. Testbed development will be led by a two-investigator team
combining expertise in mmWave chip/system design with expertise in cross-layer
design and implementation of wireless networks. Since commercial mmWave hardware
(especially with advanced features) will not be widely available for the
foreseeable future, the proposed infrastructure will leverage the principal
investigator's previous NSF-funded research that has resulted in the design and
prototype demonstration of advanced mmWave radio chips which feature
unprecedented levels of integration, energy-efficiency, reconfigurability and
programmability. The proposed project is structured to operationalize a small-
scale link/network in the early part of the second year, and scaling up in
complexity and network density in the second and third
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.