* 1823363
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temporality and Changing Parameters of Citizenship
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Eleana Kim, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 19,596.00

What does it mean to be a citizen in the contemporary world? Guest worker
programs, refugee status, and other forms of protected but temporary legal
status challenge traditional expectations of national belonging. Ambiguous
populations can appear to fall through the cracks. This creates problems for
policy makers who need to protect a nation's sovereignty and also be responsive
to economic and humanitarian demands. It can also be an obstacle for social
scientists seeking to develop new understandings of the dynamics of changing
relationships between people and places. The research funded by this award takes
up the challenge of this difficult problem by using intensive ethnographic
methods to build new practical and theoretical understandings of citizenship
from the ground up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by
University of California, Irvine, anthropology doctoral candidate Jennifer A.
Zelnick, who is supervised by Dr. Eleana Kim. The focal population will be
people of Cambodian origin, some of whom are legally resident in Long Beach,
California, and some of whom have been involuntarily relocated back to Cambodia.
This shifting residency makes them appropriate for research on the ambiguities
of national belonging and the consequences of these ambiguities. The researcher
will conduct her investigation in both sites. She will pay particular attention
to socio-demographics, movement histories, official and bureaucratic encounters,
and family and social networks. Data will be collected through participant
observation, interviews, kinship mapping, and archival research. Findings from
this research will produce the rich, micro-level data needed by both policy
makers and social scientists to understand the nature and limits of citizenship
in the world today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.