* 1823687
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Humanitarian Infrastructures and Networks of Protection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Scott Ross, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 12,020.00

In unstable or violent environments, the ability to assess threats and respond
quickly is crucial to security provisioning. However, this can be challenging in
environments with poor communication infrastructure. The research supported by
this award investigates a case of adapting an old communication system for
contemporary use in such situations. The researcher will examine who defines
insecurity and how, who is responsible for providing security, and how history
and technology shape these processes. Findings from this research will support
policy makers and other stakeholders who are responsible for responding to
violence and other kinds of instability. Research results also will provide
theoretical understanding of the dynamic social effects and potentials of
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by George
Washington University anthropology doctoral student Scott Ross, with the
supervision of Dr. Sarah E. Wagner. The researcher has chosen northeastern Congo
as a site to investigate this problem because local and international actors
there have expanded an old radio network to create a new Early Warning Network
to connect communities who have no other communication infrastructure. The fact
that this is the only communication infrastructure in the research site will
make it easier to isolate the effects of the communication system than would be
the case in a situation, such as the United States, where multiple systems are
present. The overarching research questions are: (1) Does using an old
technology reinforce certain conceptions of insecurity and discount others? (2)
Does localizing a security apparatus reconfigure how people understand their
relationship to authority? (3) How do the limits and history of the technology
itself affect its contemporary use? The researcher will collect data using a
mixture of ethnographic and archival research methods, including participant
observation, interviews, network analysis, and historical documentation. The
researcher will travel to different sites along the network, listen to radio
communications, interview operators, and trace how information travels across
the network. In order to assure that research outcomes are communicated to those
who can put them into practice, results from the research will be shared through
public media outletsas well as in professional publications and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.