* 1823376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Vectors of Health: Science and the Making of Modified Mosquitoes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Stefan Helmreich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 9,890.00

Aedes aegypti rose to international notoriety most recently for transmitting the
Zika virus, causing a disease linked to babies born with microcephaly and other
health issues. This insect species is also a vector for other viral diseases,
including dengue, chikungunya, and urban yellow fever. The geographical
expansion of the vector A. aegypti and the interconnectedness of the planet are
all matters that increase the concern about mosquito-borne diseases in global
attempts to govern and secure life. In the wake of the Zika outbreak, the World
Health Organization endorsed pilot implementations of modified mosquitoes as a
new vector control tool. The project, which trains a student in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores several such pilot
efforts to modify A. aegypti. Further, it would broaden the participation of
groups underrepresented in science, build capacity and scientific infrastructure
through international scientific cooperation, and enhance public scientific
understanding by broadly disseminating findings to organizations engaged in
public health policies for mosquito-borne diseases.

Luisa Castro, under the supervision of the Dr. Stepfan Helmreich of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, will explore different models of
modifying A. aegypti, with the aim of evaluating whether different scalar
approaches impact understandings of health outcomes and anthropogenic processes.
International and local media marked Brazil as the epicenter of the 2016 Zika
epidemic. In the last years, the country has also been struggling with dengue,
chikungunya, and yellow fever outbreaks. However, these diseases are not only a
problem for endemic countries like Brazil. This research will be conducted in
different regions in Brazil, in order to ethnographically investigate three
scientific projects that strive biologically to modify A. aegypti in order to
deploy them to control local populations of these insects. Each project
implements a different type of modification: one infects A. aegypti with the
Wolbachia bacterium to curtail the mosquito's ability to transmit viruses; the
other irradiates the mosquito to sterilize it; and yet, a third genetically
engineers the mosquito to limit its reproduction. By accompanying researchers
and workers in their daily practices between lab and field, the researcher will
collect data on the efforts to develop these technologies, and the imaginaries
and justificatory logics that surround their implementation. Person-centered
interviews, a technique used frequently in psychological anthropology, among a
sample of 60-75. She will also investigate how modified mosquitoes conform and
rearrange Brazilian policies for controlling mosquito-borne diseases,
historically oriented around human behavioral reforms and toxic chemicals. Being
attentive to the professional experiences and training of those involved in
these projects, she will also observe how scientists, lab workers, and
government officials assess methodologies, formulate theoretical engagements,
and frame their political positions and personal aspirations in their goal to
transform research into health applications. This project proposes to trace the
confluence of natural, scientific, and political agendas, practices, and
strategies, particularly in the context of diseases. It will provide specificity
to analytical reflections on social-cultural drivers of anthropogenic processes
and the solutions proposed to mitigate their effects. The project aims to
develop a historically-informed critical theory of health around mosquito-borne
diseases that takes seriously the environmental dynamics, politics, and social
power relations that inform these interactions. In times of growing anxieties
about mosquito-borne diseases, and burgeoning solutions of how to control them,
an ethnographically rich account can contribute to debates to develop more
comprehensive, reflective, and effective policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.