* 1823221
* CRI: CI-EN: Collaborative Research: mResearch: A platform for Reproducible and Extensible Mobile Sensor Big Data Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Santosh Kumar, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 751,014.00

The Center of Excellence for Mobile Sensor Data-to-Knowledge (MD2K) has
developed open-source software for smart phones and cloud. Scientists use MD2K
software to develop and test algorithms to monitor health, wellness, and work
productivity via wearable sensors. The mResearch project is aimed at assisting
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) researchers. The
mResearch project will significantly enhance MD2K software and integrate
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. The enhanced MD2K software will accelerate
research in sensors design, mobile computing, privacy, analytics (especially
machine learning and deep learning), and visualization. mResearch will enable
CISE researchers to easily deploy their contributed software in scientific
studies for health, smart homes, and workplace. The resulting discoveries and
tools will help individuals improve their health, wellness, and work
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MD2K has developed open-source mobile sensor
big data software platforms mCerebrum for smartphones and Cerebral Cortex for
the cloud. This scalable and generalizable infrastructure is used for
collecting, analyzing, and sharing high-frequency, mobile sensor data and
associated labels in the context of scientific field studies. In particular, it
supports the development and validation of models and algorithms for inferring
markers of health, wellness, and productivity, and their associated risk
factors. It has already been used at eleven sites across the country to collect
over 300 terabytes of mobile sensor data in the field setting from over 2,000
participants. It has resulted in new computational models for the detection of
conversation, smoking, eating, craving, stress, and cocaine use. The mResearch
project is making five significant infrastructure enhancements to the MD2K
infrastructure to assist CISE researchers in mobile sensor development, mobile
computing, privacy, analytics, visualization, and participant engagement. First,
it will enable data analytic workflow management across multiple layers of the
system to enable reproducible and extensible experimentation. Second, it will
allow encapsulation of data sources to provide convenient and responsible access
to them in data analytic workflows. Third, it will facilitate cloud-assisted
complex, real-time analytics for personalizing mobile interventions and
improving engagement. Fourth, simulators will be developed with the ability to
feed stored data into the platform at various points to enable research on
system components and properties such as data compression, transfer and storage,
as well as the scalability of data analytics. Finally, Internet-of-Things (IoT)
devices and services will be integrated. With these five enhancements, the MD2K
software will provide a complete, open, and modularized architecture. It will
include all aspects of sensor data collection, data processing algorithms,
cloud-based machine learning, and IoT integration. The enhanced MD2K software
will facilitate reproducible and extensible CISE research with high-frequency
mobile sensor data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.