* 1823154
* CRI: CI-New: A Community Benchmarking Infrastructure for Birectional Reflectance Distribution Functions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Pieter Peers, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 380,779.00

This project will support the development of a testbed application suite for
evaluating material appearance models that describe how light is reflected from
surfaces in computer graphics research. Photorealistic image synthesis in
computer graphics requires accurate simulation of light transport through a
virtual scene starting from the light sources, reflecting off surfaces (based on
the material models), before ending at the camera. Hence, material models are a
fundamental component in computer graphics systems. The testbed will consist of
three integral components: (1) reference implementations of existing material
models, (2) a library of material model parameters optimized to best mimic the
appearance of real materials, as well as tools to compute new sets of parameters
to mimic newly measured materials, and (3) online and offline analysis tools to
aid researchers and practitioners to select appropriate models and to aid in the
development of more accurate material models. A key feature of the testbed is
that when people submit new material model implementations, or new strategies
for mimicking real materials, or new tools for assessing the accuracy of models,
the testbed will automatically evaluate them against all models and data in the
testbed. This key feature is critical as there currently does not exist a good
way for researchers to exhaustively compare their work against others, which
slows down progress in both research and graphics applications; the testbed will
make it much easier to compare new ideas to old ones, as well as to understand
which models work best in which practical situations, making appearance modeling
more portable and accessible to researchers and practitioners in and outside
computer graphics. This testbed will advance research in areas related to
computer graphics, as well as directly benefit society through supporting
improved fidelity and visual realism in virtual reality applications, product
pre-visualization, e-commerce, safety and training simulators,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will be in the form of a repository and a
web interface. The repository will be populated by the lead investigator with an
initial set of reference implementations of bidirectional reflectance
distribution functions (BRDFs), BRDF fitting strategies, and quality assessment
metrics. The research community will then be able to contribute new advances to
each of these components to the repository. In addition, fitted BRDF parameters
that mimic the reflectance behavior of physical materials for all BRDF models,
computed with each of the different BRDF fitting strategies available in the
code repository will be made publicly available, both on the repository as well
as through the web interface. These fitted BRDF parameters will be dynamically
updated when new algorithms or improvements are recorded in the repository. The
web interface will allow experts and practitioners to explore the fitted BRDF
parameters, corresponding visualization, and quality assessments to drive their
research or product development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.