* 1823833
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Infrastructural Development and Urban Participatory Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Neha Dhole, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 23,940.00

Designing and maintaining infrastructures is as much a social problem as a
technical one. Understanding the interplay between governance, communication
systems, and mechanical infrastructures is a critical part of developing and
managing urban spaces. This study, which trains a graduate student in methods of
rigorous, empirical data collection and analysis, traces connections between the
built environments of roads, the social lives of users, and the processes of
negotiation they engage in. By revealing unexpected ways in which
infrastructures function, this research will contribute to broader discussions
among urban planners, municipal bodies, and other institutions invested in the
governance of urban spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neha Dhole, under the
supervision of Dr. Laura Brown of the University of Pittsburgh, will explore the
relationship between models of social distance and urban infrastructures in
planned landscapes. In many cities, roads and surrounding spaces are used in
ways that are rarely recognized by municipal bodies. They are places where
people sleep, sell food, park vehicles, post advertisements, and engage in other
forms of connection and contestation that shape urban life. This research
examines debates among residents, workers, municipal bodies, and other state
authorities over the care of roads in New Delhi, India, an appropriate
laboratory for asking such questions because of its pilot of a participatory
urban development project. The project focuses on one of several neighborhoods
planned and built by the Delhi Development Authority to promote secularism and
equality among dwellers. Drawing on interviews with residents, street vendors,
domestic workers, technical experts, and bureaucrats, along with observation of
interactions among them through face-to-face conversations, online exchanges,
petitions, and newsletters, the study will examine the link between material
infrastructure of roads and conversations, institutions, and forms of sociality.
The project will combine analytic models from anthropology, sociolinguistics,
and urban planning to better understand the enmeshment of roads and other
communication networks. Results will be useful in framing and evaluating
participatory governance systems, particularly in thinking through how social
media can shape decision-making processes at the local, municipal, and national
levels. More broadly, the study will map shifting connections between religion,
class, and public spaces in India and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.