* 1823119
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rapid Infrastructural Development, Mobility, and Changing Spatial and Social Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,285.00

The quality, role, and impact of transport infrastructure are at the center
stage of discussions on development and accessibility. How does increasing
vehicular traffic, road networks and associated urbanization affect particular
regional economies? How do changes and challenges to infrastructural development
at the local level impact regional identities and even national debates? Given
the increasing significance of infrastructure politics in the regional and
national American identity and politics, understanding the factors and processes
that constitute them can help us determine the varied regional patterns, gaps
and impacts in such infrastructure development, crucial to cross-country
differences and development. In addition to providing funding for the training
of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, the project would enhance scientific understanding
by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in discovering
more effective means of improving public
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bhoomika Joshi, under the supervision of
Dr. Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan of Yale University will explore what impact
new mobilities created through rapid infrastructural development have on social
and spatial relationships. This project aims to understand the role of road
transport in the regional hill economy of the Indian Himalayas. This setting
provides a laboratory for investigating the effects of rapid infrastructural
development where roads are the principle method of transport. India is the
fastest growing manufacturer of automobiles with a rapidly expanding road
network that has fueled varied aspirations and expectations at the regional
level. Given that the extent and network of roads and mass road transport has
increased rapidly in the high reaches of the Himalayas over the last decade,
this project will examine how that has affected the urban life, business
networks and regional identity in the region. It is a mixed method and multi-
sited project that will be conducted over a total period of 16 months and across
three sites in the Indian Himalayas. Since road transport is the only mode of
mobility in the region, the proposed research at three different sites is
crucial to understanding the kinds of infrastructure politics it determines
through the prism of new forms of urban economy, new patterns of mobility and
newly shaped identities in the ecologically fragile and fast changing Himalayan
landscape. It will use a combination of semi-structured interviews and surveys
with drivers and transporters, life histories of old residents and travelers and
interviews with transport bureaucrats in addition to archival research and
mobile ethnography (travelling between small towns in shared taxis). The
proposed research will provide a much-needed analysis of infrastructure politics
at the regional level and its impact on the regional economy and identity which
will not only provide the analytical tools for investigating and determining
such patterns in the United States of America but even
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.