* 1823950
* Qualitative Data Repository 2018-2021
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,667,886.00

The Qualitative Data Repository (QDR) curates, preserves, publishes, and enables
the download of digital data arising from qualitative research in the social
sciences, and from multi-method research in which qualitative data and analyses
play a significant role. QDR is the first domain repository in the United States
dedicated to working with such data. The repository also develops, disseminates,
and promotes standards and techniques for managing, sharing, and reusing
qualitative data, and for pursuing research transparency. NSF funding supports
QDR?s efforts to increase its data holdings and to develop additional
functionality (emphasizing scaling, interoperability, and tools for
transparency). The foundation's support also enables QDR to organize customized
workshops and training sessions for researchers and data librarians in an effort
to expand expertise in qualitative data management and to encourage instruction
on qualitative data-management skills. Additionally, the project seeks to
further integrate QDR into the academic ecosystem, facilitating interaction with
Institutional Review Boards and the social science publication infrastructure,
developing new ways for scholars to provide ready access to the data and
materials that underpin their publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QDR expects to
receive CoreTrustSeal certification by the end of 2018. The repository is hosted
by Amazon Web Services (AWS) and employs the open-source repository software
Dataverse. In conjunction with the Dataverse development community, QDR is
designing features and functionality that will allow Dataverse to capture the
strengths of qualitative data. QDR?s membership in a consortium of U.S. social
sciences data archives (Data Preservation Alliance for the Social Sciences
[Data-PASS]) guarantees continuous access to QDR data; QDR is also a member of
the Data Preservation Network (DPN), which provides distributed long-term
preservation for QDR?s data. During the grant period, QDR will introduce several
features to further enhance its service to qualitative and multi-method research
communities, including: augmented discoverability of QDR data; data curation at
the file-level; automated embargoes; custom subsetting; large file transfer;
preview of multimedia data; full-text indexing; a message and log system to
capture provenance and curation; and a redesigned user interface. QDR is also
developing Annotation for Transparent Inquiry (ATI), a solution for rendering
qualitative research more rigorous and persuasive that should revolutionize how
such research is represented and received.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.