* 1823441
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Politics and Economics on Property Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Deborah Yashar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 21,565.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Politics and Economics on
Property Law&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
substantial change in recent decades, economic disparities between men and women
continue to persist today. Contemporary gender inequalities in economic arenas
are linked to a legacy of legal inequalities initially enacted in civil property
and family law. This project seeks to examine how and why certain family and
property laws were adopted, in order to identify the historical processes that
have shaped modern gender inequalities. In doing so, the study will provide
insight into economic and political inequality in the United States and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The legal foundations of modern nation states and
economies emerged throughout Western societies in the 18th and 19th centuries,
as numerous countries adopted nationally standardized civil law regimes with
complex systems of property rights. This project will investigate the cross-
national and cross-time variation in civil laws in order to identify the
political processes informing which laws were adopted. Further, it will test the
degree to which conflicts over economic and political resources drove these
legal and political outcomes. Empirically, the project will examine developments
in France and more broadly in Europe and will produce two novel datasets. The
first subnational dataset will leverage a set of documents containing reform
demands, written on the eve of France?s 1789 revolution, to create a
geographically comprehensive source of public and elite opinions on legal reform
and women?s rights. The second dataset will provide cross-national quantitative
indicators of women?s property rights in the late 18th and 19th centuries. The
project will provide insight into the factors that drive inequality and
hierarchy between men and women in law and economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.