* 1823935
* Transforming Introductory Biology at University of Alaska, Anchorage
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Cheryl Wilga, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2022
* USD 331,380.00

The general education biology course at the University of Alaska, Anchorage
(UAA) enrolls a high proportion of first-time students, many of whom arrive
underprepared for the rigors of college education. Thus, the pass rates for this
course are consistently low. To improve student success, this project will
redesign the course to include interactive practices such as instant responses,
one-minute discussions and writing assignments, and rubrics to grade
presentations by fellow students. Introduction of similar activities into an
introductory course for biology majors improved the pass rates from 46% to 87%.
Project personnel will identify what elements of the majors' course are
particularly successful and will use that information, along with a survey of
best practices in biology education, to revamp the curriculum for the general
education course. UAA serves a diverse student population often underrepresented
in STEM fields, including 81% who receive need-based financial aid. The project
is designed to investigate what aspects of the new course will resonate most
strongly with the diverse student population at UAA. Faculty at UAA will
participate in workshops to improve their teaching and faculty incentives will
promote implementation of best teaching practices. The planned course revisions
are designed to increase course completion, increase science literacy, and
improve quantitative reasoning skills. Additionally, it is envisioned that the
revisions will encourage more students to pursue STEM majors and careers,
helping to fill a national need for increasing the STEM workforce. Finally,
approximately 7% of the students enrolled in the general education course are
training to be K-12 teachers. Improving their college biology experience may
have positive impacts on their future classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use a mixed methods approach to identify and quantify course
elements that increase course completion, retention, science literacy, and
quantitative reasoning in a diverse student body. Quantitative analysis will
include a difference in differences (DiD) approach to mimic an experimental
design and to isolate the impact of the intervention. The impact will be
measured as changes in pre- and post-intervention scores for the treatment group
(students who participate in the redesigned curriculum) and control group
(students who took the course prior to the redesign). Literature relating to
active learning strategies in STEM considers learning gains in a single setting
that is already using active learning. This project incorporates a quasi-
experimental DiD design using a large dataset and diverse student body with a
range of academic and demographic characteristics and has the potential to make
a significant contribution to the field. A qualitative analysis will supplement
and add depth to the quantitative findings; axial coding of focus group
interviews with majors, non-majors in the traditional course, and non-majors in
the revised course will be analyzed using within-case analysis of each group.
Comparative analysis with pattern matching will be used for a cross-case
analysis to identify commonalities and differences between the groups. In
addition to these empirical contributions, the analysis will support curriculum
design, faculty development, and course assessment for the general education
biology course. Professional development and faculty incentives have the
potential to enhance teaching and learning throughout the courses offered by the
Department of Biological Sciences and ensure implementation fidelity to the best
practice pedagogical approaches. The findings of this project are expected to be
especially informative for commuter colleges and other open-enrollment
institutions with diverse student bodies, including indigenous student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.