* 1823929
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Forest engineers, bureaucrats, and the constitution of information
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Elizabeth Povinelli, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 6,659.00

The production of accurate and reliable information about rainforests and other
difficult-to-survey environments constitutes an enduring challenge for state
bureaucrats, scientists, and engineers. Yet the grounded processes through which
key environmental information is produced have received little study. The
research supported by this award takes up this problem through an
anthropological investigation of the technical and bureaucratic practices
through which state environmental information is created, transmitted, and
applied.

The research will be carried out by Columbia University doctoral student,
Eduardo Romero Dianderas, with oversight from Dr. Elizabeth A. Povinelli. The
researcher will focus on the work of engineers and bureaucrats in the Amazonia
region of Loreto, Peru, as a case study. He will collect data at multiple points
in the chain of information production and application. In the field, he will
document how engineers conduct research to generate technical data about the
region. In state and associational offices, he will follow the engineering data
as they are communicated to bureaucrats and as bureaucrats deploy them for
technical judgments and public decisions. Research methods will include
participant observation, analysis of paper and digital documents, and semi-
structured interviews. This approach will shed light on what technical and
bureaucratic environmental information includes and what it excludes, such as
the knowledge and perspectives of indigenous inhabitants of these environments.
It will also clarify the relevant communicative and technological
infrastructures. Findings from this research will help policy makers determine
the potentials and limitations of the data on which they base their policies.
The research also will contribute to building more robust theories of the
production, communication, and comprehension of scientific data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.