* 1823415
* An Ethnography of Deportee Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Chelsey Kivland, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 215,464.00

Each year, hundreds of thousands of migrants in the U.S. are deported to their
countries of origin as a consequence of criminal violations. What happens when
these migrants return to their native countries? Many criminal deportees, having
been raised in the U.S., are unfamiliar with their homeland's language, history,
and social customs. Furthermore, criminal deportees can face the prejudices of
fellow citizens who suspect them of bringing crime and delinquent behavior into
the country. These factors can present challenges as deportees attempt to
resettle after deportation. Yet at the same time, deportees have often learned
English, attended school, and learned marketable skills during their time in the
U.S., which can lead to employment and status in their countries of origin. With
a pending rise in criminal deportations, it is essential to identify the
opportunities and obstacles encountered by deportees, and the services and
resources that would assist their resettlement. Dr. Kivland of Dartmouth College
and her team will conduct a longitudinal ethnography of deportation, following
the a cohort of deportees over the first three years of the resettlement
process. Findings will be disseminated to organizations and individuals that
influence policy debates related to migration. The project also broadens
participation of underrepresented groups in science, and provides opportunities
for training undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. The project
builds capacity and infrastructure through the broadening of international
scientific cooperation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in
Haiti, where Dr. Kivland has conducted research since 2006 and has extensive
knowledge of political and social conditions. Haiti is a is an ideal research
site because it has recently witnessed a dramatic rise in its deportee
population. In 2016, it received 310 deportees; in 2017, this number rose to
5,578 deportees. Haiti is also an important research setting because it provides
an opportunity to study a racial subgroup rarely analyzed in deportation
studies. Whereas several studies have analyzed the criminalization and
stigmatization that Latino deportees face in Latin American countries, there has
been less research on the experiences of Afro-descendant deportees in the
Caribbean. This study hypothesizes that Haitian deportees' experiences are
particularly shaped by their Black racial identity. Preliminary research
suggests that Haitian deportees may confront the prejudices of fellow Haitians
who suspect them of violence, crime, and what it perceived as a disreputable
African American culture. But they may also capitalize on their racial identity
and American cultural capital to find employment, status, and community in
Haiti. Working with a team of Haiti-based graduate students and U.S.-based
undergraduate students, Dr. Kivland will chronicle the everyday successes and
challenges that deportees face in their attempts to rebuild lives in Haiti.
Using the ethnographic methods of observation, participant observation, and
interviews, the team will analyze how deportees' racial identity, deportee
status, migration history, and other emergent factors shape their resettlement
trajectories in positive and negative ways. Findings from this research will
lead to a fuller understanding of the societal factors and personal
circumstances that lead to deportation, the difficulties and prospects people
face once deported, and the resources that would assist deportees in the
resettlement process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.