* 1823800
* Aperiodic Topological Materials and Meta-Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Emil Prodan, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 378,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this award. It supports
theoretical, computational, and mathematical research with an aim to use
sophisticated concepts from mathematics to develop a deeper and more precise
understanding of topological states of electronic matter in materials and their
occurrence.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In thermodynamically stable condensed phases
of matter, atoms spontaneously arrange in patterns that determine many of the
physical characteristics of the materials. The most studied materials are
crystals, where atoms arrange themselves in spatially periodic patterns, like
desks in a classroom. Other condensed matter phases such as alloys, amorphous
solids, quasicrystals, and liquids display aperiodic atomic structures. In
general, the loss of periodicity makes these more difficult to characterize,
both theoretically and experimentally. Yet they are of interest because there
are many more aperiodic than periodic structures, offering more ways to tailor
the physical properties of the material and for the electrons in the material to
achieve new states of matter. Besides the naturally occurring condensed matter
phases, there is a growing interest in synthetic materials patterned on the
microscopic and nanoscopic length scales. These materials enable a more
controlled exploration of new properties, new states of matter, and related
phenomena enabled by aperiodicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrons in
materials navigate the energy landscape generated by the atomic cores; they are
strongly influenced by the pattern in which the atoms are arranged. The
electrons also interact with each other through the celebrated electrostatic
interaction discovered by Coulomb long ago. In many instances, the effect of the
electrostatic interaction can be subsumed in modified atomic potentials. When
this is not possible, the electrons are said to be strongly correlated and their
dynamics become very difficult to quantify, even with the most powerful
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research which will explore the dynamics of the electron in
conditions of both strong aperiodicity and correlation. The focus will be on
detecting those dynamical characteristics which do not change under small
modifications of the external conditions and which are said to be topological.
The PI has adapted ideas from fields of pure mathematics, such as Operator
Algebras, K-theory and Non-Commutative Geometry, into pioneering tools of
analysis in materials science. They have been successfully used in the past in
the context of strongly disordered topology. In this project, the PI will
further extend these tools to generic aperiodic and correlated materials to
predict and systematically characterize novel topological phases of electronic
matter and related physical effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
activities are ultimately aimed to build accurate and efficient methods and
concepts to describe extremely complex electronic systems in materials. It is
envisioned that the methods will provide a global view of all possible classes
of topological states and the precise conditions that ensure their stability and
lead to concrete computer algorithms to locate any synthetically patterned
material in this global picture. The award supports graduate student training to
become the future experts in applied Non-Commutative Geometry, currently a rare
ability in theoretical condensed matter and materials physics. It will also
support lectures, pedagogical reviews and textbooks prepared by the PI as an
effort to disseminate his ideas among theoretical as well as experimental
members of our condensed matter physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to
this award. It supports theoretical, computational, and mathematical research
with an aim to use sophisticated concepts from mathematics to systematize the
search for topological phases and related phenomena in the vast classes of
aperiodic correlated materials. Operator Algebras, K-theory and Non-Commutative
Geometry will be utilized in this pursuit. The generic goals are: to classify
the gapped bulk Hamiltonians and explore their physical responses; establish
K-theoretic bulk-boundary correspondence principles and detect those systems
with topological boundary spectra; and to use numerical algorithms that
implement ideas from Non-Commutative Geometry to exemplify and generate real-
world concepts and materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been long known that
the bulk dynamics of a patterned material occur inside a well-defined algebra of
physical observables, which derives from the hull of the pattern. This is a
topological space associated with and constructed from the given pattern. It
augments physical dimensions and can greatly enrich the bulk-boundary
correspondence. For example, specially patterned 1-dimensional systems can
manifest the physics of the Integer Quantum Hall Effect in 2-dimensions and
display topological quantum pumping. Similarly, specially patterned
2-dimensional systems can manifest the physics of the Integer Quantum Hall
Effect in 4-dimensions and display the quantized piezo-magneto-electric effect.
These systems are much easier to investigate, both theoretically and
numerically, in the presence of correlations because of their reduced
dimensionality, hence the classification and thorough characterization of
correlated aperiodic systems becomes feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the
K-theories of the algebras of physical observables can be computed explicitly,
the classification of topological phases becomes exhaustive, with the generators
of the K-groups providing all fundamental topological models. Non-Commutative
Geometry was found to provide the necessary tools to define topological
invariants and to connect them to physical responses, as well as to explore
their fate in regimes where spectral gaps are replaced by mobility gaps. This
project will integrate these general ideas into a search-and-discovery program
in materials science that goes well beyond the class of disordered crystals and
covering many other thermodynamic phases of matter, algorithmically synthesized
meta-materials and complex systems found in nature. This program is aimed to
provide accurate and efficient numerical algorithms, which will be
systematically used to channel theoretical advances to experimental
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.