* 1823498
* Workshop: Linking remote animal detection and movement data with macrosystem environmental datasets and networks; September, 2018; Front Royal, VA
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Gil Bohrer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 47,604.00

Technological advances have allowed scientists to collect vast quantities of
data on animal occurrences and movements from remote locations in ways that
weren?t possible even a generation ago. Examples of technology improving the
specificity of animal data are acoustic recordings, camera-traps,
radiotelemetry, and geolocators. These data have broadened our knowledge of
where individual animals live and their movement patterns. In addition,
relatively new technologies such as remote sensing from satellites and aircraft,
and observation networks are providing large quantities of environmental data,
such as rainfall, vegetation productivity, structure, connectivity and more at
landscape and macrosystem scales that were not previously possible. These
advances in technology, along with increased connectivity of internet users,
have allowed a broader involvement of the public in collecting animal or
environmental data. The challenge in many cases has been to link the animal-
observations information, being collected by citizens, local groups, as well as
national and international agencies, to relevant large-scale environmental
datasets. This project addresses these issues in a workshop with experts that
have helped advance the new technologies associated with animal detections and
environmental data at landscape and macrosystem scales.

The explicitly inter-disciplinary nature of the workshop will foster linkages
and collaborations that aim to alleviate technical barriers for scaling the
information from animal observations to environmental datasets at macrosystem
scales. Such barriers currently limit researchers from broadening the scale and
scope of their research. There will be a two-day workshop that focuses on how
new technologies and capabilities that investigate the distribution and movement
of animals can be linked to environmental states and environmental changes at
the landscape and macrosystem scales. The workshop will bring together experts
in the fields of remote sensing and animal detection with the goal of
integrating the various technologies and lay the foundation for a review paper
on the potential of combined techniques to answer important questions in ecology
and conservation biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.