* 1823816
* Collaborative Research: Socio-linguistic analysis of cross-cultural encounters and their outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Sonia Das, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 232,243.00

The research supported by this award will investigate "linguistic triggers" in
multi-cultural contexts. Research on verbal and non-verbal interactions has
shown that even when people speak the same language, they may have different
linguistic practices and preconceptions that can inadvertently inhibit mutual
understanding. Where ethnic, racial, and linguistic diversity is greatest, so is
the potential for incorrect assumptions, misunderstandings, and misjudgments.
This research will address this issue through the examination of a data set of
over 400 recordings of such interactions to better understand what transpires:
when do the interactions produce conflict, when do they not, and why? Findings
from the research will support the development of social and legal policies and
procedures to help prevent conflict and ensure public welfare and safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by linguistic
anthropologist, Dr. Sonia N. Das of New York University and Dr. Sherina
Feliciano-Santos of the University of South Carolinsa at Columbia. In 2015,
South Carolina became the first state to pass a law requiring police officers to
wear body cameras. The researchers will analyze a subset of the first three
years of these body-cam and dash-cam video recordings, faces blurred to protect
privacy, to document communication patterns between law enforcement officials
and subjects during Driving Under the Influence (DUI) stops. The researchers and
their team will transcribe and code the video archive, with attention
biographical, demographic, and contextual as well as linguistic factors.
Recordings will be linked to their written case files to associate them with
legal outcomes. This technical analysis will be supplemented with interviews and
ethnographic fieldwork in South Carolina to further contextualize underlying
assumptions about rights, language, and the interpretation of intent. The
research will model the use of qualitative research methods for the joint
analysis of ethnographic and corpus data. By asking how situational
interpretations of subjects' and police officers' standard communicative
practices may play a subtle yet crucial role in impacting rates of occurrences
of force by or against police, he research will also provide data to assist in
the development and implementation of law enforcement training and multicultural
education to prevent the unnecessary escalation of force and the unintentional
reproduction of biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.