* 1823748
* Collaborative Research: The Zirconium Isotope Composition and Variability of the Silicate Earth -- A Pilot Study
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Mauricio Ibanez-Mejia, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 309,532.00

Over the past 60 years the element zirconium (Zr) has been increasingly used as
a tool for deciphering the differentiation history of the Earth and other
'rocky' planetary bodies in our Solar System. Despite being a 'trace element'
(i.e., element of relatively low concentration) in most geological environments,
its preferential enrichment in the chemically differentiated portions of the
terrestrial planets - like Earth's continental crust - plays a key role in the
presence of accessory minerals like zircon (ZrSiO4) and baddeleyite (ZrO2). In
addition to being a cornerstone in the study of geologic time using the Uranium-
Lead geochronometer, these accessory minerals are the main carriers of zirconium
in the crust and are thus likely to preserve a unique yet unexplored record of
the evolution of Zr isotope composition through geologic time. As such,
understanding the processes that lead to variability in the isotopic composition
of zirconium and how this is recorded in Zr-rich accessory minerals, may provide
a window to explore the geochemical evolution of our planet in the deep geologic
past, even beyond the oldest preserved rock record currently known in our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shifts in the bonding/coordination environment of
tetravalent Zr ions in silicate magmas during zircon and baddeleyite
crystallization are expected to result in fractionation (i.e., differential
equilibrium incorporation) of its isotopes in precipitated solids and residual
melts. This implies that small variations in the abundance of zirconium stable
isotopes in terrestrial rocks and minerals have the potential to elucidate how
this element behaves and fractionates in high-temperature geological
environments. This award will support two early-career investigators to develop
techniques to measure zirconium isotopic compositions at high precision and
explore, for the first time, the stable zirconium isotopic composition of
silicate Earth. The principal goals of this research are threefold: 1) To
develop the laboratory materials (e.g., isotopic reference standard and isotopic
tracers) necessary for making zirconium isotopic measurements at high-precision.
This will be accomplished in collaboration with scientist from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), who in the future will continue to
distribute the standard materials produced during this research; 2) To explore
the range of variability in zirconium isotopic abundances of key reservoirs that
comprise the solid Earth; 3) Using the newly gained knowledge, explore how
variations in the isotopic composition of Zr may be linked to the development,
evolution and chemical refinement of the Earth's
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.