* 1823134
* Management and Operations of the Arecibo Observatory Transition Plan Related to NSF Proposal Number 1744119
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2018,06/30/2018
* Yanga Fernandez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bevin Zauderer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 913,935.00

To enable a world-wide multi-user community to realize research and education
programs, the University of Central Florida (UCF) presents a strategic vision
over the next five years to manage, operate, and disseminate results from the
unique capabilities of the Arecibo Observatory (AO). AO will provide
observations, and support researchers, in three main areas: Radio Astronomy,
Atmospheric Sciences, and Planetary Radar. The management team includes members
with expertise in the science at AO, in maintenance and operations, and in
education and public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under UCF management, AO
will allow researchers to make innovative use of the facility, and maintain its
central role in science and education into the future. For example, the role of
AO in the detection and characterization of Gravitational Waves is an exciting
new opportunity. The management team will search for other collaborators and
funders interested in using the unique capabilities of AO (for example, its
reflector sensitivity and location). The PIs will implement a New Business
Development Team focused on developing other funding sources including
donations, tourism and commercial clients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCF balances
science with the maintenance that assures the viability of AO for the long term.
The management team plans to grow the diversity of science and maintain
observations without trading off the condition of the facilities/equipment or a
reduction in workforce. The goal is to maintain the total funding at the
2017/2018 level through government and non-government funding sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AO continues to be a source of intellectual inspiration to
the next generation of scientist, particularly those located in Puerto Rico.
Under UCF management, AO will enable research by student scientists in Puerto
Rico that will result in the next generation of Astronomers and Atmospheric
Scientists. In addition, AO will provide workshops emphasizing STEAM education,
create a summer research academy for high school students, and train a large
number of STEAM high school teachers each year. Team member UMET, leading
collaborations with the Puerto Rico Space Grant Consortium, expects to expand
delivery of high quality student and teacher education programs using AO as a
hub. An expected result is a pipeline of potential students and postdocs to
support the science investigation interests of both UCF and Universities across
Puerto Rico. The outreach plan updates the Angel Ramos Foundation Visitor
Center, expanding the visitor experience at AO.