* 1823879
* The Role of Stigma in Partner Violence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Heather Littleton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 420,000.00

Dating and domestic violence, also referred to as intimate partner violence
(IPV), are serious public health and safety concerns in the United States.
Research shows that IPV affects young adults at rates higher than other age
groups. It is also associated with many negative outcomes, including
psychological distress and school drop-out. The costs to society and to
individuals is enormous. Among all people who experience IPV, sexual minorities
show rates higher than heterosexual individuals. Higher rates of IPV among
individuals in this minority group can be explained by the concept of sexual
stigma, that is negative attitudes and discrimination directed toward this
group. This project develops a model of stigma that identifies two distinct
forms: institutional stigma and individual stigma. Institutional stigma refers
to the discriminatory practices and policies of an organization or institution.
Individual stigma refers to experiencing prejudicial attitudes and
discriminatory behavior from other people, as well as accepting negative beliefs
about this minority group as true. Young adults attending a wide variety of
colleges and universities will be surveyed to learn how attending a college that
is less supportive toward this minority group (institutional stigma) can lead to
feelings of shame and fears of being discriminated against (individual stigma).
This project examines the extent to which these stigma experiences increase risk
for IPV in this group, and considers multiple pathways for such increased risk,
including lower levels of social support, increased drinking, difficulties with
managing emotions, and increases in depression. The alarming rates of IPV in
this group on college campuses makes it a high public health priority to
identify factors that contribute to these increased rates and to ultimately
develop effective prevention efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
and tests the multi-level sexual stigma model of intimate partner violence
(MLSSM-IPV). A longitudinal survey will be conducted of over 20,000 sexual
minority and heterosexual students and more than 7,500 faculty, staff, and
administrators across 15 large residential colleges and universities. The
institutions will vary in the extent to which they have made efforts to
establish a supportive climate for students in the minority group. Several
hypotheses derived from the MLSSM-IPV model will be tested. One is that
universities with higher levels of institutional sexual stigma (as evidenced by
discriminatory practices and policies) will have higher rates of individual-
level stigma (prejudicial attitudes and discriminatory behaviors) among
heterosexual staff, faculty, administrators and students, and also higher rates
of IPV victimization and perpetration among minority group members. A second
hypothesis is that individual-level stigma among this minority group (feelings
of shame regarding one's identity, anticipating discrimination from others) will
be predicted by both institutional stigma and by individual level-stigma among
heterosexual staff, faculty, administrators and students. It is expected that
the relationship between stigma and IPV experiences in the minority group will
be mediated by emotion regulation difficulties, poor social support, hazardous
drinking, and psychological distress. A 6-month follow-up survey with students
will examine how stigma and mediators predict IPV experiences. This research
will establish the extent to which stigma at the institutional and individual
levels relates to increased risk of IPV, and identify mechanisms by which this
occurs. The project is an important step in developing comprehensive and
effective approaches to the prevention of intimate partner violence associated
with a key vulnerable population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.