* 1823661
* Psychological Assessment of Voluntary Consent
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Vanessa Bohns, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,855.00

The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution aims to protect the public from
unreasonable search and seizure by requiring authorities to have probable cause
before conducting a search. However, the vast majority of police searches today
are authorized by citizens' voluntary consent. Consent searches do not require
probable cause, which means that an individual can be singled out based on an
officer's hunch, or for no reason at all. The legality of these consent searches
rests on the "voluntariness test," an assessment of whether a reasonable person
would feel free to refuse the officer's request or walk away. This test requires
third-party decision-makers to engage in a perspective-taking task. They must
determine how it would feel to be approached by a police officer and confronted
with a search request. A key insight from social psychology is that people tend
to perform such tasks poorly. In particular, people underappreciate the role of
situational pressure and feelings of discomfort when judging others' behavior.
This insight suggests that outside observers may not fully recognize the
distress citizens are likely to experience when considering the prospect of
saying "no" to a police officer. In a series of experiments, the current
research will assess whether these perspective-taking errors cause outside
observers to systematically overestimate how free a reasonable person would feel
to refuse a search request, and, accordingly, whether the voluntariness test is
biased against citizens who have consented to a search.

This research will introduce and validate a new experimental paradigm through
which to examine the psychological task of assessing voluntariness. In this
paradigm, one group of participants will be asked an intrusive and consequential
search request, while another group of participants predicts how a reasonable
person would respond to this request. It is hypothesized that participants in
the "prediction" condition will underestimate compliance rates, despite having
access to all the same information as participants in the "actual search"
condition. In pilot studies, this paradigm generated large differences between
predicted and observed compliance, indicating its promise for addressing long-
standing questions related to the perceived and actual voluntariness of consent
search. In addition to testing for main effects, the current research will test
for moderation by features of the search request that might reduce the gap
between perceived and actual voluntariness. Notifying participants that they
could refuse a search without penalty, a frequently proposed solution by critics
of consent search sometimes referred to as "Miranda-for-search," was not found
to be effective at reducing this gap in pilot studies. Thus, the current
research will explore alternative possible solutions, such as seeking written
consent. Identifying features of the search request that effectively decrease
the gap between perceived and actual voluntariness is essential for developing
empirically supported policy recommendations related to changes to the law
and/or to the practices used by law enforcement agents to obtain consent from
citizens.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.