* 1823742
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Exploitation of a Criminal Record: Coercive Work while on Parole
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Keramet Reiter, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 28,348.00

During the period following release from prison, people on parole may experience
coercive employment as a result of their parole-mandated work requirements.
Coercive employment occurs when people find themselves outside the bounds of
legal labor protections, forced to work in conditions under either the explicit
or perceived threat of criminal justice repercussions should they refuse. These
differential power dynamics create space for the exploitation of already
marginalized laboring populations, which has lasting implications for
socioeconomic inequality and recidivism. The proposed project will be the first
to systematically document the prevalence of coercive work in the period
following release from prison, and will explore both the lived experience of
coercive work and parolees? perceptions of employment and punishment after
prison. Additionally, this project will investigate how people navigate the
looming threat of criminal justice sanctions as tied to employment requirements
while on parole. To date, reentry policymakers and scholars alike have focused
on the hiring process, as evidenced by the recent movement to ?Ban the Box;?
however, this project draws attention to the reality that barriers to reentry do
not stop at the moment of hire but, rather, continue on throughout the
employment process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through two phases of original data
collection with adults on parole in Los Angeles County, this project will
provide insight into the prevalence and experience of coercive work while on
parole. First, 40 in-depth qualitative interviews with active parolees will
provide a nuanced understanding of the ways coercive work manifests while on
community supervision, what that experience is like, and how parolees perceive
work requirements and punishment after prison. Second, quantitative data will be
obtained through a large-scale web survey. In order to obtain estimates of
coercive work that are representative of adults on parole in Los Angeles County,
survey participant recruitment will utilize a Respondent-Driven Sampling (RDS)
design, one of the most effective strategies for studying hard-to-reach
populations. This study will combine an in-person RDS recruitment method with
the web survey for a mixed methods approach to studying employment among former
prisoners that may have implications for future research on other hidden
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.