* 1823103
* Workshop/Collaborative Research: NSF Proposal Writing Workshop at 46th SME NAMRC and ASME MSEC 2018; Texas A&M University; College Station, Texas; June 18, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* George Hazelrigg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 17,396.00

This award provides funds to conduct a National Science Foundation (NSF)
proposal-writing workshop concurrent with the 46th Society of Manufacturing
Engineers North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC) and the ASME
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC 2018). The workshop will
be held at Texas A&M University on Monday, June 18, 2018, building on the
success of previous similar workshops held at the three previous NAMRC/MSEC
conferences. The aim of the workshop is to aid future NSF proposal submitters in
communicating clear research objectives and improving proposal quality.
Participants will learn guidelines for writing a quality NSF proposal with an
emphasis on the research objective. Interactions during the workshop will help
build meaningful collaborations. This will positively affect the attendees'
academic career and, subsequently, will help develop the nation's human
resources. Additionally, when proposals are well written, the reviews tend to be
more consistent and NSF panel meetings are more efficient.

Major activities of the workshop include: presentations by NSF program
directors, breakout sessions to discuss example research objectives, a group
question/answer period, and a conclusions session. Professors and graduate
students from across the US will be invited to attend the workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.