* 1823521
* Collaborative Research: Transgenerational Mobility
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Irma Elo, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 264,400.00

This project investigates the effects of grandparents on the outcomes of their
adult grandchildren, independent of parental influences. Correlations due to
genetics and family culture that may confound these effects also are taken into
account. This will give a more thorough analysis of social mobility than that
obtained solely on the basis of parent-child relations. This project will
enhance the well-being of society by increasing understanding of the degree and
pattern of intergenerational transmission of disadvantages and advantages in key
sociodemographic outcomes, which affect the well-being of individuals, families,
and society as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project eliminates bias due to
unobserved multigenerationally-correlated endowments through use of data on five
generations available in the Utah Population Database and an innovative modeling
strategy. Causal effects of parents and grandparents on children are assessed
across six major sociodemographic outcomes: schooling attainment, occupation,
age at marriage, age at first birth, number of children, and age at death. The
project makes four contributions. First, models of multigenerational relations
that incorporate controls for unobserved multigenerationally-correlated
endowments will be developed and estimated. Second, measurement error biases
will be reduced by including more complete sets of members of each previous
generation, up to great-great grandparents, than in prior studies. Third, the
effects of sex of children and of maternal versus paternal lineage on
multigenerational effects will be analyzed. Finally, the importance of cross
effects, that is, effects of including many parental and grandparental
sociodemographic variables, and the extent to which they reduce analytical bias
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.