* 1823276
* CRI: II-New: Cognitive Mechanisms and Computational Modeling of Gaze Control During Scene Free Viewing, Visual Search, and Daily Tasks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,277.00

This project is to build an infrastructure to study visual attention and its
applications at the University of Central Florida. The infrastructure will also
enable larger-scale inquiries into high-level visual recognition problems in the
vision sciences. The infrastructure of fixed and portable eye trackers will be
used by several faculty and researchers across the University (e.g., Computer
Science, Engineering and Computer Engineering, Psychology, Biomedical
engineering and UCF Institute for Simulation and Training) to study human
perception, cognition, learning, and motor control, as well as exploring
applications in activity recognition, surveillance, and data summarization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core goal of this infrastructure is to utilize gaze
and eye tracking technology to understand mechanisms of attention from
behavioral, neurophysiological, and computational perspectives and explore its
applications in a wide range of problems in computer vision and psychology. The
team utilizing the infrastructure has complementary expertise to address
research encompassing computer vision, machine learning, human vision, imaging,
and psychology. In particular, this infrastructure will be used to explore in
what ways current attention models fail, how to remedy them, and discover new
cues that attract gaze. The approach is a combination of cognitive and
computational studies utilizing machine learning and computer vision techniques.
New large-scale eye movement datasets and benchmarks will be constructed as part
of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.