* 1823288
* CRI: CI-SUSTAIN: Collaborative Research: CiteSeerX: Toward Sustainable Support of Scholarly Big Data
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* C. Lee Giles, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 786,000.00

Access to the scientific and scholarly literature has changed radically in
recent decades. Increasingly researchers and scholars make their publications
freely available on the Web. Taking advantage of this opportunity, new
scientific search engine tools have been developed such as Google Scholar,
Semantic Scholar, and CiteSeer, now CiteSeerX. CiteSeerX has become one of the
most comprehensive and widely-used online public resources for the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) research community. Millions of
CiteSeerX Portable Document Format (PDF) documents are indexed by Google.
CiteSeerX is unique among digital library search engines. It is open access,
most all of its documents are harvested from the public Web, and users have
full-text access to all documents searchable on its website. Moreover, it
provides all automatically extracted metadata and citation context via an Open
Archive Initiative (OAI) metadata service interface and bulk downloads on a
public cloud - all under a Creative Commons license. This service is usually not
available from other scholarly search engines. CiteSeerX performs automatic
extraction and indexing of tables (in production), figures (developed)}, and
algorithms (developed), capabilities rarely seen in other scholarly search
engines. CiteSeerX provides its open source software and architecture on GitHub.
At this time none of the other above-mentioned systems release their digital
library software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the established CiteSeerX
infrastructure, this proposal aims to create a sustainable CiteSeerX system with
new data resources and a much larger data collection. We will develop a new
system that runs with low operation overhead, without a single point of failure,
and that provides quality and enriched data and metadata in portable formats
that will be available through accessible user interfaces. We will ingest all
freely accessible scientific documents on the Web, currently estimated to be 30
million. CiteSeerX will make available high-quality metadata through an
accessible Web User Interface, Application Programming Interface, and data
dumps. SeerSuite, the platform on which CiteSeerX is built, will be refactored
so as to be an easily deployable and configurable scholarly digital library
framework. It will be built on commercial grade open source software. In
addition, we will provide searchable semantic metadata, such as key phrases and
disambiguated author names, and non-textual content such as data from figures,
tables, algorithms, and equations. For long-term sustainability we will explore
different monetization models. The result will be a refactored digital library
search engine that provides stable, usable, and reliable data services on
multiple types of scientific documents built on a portable, maintainable, and
self-contained framework that can be deployed for other research document
digital collections. Source code will be hosted at https://github.com/SeerLabs.
System development and related research will be published in relevant venues and
be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.