* 1823225
* CRI: II-NEW: CHRONOS : A Cloud based Hybrid RF-Optical Network Over Synchronous Links
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Hany Elgala, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 765,999.00

This proposal presents CHRONOS - Cloud based Hybrid RF-Optical Network Over
Synchronous links. The primary goal of this project is to design, build and
maintain a multi-node, heterogeneous, wideband, scalable, hybrid and synchronous
Cloud Radio Access Network (Cloud RAN or C-RAN), specifically to support high
throughput wireless access for emerging applications like Virtual Reality (VR),
Industrial Internet of Things (IoT), 3D broadcast video, tele-surgery, etc. The
combination of tight synchrony and heterogeneity among the network constituents
make CHRONOS radically different and foundational to investigate previously
unexplored research problems in wireless networking and communication. This
infrastructure cuts across multiple domains including wireless networks, digital
communication, signal processing, optical communication, hardware and software
architectures and parallel processing. In addition to global technological and
social impact, students at the state University at Albany will be trained using
this testbed. The highly diversified student body in the university includes
traditionally underrepresented communities, who will greatly benefit from hands-
on workshops, seminars, summer programs and student interest groups hosted by
the researchers throughout the duration of the project. The testbed will not
only enable research at Albany, but will also foster long-term collaborations
beyond the campus as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHRONOS enhances the
capabilities of conventional C-RAN in multiple directions by integrating
synchronous radio frequency and optical links. The long term goal of this
project is to utilize the testbed to enable practical research in wireless and
optical communication with emphasis on new hardware and software architectures
for signal processing. Specifically, this project will 1) develop baseband
transceiver in multi-field-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based cloud platform,
edge nodes as well as mobile terminals to enable high bandwidth communication,
2) interface between the cloud and the edge nodes to split edge-cloud
processing, 3) partition between FPGA and graphical processing unit (GPU) co-
processor for parallelism in baseband, and 4) enable dynamic reconfiguration for
digital signal processing (DSP) modules as required by applications. The key
architectural advantage of CHRONOS is the decoupling of baseband signal
processing from the front end allowing for complex, joint processing of signals
from spatially distributed radio units. It also optimizes real-time performance
by having computation capabilities at the network edge while trading off energy
consumption. Spatially distributed antenna geometry alleviates the
inefficiencies imposed by co-located antennas in existing communication methods.
It also advances the research in virtual cloud platforms that support partial
reconfiguration of FPGA to scale the DSP tasks based on demand. These efforts in
multiple fundamental domains are tightly coupled and require close interaction
to realize the full potential of this infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.