* 1823496
* EAGER: Implementing Effective Sharing of Research Data
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Joshua Rosenbloom, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 229,318.00

This project investigates current practices and attitudes relating to the
sharing and re-use of electronic research data among faculty and research staff
at Iowa State University. Federal policy encourages and indeed requires in many
cases that researchers make available for re-use research datasets created as a
result of federally funded research projects. A number of previous studies have
found that although scholars widely affirm the value of research data sharing in
principle they have often failed in practice to share their own data in formats
that are accessible for re-use. This project investigates the reasons for the
divergence between the ideals of open science and actual practice to provide an
evidence base for the development of more effective and efficient policies for
data sharing and to facilitate development of university infrastructure to
better support research data sharing. The results of this research will
contribute to the development and implementation of data sharing policies that
are more effective in facilitating data re-use while reducing the cost to
investigators and universities of compliance with these policies. Enhanced data
sharing will, in turn, contribute to more rapid scientific
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project coincides with a new institutional
initiative at Iowa State University to establish more robust institutional
support for the ideals of data sharing and re-use, and a central question in the
investigation is what institutional approaches are most effective in supporting
increased data sharing. An initial survey of faculty and research staff will be
used to establish a baseline measure of existing formal and informal practices
for data sharing and data re-use and their variations by discipline, career
stage, and other investigator characteristics. A follow up survey administered
18 to 24 months later will assess the impact on data sharing of new university
policies and infrastructure to support data sharing. In addition, information on
investigator follow through with data management plans for funded projects will
be analyzed, and data on implicit and explicit costs of implementing data
management plans will be collected and analyzed to illuminate the extent to
which these costs affect compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.