* 1823392
* Receiving Contexts of Return through Deportation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Ruth Gomberg-Munoz, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 280,544.00

The research supported by this award addresses one facet of the global migration
crisis: return migration through deportation. Deportation is a widely
significant contemporary social, political, and intellectual problem. Existing
social science scholarship has theorized deportation as a straightforward
politics of exclusion that culminates in the removal of people from one national
territory and their return to another. However, for most people, deportation is
not only an endpoint; it also marks the beginning of long-term efforts to build
viable post-deportation lives. Yet despite the key role that nation states play
in shaping their citizens' decisions to migrate in the first place as well as
their post-deportation experiences, contexts of return have received little
sustained research attention. This project takes a broader perspective to
provide the more complete picture that is needed by both theorists and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out by Loyola
University of Chicago anthropologist, Dr. Ruth M. Gomberg-Munoz. Using a multi-
year and multi-sited approach, this project involves the sustained ethnographic
research necessary to better understand the sociopolitical afterlife of
deportation and its effects in both Mexico and the United States. The research
design comprises a three-year study of the contexts of deportees in Mexico City
and Chicago. The researcher will use a mix of ethnographic research methods
including participant observation, digital ethnography, in-depth and follow-up
interviews, targeted semi-structured interviews, and research on state and
municipal policies regarding migration and deportees. The study population will
include Mexican government agents, a sample of deportees, and organizations that
work with deportees. Findings from this research will advance a more robust and
reliable theorization of life after deportation in three key ways. 1. The
project's longitudinal design will provide the time depth needed to understand
post-deportation life. 2. The analytical focus on deportees' interactions with
Mexican state agencies will illuminate the role of emigrant states in shaping
contexts of migrant return. 3. Attention to the quotidian activities of
deportees will shed light on dynamic, cross-border cultural formations that
arise in response to global securitization concerns. Using a collaborative
approach to research design and dissemination, this project will make a timely
and important intervention in social science scholarship on migration and
removal, and it will contribute critical information for policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.