* 1823229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conceptualizing Crop Domestication and Diversification
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John White, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 39,855.00

In 2011, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) reported that in the last
century alone, ~75% of global plant genetic resources have been lost. Moreover,
while the FAO estimates that global food production demands will rise 60% by
2050, they also predict that plant genetic resources for crop improvement will
shrink by a third. In the face of such endangered food security, the United
States, like many countries, must strive to breed, domesticate, and conserve
crop genetic resources to help satisfy such increased agricultural demands. The
evolutionary relatives and progenitors of domesticated crops (i.e., crop wild
relatives) play invaluable roles in plant domestication and diversification,
often acting as sources of valuable traits (e.g., pest resistance, increased
nutrition, drought tolerance, increased yield) or as potential domesticates
themselves. Importantly, crop and crop wild relative diversity have historically
and contemporarily been modified by indigenous peoples, who play key roles in
crop domestication and diversification through their conscious and unconscious
forms of environmental modification. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology, the data produced by this study
will facilitate the growing number of participatory crop breeding,
domestication, and conservation projects in the United States and abroad, which
depend upon effective cross-communication between indigenous farmers and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John White, under the supervision of Dr.
William Balee of Tulane University, will explore the relationship between
indigenous practices and perspectives concerning domestication and
diversification, and collaborative crop domestication, conservation, and
diversification projects. The project will take place among Amazonian Runa, a
self-designation of a cultural group in Ecuador known as the Amazonian Quechua
or Kichwa. Many indigenous territories (e.g., that of the Runa in the Ecuadorian
Amazon) overlap with major global biodiversity hotspots for crop genetic
resources. However, despite widespread indigenous involvement in crop
domestication and diversification, and the growing number of conservationists
and plant breeders working with indigenous peoples in hotspots of crop genetic
diversity, indigenous knowledge and practices concerning domestication and
diversification remain critically understudied. Specifically, this research
consists of one year of ethnographic study composed of daily participant
observation and semi-structured interviewing. The data resulting from this
investigation will contribute to environmental anthropological theory by
illustrating: (1) how indigenous peoples conceptualize and modulate critical
biological processes (e.g., domestication and diversification); and (2) how and
why the form, function, and value of environmental modifications, like plant
domestication and diversification, can change within and across sociocultural
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.