* 1823040
* Subsurface Processes In the Critical Zone: Observation, Experimentation and Modeling (SPIC training school): Cargese Training Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,06/30/2021
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 56,712.00

This project supports the participation of 16 US graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers in a training workshop on observation, experimentation and
modeling subsurface processes in the Critical Zone. The workshop will take place
at Institute of Scientific Studies of Cargese (IESC) Corsica, France. The
Cargese workshop will provide a high-level interdisciplinary overview and
training on flow, transport and biogeochemical processes, experimental methods
and numerical and statistical modelling in critical zone environments. Multiple
sessions led by invited scientists from around the world will discuss emergent
scientific questions and approaches in critical zone science. The event will
address the interfaces of hydrology, hydrogeology, biogeochemistry,
geomorphology, microbiology and ecology.

This project supports the participation of 16 US graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers in a training workshop on observation, experimentation and
modeling subsurface processes in the Critical Zone. The workshop will take place
at Institute of Scientific Studies of Cargese (IESC) Corsica, France from 25
June to 7 July, 2018. The Cargese workshop will provide a high-level
interdisciplinary overview and training on flow, transport and biogeochemical
processes, experimental methods and numerical and statistical modelling in
critical zone environments. In particular, sessions lead by leading scientists
from around the world will discuss emergent scientific questions and approaches
in critical zone science. The event will address the interfaces of hydrology,
hydrogeology, biogeochemistry, geomorphology, microbiology and ecology. The main
topics to be addressed are (1) the water cycle: interaction between groundwater
and surface water, eco-hydrology; (2) fluid flow and transport: multiphase flow,
mixing and reactive transport, coupling flow/transport with biological activity,
thermo-hydromechanics, complex fluids and biofilms; (3) experimental methods:
hydrogeological and hydrogeophysical characterization, seismic noise tomography,
bio-geophysics, micro-scale and microfluidic imaging; and (4) numerical and
stochastic modelling methods, data analysis, inverse problem, upscaling,
uncertainty analysis and geostatistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.