* 1823543
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural and Social Dimensions of Anti-Mullerian Hormone Screening Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Moira Kyweluk, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 7,584.00

Demographic shifts in the United States, including a later average age of first
birth have significantly changed how women and couples navigate family planning.
For women, age is one of the best predictors of fertility: that is, whether a
woman will be able to conceive. Younger women are typically more fertile, and
ability to conceive declines until a woman reaches menopause. However, the age
at which an individual woman becomes less fertile varies depending on many
factors unique to her individual body, including genetic makeup, diet,
lifestyle, and environment. Over the past decade, medical providers have
increased the use of a simple blood test to measure a woman's anti-Mullerian
hormone (AMH) level, a hormone secreted by a woman's remaining pool of eggs. AMH
level has been used in some medical settings as an indicator of fertility, with
lower values suggesting reduced fertility. AMH screening is a low-cost fertility
test and is becoming more widely available in the United States. As AMH testing
is becoming more widespread, it is important to understand how women are using
test results as a tool in family planning and to navigate their biological
parenthood options. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the project would enhance scientific understanding by
broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in discovering more
effective means of improving public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moira Kyweluk,
under the supervision of Dr. Thomas McDade of Northwestern University, will
explore the cultural and social dimensions of AMH testing. The research will
take place at two locations where AMH testing is common: first, at a network of
private clinics that offer fertility testing for low out-of-pocket costs
directly to consumers and second, at a large research hospital fertility clinic
where testing is often a part of family planning using reproductive technologies
like egg freezing and in vitro fertilization. The project uses anthropology
methods including careful observation and recording of conversations in both
clinics, as well as interviews with patients and providers who deliver test
results. Qualitative data will help the research team understand why and when
women seek AMH testing, as well as the role of romantic partners, family and
social networks on accessing fertility testing and taking action using test
results. Importantly, this project will gather data on experiences with low-cost
fertility testing from women from diverse socioeconomic statuses, races,
ethnicities and sexual orientations, deliberately including women often
overlooked in research on reproductive technologies, since most patients who
have access to fertility medical care in the United States and thus comprise the
majority of research participants are white and affluent. Ultimately, data from
this project will be important in helping women and providers make decisions
about when, whether, and how to take this sort of fertility test since it can
have impacts on family planning decisions, emotional health, and social life.
Early fertility screening and ongoing screening throughout a woman's life could
soon become a standard of care. Information from these interviews will be
available to the public to give women more information about others' experiences
with elective AMH testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.