* 1823294
* CRI: CI-P: Collaborative: Towards a Program Analysis Collaboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Robert Dyer, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 46,546.00

Benchmark programs play an important role in evaluating the advances in program
analysis research. Thus, the confidence of the evaluation depends on the
quantity and the quality of the benchmark programs. The larger their number and
the closer they resemble real-world programs, the higher confidence in the
evaluation. Currently, research in the field of program analysis often relies on
a few outdated or deficient benchmark programs for evaluation purposes. The
difficulty in obtaining sufficient benchmark programs comes from the
requirements imposed on the benchmark programs by program analyzers. Usually
researchers manually obtain, inspect, and transform potential benchmark programs
to create benchmark programs that meet those requirements. Such an unscalable
approach often fails to produce adequate benchmark programs. The goal of this
research is to automate this process and make it available through an online,
public infrastructure. The infrastructure facilitates obtaining, selecting, and
transforming open-source software projects for use as benchmark programs. In
addition, the infrastructure gives researchers the ability to easily curate
benchmark programs for program analysis and share the results of running their
analyzers on those benchmarks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are to solicit requirements and feedback from the program analysis
community on automating benchmark program generation, and to prototype a Program
Analysis Collaboratory (PAClab) research infrastructure that implements that
process. Using researchers' specifications for adequate benchmark program
generation, PAClab locates and obtains potential benchmark programs in open-
source repositories; performs necessary program transformations as specified by
researchers; and outputs the adequate benchmark programs. In addition, PAClab
enables researchers to share their program analyzers using container technology,
the transformed benchmark programs, and the results of running their analyzers
on those benchmark programs. The intellectual merit of the project lies in
investigating techniques for specifying and automating program transformations
for targeted program analyzers. The broader impacts of the project stem from its
potential to broaden adaptation of program analysis advances through the
increased confidence of their evaluations; to lower the entry barrier for new
program analysis researchers; and to accelerate the pace in program analysis
research. PAClab's educational benefits include the ability for students to
easily locate real-world programs and evaluate their implementations of program
analyzers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.