* 1823479
* Novel Methods to Explore the Gender Composition of the STEM PhD Workforce: An Analysis using the SDR
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Melanie Zaber, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Sinibaldi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 248,485.00

While women have earned nearly 45% of the past decade's doctoral degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields, they comprise less
than 25% of full professors in STEM departments. Although historical
underrepresentation will persist mechanically at the top levels due to the
gender composition of cohorts in previous decades, recent work shows a within-
cohort gender gap in tenure and promotion, even among younger graduates. Hence,
women are unequally represented in STEM in academia, and are on track to remain
so. The consequences of underrepresentation are numerous, both for women in
those fields -- such as reduced mentorship for female graduate and undergraduate
students -- and for the fields themselves, as the research is conducted by less
diverse perspectives. Not engaging otherwise capable female STEM Ph.D.s. could
lead to less innovation and reduced overall research productivity. This
innovative study of the STEM Ph.D.-holder pipeline identifies factors that lead
female Ph.D.s to be less likely than their male counterparts to enter into, and
remain in, tenure-track academic positions. It applies novel methods to identify
and explore personal and professional factors that contribute to women with STEM
Ph.D.s selecting out of academia at various stages of the pipeline. This project
supports the goals of the National Science Foundation (NSF) and National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) to better understand the science
and technology (S&amp;T) workforce and to improve the methodologies for
assessing indicators of S&amp;T activities. It focuses on issues facing an
under-represented group: female doctorates in STEM. This research will highlight
the differences in research engagement, compensation, and professional outcomes
for a researcher who remains compared to one who departs either academia or STEM
altogether, all of which have broader societal impact. The findings from this
work will potentially reshape infrastructure for research and education by
encouraging employers to craft policies that attract female doctorates, as such
policies may allow employers to cream-skim highly qualified female doctorates
from alternate employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data from the Survey of
Earned Doctorates (SED) and the Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR), the
project uses cutting-edge trajectory analysis to classify all observed job
sequences among STEM Ph.D. holders into a typology of STEM career paths. Using
the rich data from the SED and the SDR, the project produces descriptive
analysis of individual characteristics that correlate with sorting among these
typologies. In addition, the project also compares among the identified STEM
career typologies objective and subjective measures of job attributes, including
compensation, engagement with the research community, and job satisfaction,
separately for men and women. Hence, the project defines the set of "career
pipelines" of Ph.D. holders (of which academia is one), which are associated
with women, and which are associated with better or worse job outcomes for men
and women within those pipelines. The project answers to what extent the
observed transitions out of academia are in fact beneficial to female Ph.D.s. in
terms of pay, research time, and job satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.