* 1823166
* CRI: CI-P: Creating the Largest Speech Emotional Database by Leveraging Existing Naturalistic Recordings
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Carlos Busso, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2021
* USD 115,390.00

This community infrastructure planning project aims to consider the needs from
other researchers in the design of the largest publicly available naturalistic
speech emotional database, broadening the impact of the corpus across speech
processing areas. The project includes a workshop with researchers with relevant
but diverse expertise to introduce the current protocol for data collection, and
requests their recommendations for improvements. The proposed activity will
improve the protocol to address the needs from the community. Affective
computing is an important research area aiming to understand, analyze,
recognize, and synthesize human emotions. Providing emotion capabilities to
current speech-based interfaces can facilitate transformative applications in
areas related to Human Computer Interaction (HCI), healthcare, security and
defense, education and entertainment. The research infrastructure envisioned in
this project will open new opportunities that we cannot address with current
speech emotional databases. In the area of affective computing, the proposed
corpus will provide suitable training sets to explore learning algorithms that
are powerful, but require large amount of labeled data. It is expected that the
size, naturalness, and speaker and recording variety in the proposed corpus will
allow the community to create robust models that generalize across applications.
Improvements on speech emotion recognition systems will facilitate the
transition of these algorithms into practical applications, providing unique
societal benefits. The proposed infrastructure will also play a key role on
other speech processing tasks. For the first time, the community will have the
infrastructure to address speaker verification and automatic speech recognition
solutions against variations due to emotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
infrastructure relies on a novel approach based on emotion retrieval along with
crowdsource-based annotations to effectively build a large, naturalistic
emotional database with balanced emotional content, reduced cost and reduced
manual labor. The database considers podcast recordings that are available in
audio-sharing websites. Although the approach of building affective databases
using media content has been previously explored, the contribution of this study
is the use of machine learning algorithms to retrieve audio clips with balanced
emotional content, providing natural stimuli with wider spectrum of emotions.
The proposed approach relies on automatic algorithms to post-process podcasts
and a cost effective annotation process, which make it possible to build large
scale speech emotional databases. This approach provides natural emotional
renditions that are difficult to obtain with alternative data collection
protocols. This project involves the research community from the design of the
corpus, which is the key goal in this community infrastructure planning project.
The community also play a key role in the selection of target sentences to be
emotionally annotated, with novel grand challenges where the goal is to
recognize and retrieve target emotional behaviors in unconstrained, unlabeled
recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.