* 1823754
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Deindustrialization and Security in Rural America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Briel Kobak, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 20,787.00

Over the past decade, idyllic depictions of small rural towns scattered across
the American Midwest have been overtaken by national concerns over
deindustrialization, drug addiction, and suicide. With the deindustrialization
of the Midwestern United States, individuals within these communities have taken
a range of measures to ensure the security of their economic, physiological, and
community wellbeing. This project, which provides funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, will investigate what role security plays in gauging
the potential that the future holds for small rural towns. To understand the
lived effects of recent shifts in industry and economic restructuring, the
project will explore how such global processes are reflected in the objects that
make up homes, and speak to the changing nature of sociocultural dynamics
therein.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Briel Kobak, under the supervision of Dr. Shannon
Dawdy of the University of Chicago, will explore what factors motivate consumer
behavior as it relates to issues of security, and what significant social and
cultural identities are associated with the consumption, collection, and
curation of objects that afford personal safety. Taking the classic analytical
approach of the object biography, this research will be conducted by tracing the
circulation of security objects in and around a small town in Southern Indiana,
and asking how certain dangers and insecurities are articulated and remediated
along the way. Using a mixed approach of ethnographic, archaeological, and
archival methods, the researcher asks what role these objects play in terms of
providing a sense of security that is material, affective, and economic. By
investigating practices of security as they have historically also become
related to individual consumer behavior, the project moves studies of security
beyond the study of formal institutional frameworks, to the more local,
quotidian contexts where they are experienced. The project will make significant
contributions to theories of security, and economic anthropological debates
around consumption and commodities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.