* 1823821
* Social Context and Revenue Measures
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Isaac Martin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 404,999.00

In this project, new computational methods are applied to the texts of more than
3,000 local revenue measures that were subject to voter referendums in more and
less diverse places. These data are used to investigate how tax policy
characteristics may moderate the known effects of diversity on voters'
willingness to pay for public spending. The results will yield new insights into
what makes for a sustainable revenue source. This is crucial for enabling
American society to meet the fiscal challenges of the future, and thus for the
health, prosperity and welfare of American society as well as for national
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the assembly and
digitization of revenue measures presented to local voters since 1986.
Supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques then are applied to
classify these measures and to identify features of the text that mediate the
observed associations between diversity and reported election outcomes. The most
general goal of the project is to identify institutional mechanisms that
moderate associations between social context and public spending. A more
specific goal is to identify the causes of the well-known negative association
between diversity and public spending on health, welfare, and other social
transfers and services. The project thereby advances theoretical understanding
of the dimensions of policy that affect voting behavior. It also analyzes
institutional mechanisms that yield one of the most important observed patterns
in fiscal sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.