* 1823851
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The perception of acoustic-phonetic cues and its impact on speech category learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Megha Sundara, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,247.00

To understand speech, we must be able to recognize and distinguish the sounds in
our language. For example, when we hear the first sound in 'toe' and in 'tall',
we must identify them as two instances of the same sound, /t/, that are distinct
from other sounds such as /d/ at the beginning of 'doe'. This is a remarkable
feat given that each speech sound is characterized by a host of acoustic
properties. Thus, one question that has interested researchers in speech
perception is how listeners decide what acoustic properties to pay attention to
and what acoustic properties to ignore. Listeners may learn this purely based on
experience. That is, based on exposure to the speech sounds in their native
language, they come to know that the difference between /t/ vs /d/ is signaled
by a specific set of acoustic properties that are most informative to the
contrast. Listeners may also attend to cues based on the relationship the cues
have with each other. For example, if two cues are perceptually inseparable,
then attending to one means necessarily attending to the other.This dissertation
research may lead to insights in how to improve second language instruction and
may inform work for technologies on speech synthesis in minority languages.

The goal of this project is to understand how listener's language experience and
the inherent relation between acoustic properties affect speech perception. With
perception experiments the researchers propose to compare how listeners use two
pairs of acoustic properties when categorizing speech sounds. One pair has been
shown to be perceptually inseparable, and another pair is perceptually
independent. Two groups of listeners will be tested: English listeners who have
no language experience with either pair of properties, and Hani (Tibeto-Burman -
Yunnan, China) listeners who have language experience with both pairs of
properties. Manipulating experience as well as the relation between pairs will
enable the researchers to disambiguate the role of experience from that of
perceptual separability. Additionally, as part of the proposed project an
undergraduate student will be trained in linguistic fieldwork and experimental
research methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.