* 1823489
* Exploring the relation between non-spatial skills and mental rotation from infancy to preK
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lisa Oakes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 858,549.00

Mental rotation, the ability to mentally manipulate a visual representation of
an object and recognize its appearance from a different orientation, shows
stability from infancy through preschool. This ability predicts mathematical
achievement in kindergarten and beyond as well as entry into the Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The present work focuses
on identifying how non-spatial processes contribute to mental rotation
abilities. Findings will help identify ideal time points for intervention,
advance understanding of the factors that contribute to mental rotation, and
address how individual differences in mental rotation during infancy predict
later abilities. This work will involve the creation and refinement of measures
that can be used to trace the development of mental rotation from infancy into
preschool; thereby, not only contributing new tools to the field, but also
yielding insights that can inform current theoretical conceptions of mental
rotation and its relation to non-spatial processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
critical research question is as follows: What are the non-spatial processes
that contribute to mental rotation abilities and their development? Associations
between mental rotation, object features, processing bias, and motor experience
will be examined using a cross-sequential design with overlapping age cohorts.
The investigators will recruit an infant cohort at 8 months, a toddler cohort at
20 months, and a preschool cohort at 3 years. Each cohort will be assessed at
three time points -- every six months for infants (i.e., 8, 14, and 20 months),
every 8 months for toddlers (i.e., 20, 28, and 36 months), and every year for
preschoolers (3, 4, and 5 years). When examined at a specific age, the sample
will provide a snapshot into the association between mental rotation and non-
spatial skills (i.e., object features, processing bias, and motor experience).
The longitudinal design will allow the investigators to follow participants
across infancy, toddlerhood, or the preschool years. This approach provides an
opportunity to understand how non-spatial skills, such as more precocious motor
skills during infancy, may shape mental rotation over time. Such findings are
central to bolstering understanding of the possible mechanisms by which
particular types of experiences can promote infants' mental rotation. This,
consequently, has implications for promoting academic achievement and
remediating existing discrepancies in spatial and mathematical skills in
children from different socioeconomic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.