* 1823898
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Examining Inhibitory Control and Language Flexibility in Adult Second Language Learning: A Neurocognitive Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Kara Short, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 10,844.00

Within the United States, millions of adults find it beneficial or even
necessary to learn a second language for personal, business, and government
related purposes. Yet, second language learning is a complex and challenging
endeavor that results in a great deal of variability in learning outcomes. Some
learners reach acceptable levels of proficiency for their purposes whereas other
learners do not. Nonetheless, the factors that explain the varying levels of
success in adult second language learning are still not fully understood. One
way in which researchers work to explain who is expected to be successful when
learning a second language is to identify the set of individual factors that are
associated with successful adult second language learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project investigates two cognitive
factors that have been shown to play a role in bilingualism and that have also
recently been proposed to contribute to second language learning. The first
factor, inhibitory control, is defined as an individual's ability to
deliberately suppress automatic responses and has been shown to be key for
bilingual language control. The second factor, language flexibility, refers to
an individual's ability to tolerate changes to their first language and is
evident in bilingual language processing. The dissertation will examine the role
of these factors in second language learners as they become bilingual. To do so,
we will first assess second language proficiency with multiple measures in adult
learners of Spanish who are at early, intermediate, or late stages of learning
the language. Second, behavioral measures will be taken of learners' inhibitory
control ability, and brain-based, electrophysiological measures will assess
language flexibility by examining the extent to which their developing Spanish
affects their first language processing. Finally, these sets of data will be
analyzed to examine to what extent inhibitory control abilities and language
flexibility predict the level of proficiency that the learners achieve. The
findings from the study are expected to have broad implications for theory and
practice. The research will inform our theoretical understanding of the
underlying cognitive and brain mechanisms that contribute to the complex task of
learning a second language. This increased understanding about how languages are
learned, in turn, will inform methodological approaches for teaching second
languages. For example, instructional materials can be designed that leverage or
support individual learner characteristics such as their inhibitory control
ability. This project will also provide invaluable hands-on experience to
graduate and undergraduate research assistants in areas including research
design, data analyses of cognitive and brain-based, electrophysiological data,
and data interpretation. Finally, given that the institution where this research
will take place has a diverse student population, it will involve students from
groups who are often underrepresented in higher education, many of whom are
second language learners themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.