* 1823474
* Data-enabled Decision-Making in Emerging Co-opetitive Transportation Markets with Ambiguity
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Vadim Sokolov, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 504,501.00

Recent communications and technological advancements, along with a growing
abundance of sensor and user data, enable new mechanisms of cooperation and
matching of transportation services to demand. These newfound capabilities
highlight changes in moving transportation systems from centrally controlled,
publicly owned and operated infrastructures to decentralized system elements.
These systems involve multiple stakeholders who operate in competitive
environments wherein individuals or facilities may be linked through an
underlying common market problem creating benefit from cooperation. That is,
these environments are co-opetitive. The overarching objective of this research
project is to develop and test concepts that frame dynamic, uncertain and
decentralized transportation problems in newly arising co-opetitive environments
and create efficient, data-enabled optimization and equilibrium algorithms to
support the operation of these future transport services. Developed methods will
aid in operating peer-to-peer systems, where individuals can become suppliers,
as well as system aggregators. The models and solution methods will exploit
personalized information to customize services to individual system users and to
better understand transportation systems of the future. Thus, this work will
enable assessment of novel market concepts and mechanisms for regulating them.
Through the development of an on-line library of e-learning snippets in the form
of blog posts, vignettes and video clips, and efforts to involve
underrepresented persons and first-generation college students, this project
will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concepts from game theory,
probability modeling and ambiguity, data analytics, and model predictive control
will be employed and extended for use in real-time multi-player, multi-level,
ambiguous settings with high dimensionality. Closed-form solutions will be
accompanied by rigorous mathematical derivation and proof. Solution methods that
can be applied both for long-term decision horizons and real-time
implementations will be created. Both will take advantage of information through
learning about consumer/user behavior and that of competitors. This work aims to
support transformation of the field of transportation, bringing concepts from
diverse areas of economics, mathematics and control to envision and run markets
and collaborations of the future, while simultaneously providing lasting value
through fundamental contributions to both modeling and solution
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.