* 1823148
* CRI:CI:SUSTAIN: Next-Generation, Sustainable Infrastructure for the RF-Powered Computing Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Joshua Smith, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 979,997.00

The energy efficiency of microelectronics has been improving exponentially for
decades. It is becoming possible to operate low power sensing, computing and
communication platforms in a perpetual, battery-free fashion, with all power
provided by Radio Frequency (RF) signals or other energy harvesting. The
Wireless Identification and Sensing Platform (WISP) is an open source battery-
free platform that the present investigators originally introduced in 2006.
Hundreds of WISPs have been manufactured and distributed to researchers around
the world. This infrastructure has enabled research in diverse areas of computer
science, including networking, Human-Computer Interaction, Ubiquitous Computing,
Robotics, and other areas. The present proposal will allow the researchers to
integrate the latest research results, such as Ambient Backscatter
Communication, into the WISP family, and also to reap the benefits of the most
recent improvements in low power microelectronics. The proposal will allow us to
produce a new generation of the infrastructure and mature it to the point that
it becomes self sustaining, via sales of hardware or other means. We expect that
the sustained infrastructure will support research in backscatter communication,
low power systems and networking, and applications of ultra-low-power platforms.
Battery-free sensing systems are expected to enable a wide array of new
capabilities, which will generate substantial commercial impact in a wide
variety of markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing is becoming connected more
and more deeply to the physical world, a transformation that can enable smart
environments, better medical care, more efficient manufacturing, and more.
However, the need to power physically embedded microelectronic systems is a key
challenge. This project will allow us to sustain the WISP infrastructure for
battery-free, RF-powered computing and communication. The infrastructure will
enable research in several areas. In recent years, the PI and co-PI introduced
Ambient Backscatter Communication, and backscatter-based WISP cameras, which
have been widely recognized in the research community. Making these tools widely
available will enable research on topics such as (ambient) backscatter
networking, applications of battery-free cameras, and algorithms for interactive
compression and computer vision in battery-free camera systems. This research
would likely remain inaccessible for a long time to many computer and
information science and engineering researchers, since there are no widely
accessible platforms that support research on these topics. The sustained
infrastructure will also enable novel application research, in areas such as
improved human activity detection systems, battery-free input devices, and also
research on body-implanted electronics, and long term structural health
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.