* 1823869
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of phonological contrast on phonetic variation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* John Kingston, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 3,818.00

Every time someone speaks, they produce complex sound waves. Understanding the
acoustic details of these sound waves can help improve voice recognition
technologies and provide insight on language differences which can potentially
aid in language learning. A large body of work in linguistics and related
disciplines has shown that speakers do not always pronounce sounds in the same
way. For example, the sound "p" in English will be pronounced differently in
different contexts (beginning of a word vs. end of word) and at different times
simply because talkers are humans. People do not usually hear these differences,
but they are present in the acoustics and can be measured. Variation in speech
is natural and happens in every language. However, less is known about exactly
how much variation occurs in different languages. This research seeks to address
this gap by investigating whether speakers of some languages have more variable
pronunciation than speakers of other languages and what might explain the
difference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One frequently assumed hypothesis says that
speakers of languages with more sounds will show less variation (be more
precise) when they pronounce those sounds. The researchers will gather data from
different languages to test and revise this hypothesis. They will also develop
concrete methods for measuring acoustic variability in language which can then
be applied to future work. The experiments compare stop sounds in Hindi ("b",
"bh", "p" and "ph") and English ("b" and "p"), and sibilant sounds in Polish
("s", "&amp;#347;", and "sz") and French ("s" and "sh"). Both experiments
examine multiple acoustic cues to the contrasts in each language. The second
portion of the project will use the conclusions from these experiments to
investigate whether speakers imitate the variability of other speakers that they
hear. It is well documented that speakers change their pronunciation based on
speech they have recently heard, but it is not known whether speakers will
change the amount of variability in their speech based on what they have heard.
To address this question, the researchers will carry out an imitation study
where speakers listen to speech before being prompted to speak to see if the
variability in their speech changes after listening. The results of these
studies will increase understanding of variability in pronunciation across
different languages and contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.