* 1823944
* Rationality of Harm Avoidance and Political Tolerance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kurt Gray, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 403,035.00

This project examines how to increase tolerance and openness to disagreement. It
is based on a consideration of the fundamental human motivation to avoid harm.
Not only do people avoid harm to themselves, people also think it reasonable for
others to avoid harm. It is therefore expected that people will be more tolerant
of opposing viewpoints when those viewpoints are seen as being motivated by the
avoidance of harm. Framing social viewpoints in terms of harm avoidance may make
those with opposing views seem more rational. Six studies explore how to
increase tolerance using the idea of rationality of harm avoidance. The long-
term goal of the research is to provide a strong foundation to inform efforts
aimed at reducing intolerance, and enhancing positive interactions with those
with opposing viewpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests whether the
fundamental human motivation to avoid harm can be leveraged to increase
tolerance. Six studies examine people's willingness to interact with those with
different views and their willingness to allow the expression of opposing views.
The approach is to harness multiple methods, including laboratory experiments,
archival studies, and nationally representative surveys. The experiments will be
pre-registered and adhere to best practices of open science. Mediational
analyses will test for the predicted pathway from harm avoidance to tolerance
via perceived vulnerability and rationality. The survey and behavioral studies
will test other effects of the tolerance produced by the rationality of harm
avoidance intervention. By emphasizing the universal human motivation to avoid
harm, this project will transform scientific understanding of tolerance, and
extend the research literatures on mind perception and intergroup
empathy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.