* 1823366
* CRI: CI-NEW: Trainable Reconfigurable Development Platform for Large-Scale Neuromorphic Cognitive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Gert Cauwenberghs, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Neuromorphic cognitive computing aims at learning to solve complex cognitive
tasks by emulating the principles and physical organization of highly efficient
and resilient adaptive information processing in the biological brain. Despite
over 30 years of development and a recent surge of broad interest across all
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines, access to
neuromorphic cognitive computing remains mostly limited to a small community of
highly trained researchers in the field due to high entry barriers and costs
associated with the specialized nature and complex operation of currently
available systems. This project will construct and support a general-purpose
neuromorphic cognitive computing platform that will be the largest and most
versatile realized to date as well as the first to be broadly available and open
to the research community at large, for research into new forms of brain-
inspired computing that are more effective and more efficient in approaching the
cognitive capabilities of the human mind. Targeting wide adoption by a diverse
cross-section of users in the broader STEM research community, the platform will
feature a natural user interface that shields novice users from the challenges
arising in operating and configuring highly specialized neuromorphic hardware,
by providing a set of user-friendly software tools maintained by and shared with
the user community. Building on extensive existing network and storage
infrastructure for user access and data sharing at the San Diego Supercomputer
Center, the platform will be hosted and maintained through the Neuroscience
Gateway (NSG) Portal, which currently serves over 600 active users in the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large-scale neuromorphic platform
will serve as a new and unparalleled resource to the Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE) research community, addressing a great need for
an experimental testbed for research in alternative forms of computing beyond
the traditional von Neumann paradigm and the impending physical limits to
Moore's Law expansion in the scaling of computing technology. The reconfigurable
platform will feature a hierarchically interconnected network of in-memory
computing processing nodes that emulates, in real-time, highly flexible neural
dynamics (integrate-and-fire, graded, stochastic binary, etc) of up to 128
million neurons with high flexible connectivity and plasticity (spike-timing
dependent plasticity, gradient-based deep learning, etc) of up to 32 billion
synapses. The system will be capable of biophysical detail in computational
neuroscience modeling, as well as high performance and efficiency in on-line
adaptive pattern recognition, serving and bringing together both computational
neuroscience and computational intelligence communities that have traditionally
pursued disparate computational approaches. The user interface of the platform
will support software tools and resources for deep learning and run-time
optimization in artificial intelligence applications, and for interference of
structure and functional connectivity from recorded neural activity in
computational neuroscience research, among others. To facilitate greatest
scientific and societal impact, the infrastructure will be made available free
of charge, on a time-managed shared basis, to any researcher in return for
agreeing to share source code and data necessary to replicate results reported
in the literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.