* 1823955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cross-language Interactions in Beginning Adult Bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Gabriela Meade, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2020
* USD 18,060.00

The United States lags far behind other countries in terms of foreign language
success rates, which has far-reaching implications for our engagement, safety,
and growth in an increasingly global world. One reason for this lag might be
that American students are first introduced to a second language relatively
late, often not until high school or college. Learning a second language at
these ages can be quite challenging, in part because of the extensive linguistic
knowledge that young adults already have in their native language. The goal of
the present research is to better understand how different types of native
language knowledge influence second language word learning: How does the native
language help or hinder second language word learning in young adults and why?
Understanding these interactions will further our understanding of how the new
second language words are represented in the brain and how they are connected up
to the existing linguistic system. The extent to which involvement of the native
language differs as a function of learning methodology will also be tested.
These studies will help form the foundation for the development of more
effective, evidence-based foreign language teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposed studies use
event-related potentials (ERPs) to track second language word learning among
monolingual college students in a laboratory setting. ERPs measure the
electrical activity of the brain on a millisecond-by-millisecond basis, which
makes them useful for tracking how rapid word recognition processes unfold over
time. The focus is on two specific types of native language words and how their
relative importance changes over learning time. Aim 1 considers how newly
learned second language words (e.g., lait is the French word for 'milk')
interact with the mental representations of neighboring native language words
(e.g., laid, last), which overlap in form. Aim 2 considers the connections
between the second language word representations (e.g., lait) and their native
language translation equivalents (e.g., milk), which overlap in meaning. Both
types of words play prominent roles in theoretical models of second language
learning and processing; however, their specific roles differ substantially
across models. Thus, the field is in need of empirical evidence that will
adjudicate between these various models and advance our understanding of how
newly learned words are integrated with the native language lexicon.
Understanding the neurocognitive mechanisms of second language word learning is
a prerequisite to developing evidence-based teaching practices and improving
foreign language outcomes among young adult students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.