* 1823684
* 7th Midwest Workshop on Control and Game Theory. To Be Held at Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI April 28-29, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Systematic modeling, analysis, and design of social, economical, and
technological systems require confluence of ideas from diverse scientific
disciplines, including control theory, optimization, economics and game theory.
These systems often involve multiple decision-making agents interacting over a
network and form a subset of so-called cyber-physical-human systems. Examples of
such systems include smart grid, connected and autonomous vehicles, smart
manufacturing, and mixed human-automata systems. Recent advances in technology
have made these systems increasingly pervasive in a broad range of applications.
Effective design of these systems requires interactions among experts from
engineering, economics, and social sciences as well as industry. This forms the
basis for organizing the 7th Midwest Workshop on Controls and Game Theory on
April 28 - 29, 2018 in East Lansing, MI, where leading experts on controls,
optimization, game theory, economics and computation from the Midwestern states
are brought together to facilitate interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary
research interactions and collaborations.

The purpose of the workshop is to facilitate and enhance research discussions
and collaborations among experts in a broad range of disciplines, including
biology, economics, and engineering. The workshop has a broader agenda than the
previous editions and involves an increased participation from industry. The
invited speakers are leading experts in the areas of controls, game theory,
applied probability, computation, dynamical systems, economics, and
optimization. The three sub-themes, (i) networked control systems, (ii)
application of game theory and optimization to societal systems, and (iii)
connected and autonomous vehicles, ensure that the broad agenda of the workshop
is focused both on theory and application of cyber-physical-human systems. The
workshop also includes a poster session in which students and postdocs present
their current research. The feedback and mentoring on their research from the
leading experts will tremendously benefit these young researchers. The invited
speakers are selected to ensure a broad representation of research areas and
such exposure will also benefit young researchers immensely.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.