* 1823913
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neural Bases of Semantic Composition in the Verb Phrase
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Liina Pylkkanen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 06/30/2020
* USD 18,117.00

The richness of natural language semantics stems from the ability to compose
elements together and to derive novel meanings from these combinations.
Understanding this ability has been a central goal in the neurobiology of
language, as well as in theoretical linguistics. However, despite a rapidly
growing body of research, the brain basis of composition has been vaguely
understood at best. Most of the progress during the last decade has been limited
to general descriptions of the sentence level, identifying a network of brain
areas recruited for the composition of sentential meaning but not further
specifying how the individual facets of sentence composition are encoded.
Considering the assumption in formal semantics that composition can happen via
at least two different rules, understanding very basic instances of composition
in various linguistic environments is an essential first step for characterizing
the neural basis of sentence interpretation. To this end, this dissertation
takes a bottom-up approach, investigating neural substrates of small units of
composition, with its focus on English verb phrases. Disentangling the two major
modes of composition around a verb, namely modification (e.g., paint + slowly)
and saturation of arguments (e,g., paint + a picture), this work aims to provide
an answer to the question of how the meaning of a complex event description,
e.g., "John reluctantly painted a picture," is composed from the various event
elements, i.e., John (agent), reluctantly (manner), painted (action), and a
picture (object). This work aims to lay a critical foundation for a
computationally detailed characterization of full sentence composition. This
dissertation consists of three studies that take advantage of the high
spatiotemporal resolution of magnetoencephalography to characterize the dynamics
of composition. The first experiment investigates the neural signatures of
modification in the verbal domain, asking how the combination of a verb and its
modifier engages the brain, and how this overall pattern compares to that of
noun-modifier combination, for which stable results have been described in prior
work. The second experiment investigates the neural representation of conceptual
specificity in the event domain. Previous literature has shown that a particular
brain region, the left anterior temporal lobe (LATL), is sensitive to conceptual
specificity in the object domain (e.g., boat vs. canoe). Asking whether event
specificity also involves the same area in the same way, the second experiment
manipulates the conceptual specificity of events (e.g., "hoard fuel" vs "store
fuel"). The last experiment explores situations of (possible) semantic
composition in which the combining words do not form a syntactic constituent. In
all, these studies combine insights from theoretical linguistics and from the
psychological literature on concepts and categories to elucidate the neural
reflexes of event composition as manifested in verb phrase interpretation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.