* 1823562
* FoMR: Collaborative Research: Single-Thread Multi-Accelerator Execution to Close the Dennard Scaling Gap
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Anthony Nowatzki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 37,000.00

With ever-slowing scaling trends in microprocessor technologies, traditional
techniques of improving processor performance are no longer viable, and
achieving higher performance requires a dramatically different approach. This
project develops a multicore chip microarchitecture using specialized
accelerators and code-injection techniques without needing to modify user-level
software, compilers and operating systems. The impact of this research is to
help steer microprocessor design in novel ways that can help sustain performance
improvements, especially for datacenter and big-data computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a recent promising technique
involves offloading program phases onto specialized processors (accelerators)
which are tuned to execute programs with specific characteristics (i.e.,
parallelism, control dependence, memory behavior) at extremely high efficiency.
There are two main challenges which motivate the major thrusts of this work. The
first is the question of how to design a practical system for managing the
execution of heterogeneous accelerators and dynamic translation. The second is
how to design a set of accelerators which provide integer factors of improvement
over general purpose processors' performance and energy efficiency. This work
addresses the first challenge by designing a disaggregated translation
subsystem, including region detection hardware at each core, a set of
disaggregated compiler cores and a translation cache, and a hardware/software
layer which dynamically re-maps logical threads to physical cores based on
dynamic code properties and load balancing. To design a set of balanced
accelerators, this work is analyzing programs to identify key program behaviors,
and developing targeted accelerators for each. Finally, this includes the design
of synthesis-time resource allocation algorithms which will co-optimize the
choice of cache interface, general core attributes, and accelerator execution
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.