* 1823552
* Environmental Health Governance in Six Cities: How Scientific Cultures, Practices and Infrastructure Shape Governance Styles
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kim Fortun, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 113,335.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
efforts to understand and address the health effects of long term exposure to
transportation-related air pollution in six cities: Albany, New York City,
Philadelphia, Houston, Beijing, and Bengalura. In each city studied, project
researchers will examine the operation and use of science in four arenas of
governance: environment, health, transportation and education. They will explore
how these different arenas interrelate, and they will map the sources of
scientific evidence used in governance, how these sources are evaluated, and
translated into policy and programming. They will also document and analyze the
scientific infrastructures that produced the findings used in governance, the
diversity of stakeholders involved in interpreting scientific findings, and
diverse cultural logics that shape the creation and use of scientific knowledge
in different settings. Ethnographic interviews will be the primary means of data
collection, supplemented by analyses of scientific publications, policy debates,
and media coverage. The final stage of the project will result in
recommendations that will be actively disseminated among policy makers,
journalists and other stakeholders in all cities and countries studied in the
project. Project results will also be translated into curriculum for
K-undergraduate students, using the techniques and infrastructure developed by
RPI's EcoEd Research Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an innovative extension of an ongoing
project, The Asthma Files project. The digital platform built for the ongoing
project will support collaboration among researchers (including student
researchers) involved in the new project. In addition, there will be in each
city a field school to teach the project's methods to students. The aim of the
project is to advance understanding of different ways scientific capacity is
developed and used in governance, examining how environmental health research
and governance has developed. The project will result in a theoretically robust,
empirically grounded conception of environmental health research and governance
styles, detailing and categorizing different ways of developing environmental
health data, advancing the sciences of environment and health, and directing
these toward governance of complex problems. It will extend theorization of
governance by addressing how scientific cultures, practices, and infrastructure
shape governance processes and outcomes; and it will test and stabilize the
process and cyberinfrastructure needed to support collaborative research in the
social studies of science. Project results will have wide implications in
efforts to improve collaboration between governance regimes (across scale, and
between nations); such collaboration is particularly important in addressing
complex, often trans-boundary problems like air pollution, which call for new
levels of cooperation and sharing of technology, data, and effective policy
design.