* 1823177
* CRI: CI-NEW: Collaborative Research: Constructing a Community-Wide Software Architecture Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,308.00

A software system's life cycle is dominated by maintenance costs and efforts. A
software system's architecture is acknowledged as a key determinant of the
system's properties and its successful maintenance and evolution over the
lifetime of a system. However, in the area of architecture-centered software
maintenance, empirical research and technology transfer from academia to
practice have been impeded by disjoint environments, redundant efforts, high
costs associated with developing robust tools, and the lack of shared research
infrastructure and datasets. To address these challenges, this project develops
the Software Architecture INstrument (SAIN), a first-of-its-kind integration
framework for assembling architecture-related techniques and tools with the goal
of enabling empirical research in the context of software maintenance. SAIN will
deliver a tool suite comprising four principal components: (1) a catalogued
library of cutting-edge tools for reverse engineering and analyzing software
systems' architectures, which increases reusability and eliminates redundant
tool development across the community; (2) a plug-and-play instrument for
integrating the tools and techniques to promote interoperability of existing
solutions and enable the creation of new solutions; (3) reproducibility wizards
to set up experiment-templates, produce replication packages, and release them
in easy-to-run and modify formats, which promotes wide accessibility and smooth
usage of existing techniques by researchers and practitioners; and (4) a public
repository of software-architecture datasets and benchmarks for supporting a
broad range of software-architecture empirical studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAIN aims to bridge the gap between academic research and
practice in the software-architecture domain. On the one hand, SAIN will enable
extensive empirical research by providing a large repository of architectural
artifacts, including interoperable tools and benchmark datasets. As such,
researchers will be able to compare and contrast different techniques using the
same datasets to identify gaps and inaccuracies. This will enable new solutions
for improving the state-of-the-art in software-architecture research. On the
other hand, SAIN will provide practitioners with an authoritative source
offering interoperable tools and feedback, as well as a channel to contribute
cutting-edge architectural artifacts. In summary, SAIN has the potential to
transform software architecture research and practice by (1) facilitating the
discovery and adoption of cutting-edge techniques and tools that are best-suited
to modern problems and (2) ensuring architecture's central role in a broad range
of software-engineering activities. SAIN will be available for public use and
will foster much more effective university-industry collaboration than is the
case today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.