* 1823912
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risk Perceptions as Potential Mediators of Environmental Toxicants Associated with Biomass Fuel Use
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Christopher McCarty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,029.00

Approximately 2.9 million people die prematurely from conditions arising from
indoor air pollution annually. A significant proportion of cases are due to
household reliance on biomass fuels and exposure to airborne toxicants in
biomass smoke. Significant expenditures are made by the U.S. government to
combat exposure. The cost-effectiveness and sustainability of potential spending
on interventions to improve air quality depend on understanding the local
context, however, including perceptions of strategies to mediate risk from
environmental pollution and their interaction with community health patterns.
Airborne toxicant exposure are already known to disproportionately impact
individuals from disadvantaged socioeconomic status. This study, which trains a
graduate student in methods of rigorous, empirical data collection and analysis,
explores variation between cultural perceptions of risk and vulnerability to
pollution exposure and biological outcomes. Further, this project will build
capacity and scientific infrastructure through international scientific
cooperation, and enhance public scientific understanding by broadly
disseminating findings to organizations engaged in issues related to air
pollution.

David Dillon, under the supervision of Dr. Christopher McCarty of the University
of Florida, will investigate whether perceptions of risk and vulnerability
mediate human exposure to airborne toxicants from biomass fuels. The research
takes place in Eastern Province, Zambia, an ideal setting for studying airborne
toxicant risk; in sub-Saharan Africa, household air pollution (HAP) is fourth in
the top ten list of risk factors for high burden of disease. Previous research
on biomass fuel use demonstrates that both risk perception and cultural aspects
of traditional cookstoves significantly influence individual exposure levels.
This study employs a purposive matched sampling design that stratifies
households by the primary source of household fuel while capturing variation in
local demography. The co-PI tests hypotheses linking culturally constructed risk
perception to specific and measurable biological outcomes using ethnographic
data collected through semi-structured interviews and environmental health data
on airborne toxicant exposure. Intellectually, findings from this research
contribute to understanding how risk perception and local biology contribute to
patterns of human-environment interaction and health inequalities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.