* 1823824
* Sociocultural Determinants of Human Motives
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Heejung Kim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,337.00

Understanding the basic human motives that drive behavior has been a question of
great historical significance in psychology. Yet, an integrative theory,
allowing for different sociocultural and individual factors that might
prioritize one kind of motive over another, is still missing. This project aims
to develop a theoretical model of the sociocultural determinants of human
motives. To develop a powerful testbed, with strong broader impacts, the
research examines why and how individual actions are motivated in response to
environmental challenges. Environmental crises such as pollution or the
depletion of natural resources pose some of the greatest collective challenges
faced by society today. Responses of individuals to these challenges have
critical consequences. By understanding what drives people's actions in this
context, progress will be made in addressing a fundamental question about human
behavior. The research is expected to have wide impact across a number of
scholarly disciplines, with important implications for public policy, education
and philanthropy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory proposes that different
sociocultural and individual factors orient people towards more internal and
personal reasons or toward more external and social reasons for their actions.
The factors that orient people toward more internal and personal reasons for
their actions include individualistic values, high socioeconomic status, and
social belonging. The factors that orient people toward more external and social
reasons for their actions include collectivistic values, low socioeconomic
status, and social isolation. The research examines the extent to which
environmental beliefs versus perceived environmental norms drive pro-
environmental behaviors, and how this differs for people from a wide range of
personal experiences and backgrounds. The explanatory role of sense of control
and attention allocation is also investigated. The studies use diverse
methodologies including a nationally representative study of Americans, a
laboratory behavioral study, a longitudinal study of daily environmental
behaviors, and a community field experiment at local grocery stores assessing
shopping behavior. The new theoretical model can also be used to understand why
and how individual actions are motivated in response to a broad range of
collective challenges, including widespread infectious disease and the threat of
terrorism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.