* 1823840
* Structural Solidarity: The Influence of Group Disadvantage on Intergroup Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Maureen Craig, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,913.00

The population of the United States is growing in its diversity. At the same
time, people are increasingly aware of discrimination and inequality faced by
different social groups. Examples include the gender pay gap, race-based housing
discrimination, and prejudice based on gender identity. Much is known about when
people within a disadvantaged group identify with and support other members of
the same group. Less is known about how people from one disadvantaged group view
members of other disadvantaged groups who face a different type of inequality.
People who belong to one disadvantaged social group may think that their
experiences with discrimination and inequality are similar to those of other
disadvantaged groups. As a result, they may identify with members of the other
group and seek to support them. However, it is also possible that people who
belong to one disadvantaged group see their experiences as very different than
those of other disadvantaged groups, and therefore take less interest in
supporting them. This project explores how and why these different perspectives
develop. This research focuses on the ways in which people think about their own
inequality and how that may influence their support for members of other
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments and field studies focus on
the beliefs that people have about the causes of their own group's inequality.
One pattern of beliefs may attribute such inequality to the prejudices and
negative attitudes of other individuals. A different pattern of beliefs may
attribute inequality to the ways that society and its institutions are
structured. This work tests if beliefs that one's own group faces inequality
because of institutional discrimination will lead people to support action to
reduce inequality faced by another group. Several experiments also examine
alternative explanations for why institutional understandings of discrimination
may lead to more support for addressing inequality faced by different groups.
One area of application considers whether such beliefs influence people's
opinions about discrimination cases brought by a person from another
disadvantaged social group. These research questions and applications are
addressed among individuals from several different disadvantaged groups,
examining attitudes and behavior towards multiple social groups. The results of
this project will advance our understanding of when individuals from different
disadvantaged social groups will work together to reduce different types of
inequalities. The long-term goal is to understand how experiences with
discrimination and inequality may influence how people from different social
groups relate to one another. Gaining this deeper scientific understanding will
provide insight into how to reduce conflict and support healthier interpersonal
relationships in an increasingly diverse nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.