* 1823633
* RR: The Generalizability and Replicability of Twitter Data for Population Research
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Heng Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Social media data have the potential to track phenomena in real time, such as
percentage of the population fearful in the minutes after a disaster or
terrorist event, or the degree of anger immediately after the announcement of a
jury verdict in a highly publicized case. In each of these examples, it would be
difficult to conduct a field survey in real time, and respondents may not be
able to reconstruct how they felt or behaved at the time of the event, even if
interviewed just a few days later. Social media data have the potential to
overcome these limitations. This project will analyze how the application of
survey weighting can rebalance samples of Twitter data, and assesses how well
this rebalancing will allow valid generalizations about population behaviors.
The project will provide a foundation for future advances in the use of social
media data for scientific, health, and applied research, thus permitting a wide
variety of inferences useful in social policy formulation. A key aspect of the
project will provide new evidence regarding the accuracy of migration flows in
real time, thus assisting social policy relevant to providing assistance in
response to natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the extent to which Twitter users
represent or misrepresent the population across different demographic groups and
test the feasibility of developing weights that, when applied to Twitter data,
make the results more representative of the underlying population. The project
conducts the research at the county level in the United States from January
2014-December 2017, using 96% geotagged tweets in the study period and 100%
tweets in one month. The project will: (1) extend and refine existing methods
for imputing the gender, age, race/ethnicity, and county of residence of each
Twitter user; (2) use these values to assess the representativeness of Twitter
samples at the county level and explain the determinants of biases; (3) adapt
five methods developed for probability or non-probability surveys to reweight
Twitter samples and compare their performance in producing model estimates that
can be used to infer characteristics of the general population; and (4) test the
feasibility of using Twitter data to estimate migration at the county level by
comparing to the Internal Revenue Service migration data, as well as estimate
Puerto Rico migrants to the continent after Hurricane Maria. Analysis of these
migration data will provide a new source of information with which to estimate
migration flows in real time and at unprecedentedly detailed geographic
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.