* 1823903
* NSF/SBE-BSF: Testing the Role of Implicit Cognition in Self-Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Melissa Ferguson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 381,915.00

People often have trouble regulating their behavior according to their professed
long-term goals. Many people enthusiastically want to meet broad goals, such as
health and fitness, but have trouble enacting the effortful, resource-consuming
actions that are required to do so. For example, many people who are strongly
committed to increasing their physical fitness may plan with all earnestness on
getting to the gym every morning or taking the stairs instead of the elevator,
but ultimately fail to do so. These kinds of self-control failures are common
and have wide-scale consequences for mental and physical health. Psychological
science has shown that to understand self-control, it is not enough to merely
measure what people say they think and feel about a goal and the actions needed
to get to that goal. Instead, it is necessary to also measure people's
spontaneous and uncontrollable thoughts and feelings about goals and the means
for achieving those goals. This type of implicit cognition can predict who will
and who may not end up successfully enacting the difficult activities required
to reach their goals. Laboratory experiments and a field study with high school
students will improve our understanding of how people frame, strengthen, and
bolster their behaviors in self-control dilemmas. The research will ultimately
have applications in understanding health, education, and personal
finances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines a neglected aspect of the
psychology of self-control: people's implicit beliefs about the importance of
means. In addition to knowing how much someone desires a broad goal, it is also
necessary to know a person's beliefs about the importance of the actions needed
to reach that goal. For example, one might greatly desire to be fit, but unless
they regard the difficult actions required to become fit as important and
critical, they may not enact those behaviors. The hypothesis tested across the
studies in this project is that people's implicit beliefs about the importance
of means will uniquely predict their success at self-control. Some of the
studies use an established measure of implicit importance. Other studies develop
an innovative new measure that captures people's nonconscious beliefs about the
importance of goal-relevant actions. The studies also examine the self-control
domains of physical fitness and academic performance among college and high
school students. A final study includes high school students in underserved
communities who are trying to get into college. This study follows these
students across a school year, measures the students' implicit beliefs about the
importance of school-related actions (using two different measures), and
predicts critical outcomes such as grades and college entry. The fields of self-
control and goal-pursuit might be transformed by introducing the role of
implicit importance. By focusing on evidence that implicit importance predicts
behavioral outcomes, this project offers the potential to advance an
underdeveloped topic in the research literature on self-control. This project is
supported by a partnership between the National Science Foundation and the
U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.