* 1823839
* I-Corps:  A Green and Flexible Nanogenerator Film for Sensing and Energy-Harvesting Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
efficient yet environmentally-friendly and sustainable way to harvest energy
from walking steps. Our energy-harvesting subfloor mat can convert normal human
walking steps to electricity. The mat is expected to serve the function of 1) a
renewable energy source, 2) a power supply for IoT sensors, 3) a self-powered
sensor with wireless connectivity. The mat can benefit retail stores and
manufacturing companies by helping them analyze the customer/worker locations
and foot traffic patterns, and can meet the needs of energy storage and
information transmission at heavy foot traffic area like school, airport,
stadium. If developed successfully, this mat can be integrated with various
floor products and applied across the smart building and IoT industry. This mat
also has an environmental impact in which it reduces carbon footprint, promotes
use of green natural materials and generation of renewable energy.

This I-Corps project is based on a patent-pending cellulose triboelectric
nanogenerator technology. This technology lies at the intersection of materials
science, electrical engineering, and chemistry and chemical engineering, and the
research findings can potentially impact the rapidly growing smart building and
IoT industry. This technology addresses the technical challenge of developing a
thin yet highly effective triboelectric nanogenerator from cheap, abundant
natural materials, by bulk tuning of the tribopolarity of natural materials and
rational configuration design of the nanogenerator. The bulk tuning and
configuration design methodologies developed in this R&D effort can be applied
to other relevant areas, including mechanical energy harvester design, and
materials surface potential engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.