* 1823805
* Estimation and Inference Under Shape Restrictions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Joachim Freyberger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,132.00

Standard approaches to analyzing relationships in empirical research in
economics and related disciplines impose strong assumptions on the form of the
relationships a priori. While these assumptions greatly simplify the statistical
methods needed, if they are incorrect, conclusions obtained can be misleading.
An alternative is to use so called nonparametric methods, which impose weaker
assumptions, but consequently, the results obtained are often not precise enough
to reach strong conclusions. This research explores the use of shape
restrictions to impose additional structure, but without specifying a particular
relationship. Shape restrictions, such as monotonicity or convexity, are often
reasonable assumptions and they can be implied by basic economic theory. For
example, the demand of a product is decreasing in its price. The project
proposes statistical methods to estimate relationships and summarize uncertainty
under shape restriction, which keep the flexibility of nonparametric approaches,
but can yield much more precise conclusions. These methods are appealing in a
wide range of real world applications. In this research, they are applied to
analyze demand functions, conduct inference in auctions models, and estimate
quantile functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level the project
overcomes challenges in the statistical theory resulting from the use of shape
restrictions. Specifically, the distribution of the restricted estimator depends
on where the shape restrictions bind, which is unknown a priori. This research
suggests an inference method based on test inversion, which yields uniformly
valid confidence regions for unknown parameter vectors or functions. The method
applies to a wide range of finite dimensional and nonparametric problems, to
various nonparametric estimators, and to many different shape restrictions.
Inference is based on the distribution of a shape restricted estimator, which is
an approximate quadratic projection of an unrestricted estimator onto a
restricted parameter space and this projection depends on a weight matrix. The
investigator studies optimal choices of the weight matrix, which can have large
effects on properties of the restricted estimators and the corresponding
confidence regions. Next to proving uniform size control, the project also
investigates power properties to quantity the gains from using shape
restrictions. Finally, this research illustrate these gains and the wide
applicability in Monte Carlo simulations and in various empirical applications,
studying demand models under monotonicity, auction models with parameter
dependent support, and non-crossing conditional quantile
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.