* 1823192
* CRI: II-New: ORION: Observatory for Cyber-Risk Insights and Outages of Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Michael Kallitsis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 709,982.00

Advancing the security of Internet-connected devices and networks entails the
detection and understanding of changes in adversarial behavior in real time.
Hence, there is a need to develop methodologies and deploy infrastructure that
can automatically diagnose macroscopic trends in Internet activity and provide
to researchers and security analysts visibility into botnet infections, denial
of service attacks, network outages, and malware campaigns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network telescopes--networking instrumentation that
collects and records unsolicited Internet traffic destined to a routed but
unused Internet address space--are one avenue for detecting shifts in global
Internet behavior. However, while network telescopes provide a powerful
perspective, they have primarily been used for retroactively understanding
Internet events. This project will design and deploy new infrastructure to
modernize a large academic network telescope in order to offer unique real-time
insights into malicious Internet activity and other threats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a new real-time data
processing pipeline to parse incoming traffic and detect individual network
events. It will explore emerging data science techniques to identify variations
in Internet-wide trends and to produce terse, human-readable summaries of
changes in Internet activity. To contextualize these events, this project will
integrate external data sources into the processing pipeline including network
reputation data, unique patterns of known malware and other security-focused
resources (i.e., the Censys search engine). Furthermore, to boost the
telescope's usability, this work will build accessible interfaces that would
enable researchers to easily ask questions about telescope-detected events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure will be broadly available to Computer
and Information Science and Engineering researchers interested in understanding,
measuring, modeling and defining Internet's evolution. It builds on Merit
Network's decade-long experience in operating large-scale network telescopes in
an ethically responsible manner. It will also leverage the expertise of
researchers at Stanford University, University of California at San Diego, and
Colorado State University. On the educational front, network telescope data can
serve as a vehicle for inter-disciplinary training of the future workforce in
areas that lie at the intersection of network security, computer systems, data
science and engineering. Even at the graduate level, network telescope data
analysis remains a relatively unexplored topic; this project will heighten the
scientific utility of the data and will provide unique opportunities for
educating students with real-world, heterogeneous network security
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.