* 1823270
* CRI: CI-EN: Collaborative Research: OpenNetVM: A Software Platform Enabling Network Function Virtualization Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kadangode Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 325,000.00

Network Function Virtualization is a "disruptive" technology that changes the
network from a transport pipe to a software-defined infrastructure offering
flexible services. By transforming network functions to dynamically allocated
software containers, new types of applications can be supported along with
better network management. OpenNetVM is an open source software platform that
seeks to lower the barrier for researchers wishing to explore challenges in this
area, and for developers wishing to evaluate new types of network services. This
project will provide a robust and flexible foundation that will enable new
innovations in these areas. The principal investigators will engage the
community to encourage adoption through frequent tutorials and
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Communication Networks have increasingly
become `software based'. Network Function Virtualization (NFV) provides a high-
performance network data plane (e.g., middleboxes like firewalls, proxies) and
is currently seeing both research and industry interest. NFV research has been
stymied by the inadequate software platforms that either offer only very low-
level access to packet data (making it difficult to evaluate complex services),
or are based on traditional packet-processing approaches that have very poor
performance for current-day applicability. The researchers will maintain
OpenNetVM as an open-source (BSD (Berkeley Software Distribution) license)
software infrastructure, providing high-level abstractions with an underlying
framework that provides wire-speed performance, primitives for scheduling, and
scalability, that offers both industry and academic researchers a way to quickly
and conveniently build network functions. OpenNetVM runs network functions in
lightweight containers, easily combined to form complex "service chains". The
project seeks to provide improved support for real middleboxes with OpenNetVM by
adding user space protocol stacks enabling more complex NFs and services,
substantially expanding the types of applications supported. The project also
expands OpenNetVM to support many NFs that share each CPU core, and distributed
deployments where NFs are spread across a cluster, thus enabling research into
NFV resource management, NF placement, and complex service chaining. Finally,
OpenNetVM will be extended to expose low-level performance metrics that will
enable research into automated resource management platforms. To facilitate
adoption the researchers will provide comprehensive documentation, tutorials at
major conferences, and template images using publicly accessible resources such
as NSF CloudLab. The result will be a comprehensive, open source platform that
can be used broadly across the networking and operating systems communities. In
addition, this project supports the training of a diverse body of students, with
an emphasis on preparing a mix of undergraduate and graduate students for
entering the high demand field of software-based
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.