* 1823475
* Student Travel Support for the Doctoral Colloquium at IEEE VIS 2018
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Ross Maciejewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

Visualization, or the use of interactive graphic representations to support data
analysis and understanding, has become integral to a wide array of application
areas. This grant provides support for approximately 18 U.S.-based graduate
students to participate in the IEEE VIS Doctoral Colloquium to be held in
conjunction with the IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS 2018), October 21- 26,
2018, Berlin, Germany (http://ieeevis.org/). IEEE VIS is the premier forum for
visualization advances in science and engineering for academia, government, and
industry, bringing together researchers and practitioners with a shared interest
in techniques, tools, and technology for data analysis. The focus of the VIS
Doctoral Colloquium is the students' doctoral dissertation research. Students
are selected chiefly on grounds of research excellence, and this research
represents the state-of-the-art in the field of visualization. The Doctoral
Colloquium provides an opportunity both for these projects to be shaped and
improved through intellectual exchange as well as for the students to present
and communicate the character of their work to a key group of their peer
professionals. Since the students and mentors are a diverse group (nationality,
gender, ethnicity, scientific discipline, and research specialization), the
students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their professional
development. Supporting participation of U.S. students in the DC VIS 2018 is
important for the development of researchers, practitioners and educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE VIS was established in 1996 and has become the
worldwide largest and most important conference on Scientific Visualization,
Information Visualization and Visual Analytics. The conference trend has been to
draw over 1,000 participants from dozens of countries to a week of research
presentations, tutorials, workshops, panels, demonstrations, posters,
exhibitions and scientific discussions. The Visualization Doctoral Colloquium
was initiated in 2006, and has been highly successful in providing mentorship
opportunities to current PhD students. Students at the Doctoral Colloquium
present their doctoral dissertation research and receive feedback from senior
professionals in the visualization community. This event allows the participants
to create a professional network both among themselves and with senior
researchers. This professional network plays a major role in their professional
and educational career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.