* 1823497
* Coping With Everyday Stressors: The Effects of Awe
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Seery, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 335,089.00

In times of stress, people often turn to spirituality, religion, or interacting
with the natural world as a way to cope. These methods of coping may have
benefits, such as social support during religious observance or relaxation while
hiking in a forest. However, these coping strategies also share an unstudied
element that may affect how well people cope with stress: the experience of awe.
Awe is an emotion that comes from being in the presence of something so large or
vast that it is difficult to make sense of it. An example is being immersed in a
grand natural scene. This project aims to understand when and why awe helps
people to cope better with stressful situations faced in everyday life, such as
test taking, public speaking, or experiencing physical discomfort. Understanding
the role of awe in effective coping can help to identify relatively simple
techniques that people can use to help themselves rise to the occasion during
something stressful rather than be overwhelmed by it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project centers on the idea that awe makes people feel like they and their
concerns are small in comparison to whatever induced that sense of awe. The
specific nature of this experience should have important, and possibly
contradictory, effects on coping with stress. If something that inspires awe
makes a stressful situation seem negligible in comparison, that stressful
situation should seem more manageable to cope with. In contrast, if something
that inspires awe makes one's own capabilities seem insignificant, the stressful
situation should seem less manageable. A set of studies assess personality
characteristics and experimentally create psychological states that should make
these types of focus during awe more versus less likely. Multiple methods will
be used to study these effects, including measurements of bodily responses and
behavior. This will allow tests of awe's effects on people's psychological
experience as stress happens and on behaviors that can be self-destructive in
the context of facing difficulties. The long-term goal of the research is to
achieve a deeper understanding of when and why awe helps people cope with
everyday stressors. Understanding simple ways to foster positive responses to
everyday stressors can enhance resilience in people's lives, thereby improving
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.