* 1823511
* Nationally Representative Survey on Financialization, Work Organization, and Job Training
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Richard Benton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 379,723.00

The U.S. labor market has recently seen both increased income inequality and
proliferation of low-wage jobs. Some contend that a driving force behind these
developments is increased financialization of the economy. This argument holds
that pressures stemming from shareholders, financial institutions, and
financialized management strategies have altered the way firms and managers
structure jobs, potentially diminishing firm investments in human capital and
eroding job quality in favor of increased profits. Thus, short-term financial
considerations have displaced more far-sighted management approaches that are
beneficial to both workers and firms. Despite the frequency of these assertions,
supporting data are scarce. This project evaluates these arguments by conducting
a nationally representative survey of business establishments across three
industries. The data will be used to test whether variation in job structure and
quality are related to variation in measures of financialization. The project
speaks to societal concerns regarding economic inequality and changes in the
distribution of high- and low-wage jobs in the U.S. economy. This information
will be of interest to policymakers concerned with job and economic growth both
nationally and at the state and local levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
This project will construct a nationally representative survey of establishments
in three industries that are part of matched firms that have been subjected to
greater and lesser levels of financialization, with a targeted sample size of
1,200-1,600 establishments. These industries include: 1) professional,
scientific, and technical services; 2) computer and electronic manufacturing;
and 3) retail. This choice of industries allows for focused attention on how
financialization pressures affect science and technology workers and how these
pressures differ from those found in other industries. The survey will ask
detailed questions about job quality and structure, including questions about
wages, contingent labor, skill demands, job tenure, training, and promotion
policies. The target respondents are human resource managers who are employed at
the randomly-selected business establishments. The establishment survey will be
linked with lagged firm-level indicators of financialization, corporate
governance, and shareholder ownership drawn from several business databases used
in prior research. The uniqueness of the survey data will allow analyses of
relationships between firm-level indicators and establishment-level work
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.