* 1823244
* CRI: CI-SUSTAIN: Racket on Alternative Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Matthias Felleisen, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,382.00

For two decades, the Racket programming language has served as a test bed for
research on language design and implementation as well as a platform for
teaching courses on computer science from middle school through graduate school.
Researchers use it to explore new language ideas because of its flexibility,
ranging from new ways of communicating between web servers and web browsers to
the construction of entirely new languages. Educators introduce middle school
students to algebra in a novice-friendly dialect of the language and professors
introduce PhD students to the study of the meaning of languages. Racket is also
used in industry for a range of products. Now programmers request a faster
Racket and a Racket that runs on modern platforms such as phones, tablets, and
web browsers. To accommodate these requests, the project will work on four
different, but related efforts. First, an optimizing just-in-time compiler will
be developed, based on the recently developed PyPy framework. Second, Racket's
innovations will be ported to Cisco's high-performance Chez Scheme
implementation, which is now available as an open-source project on GitHub. This
effort simultaneously constructs another performant compiler and returns to the
Scheme community some of the innovations that the Racket community has developed
over the last decade. In short, the first two projects directly address the
performance requests from the Racket community. Third, the project will design a
variant of Racket for web browsers, a radically different platform from ordinary
computers. The plan is to construct a compiler from Racket to JavaScript.
Fourth, Racket needs a GUI framework for mobile platforms (phones, tablets) to
become a fully functional language on those devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
four efforts have a direct impact on research and education. Modern software
must run on, and communicate across, heterogenous collections of platforms and
hardware (servers, laptops, tables, phones, browsers). To solve the problem of
engineering reliable, safe, and secure software, researchers need programming
languages in which they can explore the problems. From languages such as Racket,
these ideas tend to quickly flow into industrial applications and thus improve
the lives of everyone. Modern education must empower children in the world of
software; otherwise they are not broadly educated. For 20 years, Racket has
played an important role at hundreds of universities, colleges, and K-12
schools. Providing it on alternative platforms will ensure the future needs of
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.