* 1823983
* Collaborative Research: Decentralized Adaptive and Extremum Seeking Control of Robot Manipulators Using Image Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Miroslav Krstic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 179,488.00

Large networks of electromechanical agents, including complex robotic
manipulators and self-driving cars, will soon become ubiquitous. Advanced
control of such systems will increasingly benefit from inexpensive solid-state
cameras but the resulting vision-based systems will be computation-intensive and
introduce significant delays. Delays are known to cause instability in control
systems, leading potentially to catastrophic failures in critical
infrastructure. This project will develop methods to compensate and overcome
such delays in networked control systems. The project will also contribute to
the development of human resources in science and technology, continuing the
efforts of the investigators who have supervised two dozen students from
underrepresented groups on past projects, including women, Hispanics, and
African-Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in the project
are tailored to the efficient use of image data to facilitate real-time multi-
agent path planning and collision avoidance. This will be accomplished using a
combination of geometric representations and feature-based learning.
Orientations and 3-D positions will be characterized for HSV color-classified
objects to be grasped, for obstacles, and for destinations where the objects are
to be placed. These orientations and 3-D positions will be employed for real-
time generation of collision-free paths to be used as desirable trajectories.
Computationally efficient fully decentralized and energy-efficient extremum
seeking control schemes will be formulated, leveraging inherently parallel and
highly redundant processing architecture and operating in the presence of
interconnected nonlinearities, saturations, and uncertainties. Experimental
validation of the results, using a 28th-order Baxter robot, will be carried out
to examine the robustness and to validate the computational-energy efficiency of
the algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.