* 1823901
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparing Multi-Scalar Claims for Redress and Reparation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* David Scott, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,175.00

In the second half of the twentieth century, claims for redress for historical
injustices have put increasing pressure on political and legal systems. This
pressure is compounded by the fact that claims for reparations may occur
simultaneously at international and national levels. The research supported by
this award asks how international claims for redress converge on or diverge from
national claims for redress from local governments. With this dual focus,
findings from this research can be used in the development of national
government and international organization strategies for engaging with the
increasing growth of claims for redress.

Columbia University anthropology doctoral student, Anna Schirrer, supervised by
Dr. David Scott, will carry out the research in Guyana. Guyana is an appropriate
site for the research because there are active claims for redress at multiple
levels that can be leveraged for research, and because the comparatively small
size of the country makes the factors involved easier to isolate for a
scientific study. Currently, there are two sorts of claims at stake. One claim,
articulated by the multi-state Caribbean Community organization CARICOM, is a
state-driven and internationally oriented claim for redress. The other, is a
national rights-based claim for land addressed by local groups to the nation-
state itself. Through twelve months of ethnographic research, the researcher
will compare the legal resources, ethnic identity politics, and alliance
networks used to legitimize authority in making redress claims. Data will be
gathered through semi-structured interviews, ego-centered network mapping, and
participant observation with a non-probability sample of experts at five
different nodes in these networks. This research will contribute to social
science theorization of the interactions between national and cross-national
socio-legal processes. To reach non-academic audiences, the Co-PI will
disseminate her research findings through public presentations at NGO-academic
policy forums and with local stakeholders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.