* 1823432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Dynamics of Cultural Training in the U.S. Military
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Steven Caton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 25,168.00

For over a decade, the U.S. Army focused enormous energies and resources on
creating a culturally-aware military. This objective was officially and
repeatedly linked to the unique demands of contemporary warfare, generally, and
the Middle Eastern operational environment, specifically. New doctrine was
written. Old strategies were recast and revised. New cultural and language
training programs, the emphasis on culture in field and technical manuals, the
expansion of military cultural research centers, and a massive increase in human
intelligence, special operations, and other military fields deemed to be
cultural subject matter experts all helped realize this vision organizationally.
A highly-public discourse made it clear that cultural awareness would be key to
contemporary soldiering. This project, which trains a student in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores the role of culture
in the operational and institutional objections of the military. In addition,
the project would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its
findings outside academe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bethany Kibler, under the
supervision of Dr. Steven Caton of Harvard University will explore the
production and circulation of knowledge around the concept of culture within the
operational and institutional objectives of the military. Since 2003, the
emphasis on culture and cultural awareness has shaped the lives and experiences
of hundreds of thousands of U.S. soldiers. In contrast to other social
scientific work on the so-called cultural turn, which has tended to document how
the discourse around cultural awareness may have served to reframe the war in
less objectionable terms to the American public, this research examines this
discourse in a more open-ended and empirically grounded way. The researcher
investigates the training sites, team rooms, and patrol routes where culture and
cultural awareness are learned and put into practice by soldiers themselves.
Over 18 months and across three communities of military cultural subject matter
experts I will ask: What notion of culture is mobilized when culture becomes a
military tool? What alternative knowledges and/or epistemologies about war,
culture, and cultural competence are produced as soldiers operationalize this
high-level and ever-changing vision? Most importantly, what can a study of
cultural awareness tell us about how soldiers navigate and shape military
institutional structures? In pursuing this line of questioning, this research
tests the anthropological premise that institutions of all kinds are shaped by
the human agents that represent and embody them, often in ways that high-level
leadership or policy-makers fail to recognize or anticipate. Indeed, as the
nascent ethnographic literature on the military shows, soldiers are often savvy
consumers and invested actors who negotiate, resist, and recast aspects of the
military's norms and messaging. By looking at the military production of
cultural knowledge from the ground up, the competing epistemological commitments
soldiers bring to bear and generate in confronting that knowledge, and the
ethics of soldiering through cultural difference (cast as both morally and
physically dangerous by trainers and soldiers alike), the research aims to
contribute to current conversations in Middle Eastern studies, military studies,
and the anthropology of ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.