* 1823622
* Innovative Advances in Understanding Auroral Phenomena by Harnessing the Power of Citizen Science
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Elizabeth MacDonald, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 344,038.00

Auroral lights or aurora have long fascinated humans living or traveling at high
latitudes. During strong geomagnetic disturbances aurora can be seen at middle
latitudes where most human population lives. Despite decades of research,
significant gaps remain in the understanding of auroral processes, with accurate
predictions of the aurora remaining a particular challenge. This award seeks to
utilize amateur auroral observers and modern communication technologies to
improve accuracy of auroral predictions and provide additional characterization
of auroral enhancements at middle latitudes during significant auroral
disturbances. Assimilative data techniques will be developed to better utilize
amateur auroral imagery to improve predictive capabilities. Accurate auroral
forecasting is important for building the next generation of space weather
models as well as for the auroral tourism industry. This project will enhance
public engagement in scientific research and promote public understanding and
awareness of space weather effects. Additional characterization of the aurora
and related space weather phenomena will provide important feedback to
communities that are responsible for protecting critical infrastructure during
large geomagnetic disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is composed of
tw-o parts: (1) the development of a state-of-the-art auroral model that can
assimilate real-time soft sensor data (amateur reports and imagers) with
existing empirical models to improve knowledge of auroral oval specification and
(2) a comprehensive study of middle-latitude auroral enhancements using high-
quality citizen-science images. Both projects enable improved understanding of
the coupling between different parts of the near-Earth plasma environment. The
project will assimilate real-time soft sensor (human) aurora data, that is
particularly abundant during strong disturbances, with existing empirical models
to reduce uncertainties in the source data and provide improved knowledge of the
global state of the auroral oval in comparison to the current state-of-the-
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.