* 1823972
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of listener experience in perception of conditioned dialect variation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Martha Austen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,403.00

Although humans often take for granted our ability to understand other people
when they talk, anyone who has ever used a voice assistant like Siri or Alexa
will be aware that understanding speech is in fact enormously difficult. One
reason for this difficulty is that different speakers have different accents, so
two speakers might pronounce the same word differently (e.g. 'car' in American
versus British English), while pronouncing different words identically (e.g.
'gloss' in American English can sound identical to a Londoner's 'glass'). While
humans are typically able to adapt to these accent differences, little is known
about how this adaptation works. A further puzzle is how humans adapt to accents
socially: listeners can improve not only in how well they understand a new
accent, but also in how well they use the subtleties of that accent to pick up
on a speaker's social characteristics. For example, many Americans cannot
distinguish between accents from the north versus south of England, or between
upper-class and working-class British accents, but upon moving to the UK can
learn to make such distinctions. Again, little is understood about how this
adaptation works. This project investigates how listeners adapt to accents over
time--both in terms of how well they can understand an accent and in their
social knowledge about that accent--and explores the relationship between these
two types of adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term adaptation to accents is
investigated by comparing how Americans in the US versus Americans living in the
UK process southern British English. The project focuses on words like 'bath',
'grass', and 'pass' which are pronounced with "short-a" (the vowel in 'cat') in
American English but with "long-ah" (the vowel in 'father') in southern British
English. It investigates: (1) how well do Americans know which words have "long-
ah" in southern British English? (2) how does this knowledge change as they gain
more experience with British English? and (3) what does this tell us about their
mental representations of British accents? Americans in the US and UK, along
with a control group of British participants, will be recruited for several
perception experiments. Crucial items will include words that are similar to
long-ah words, but pronounced with "short-a" in British English. For example,
'grass' and 'gas' rhyme in American English, so if 'grass' is pronounced with
long-ah in southern British English, one might expect 'gas' to also be
pronounced with long-ah--but, in fact, southern British speakers pronounce 'gas'
with short-a. Do Americans know that short-a is the correct British
pronunciation, or do they incorrectly generalize from 'grass' to 'gas'? If
Americans hear 'gas' with long-ah, do they think it sounds refined and British--
or do they know that it sounds like someone faking an accent? Comparing the
answers to these questions for listeners with different amounts of exposure to
British English will tell us what kinds of linguistic generalizations listeners
make as they adapt, which will provide an important step in understanding how
humans are so easily able to adapt to new accents, and may inform technological
advances in language processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.