* 1823131
* NeTS: A Geo-Distributed Global Name Service Community Infrastructure to Spur Next-Generation Internet Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Arun Venkataramani, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

This project aims to develop a next-generation Global Name Service (GNS)
infrastructure for broad community use. The GNS is analogous to the Internet's
Domain Name System (DNS) or the Internet's so-called "telephone directory" but
is significantly more powerful in its support for mobile applications and
network functions in a trustworthy manner. The GNS is an outcome of the
MobilityFirst Future Internet Architecture (FIA) project, but the research and
development thus far has focused on its use within the context of MobilityFirst,
not for the broader networking or FIA research community. Our position is that
there is value in preparing the GNS for broader community use. To this end, this
grant focuses on software development of the existing open-source GNS codebase
to make it available to the broader community as well as a strong outreach
program to FIA and other networking researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific position, namely that a logically centralized GNS is critical for or
can significantly benefit seamless mobility support in any Internetwork
architecture, has been detailed in previous research conducted as part of the
MobilityFirst FIA project. For example, XIA like MobilityFirst implicitly relies
on a GNS to translate self-certifying endpoint identifiers to self-certifying
network location identifiers. Information-centric network architectures such as
NDN can benefit from the GNS for more efficient support for mobility of a
content producer. Our position is that these and other network architectures
including the existing TCP/IP Internet can further benefit from the GNS's other
capabilities such as programmable resolution policies, contextual communication,
assisting the routing layer, etc. This broader use potential has not been
previously validated, especially not in active consultation with other
researchers in the FIA or broader networking community. This project will
undertake preliminary development and community education and feedback gathering
activities aimed at establishing the value of a GNS for the broader networking
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is
to serve national and societal interest by helping develop a next-generation
Internetwork. NSF has made a investment in the Future Internet Architecture
program and in closely interrelated research and testbed development activities
over the past decade. However, much of the work funded to date has been done in
the context of specific FIA projects, and there is little precedent of key
architectural components being seen as reusable and valuable to the broader
networking community. Validating the GNS as a reusable and valuable
architectural component is therefore opportune.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.