* 1823219
* CRI: CI-P: Planning a Sustainable Infrastructure for the Robot Operating System
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* William Smart, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Robot Operating System (ROS) is a large collection of open-source software
for robotics that has, over the past decade, allowed more rapid progress in the
field than was possible in the past. The ROS software includes all of the low-
level "plumbing" that roboticists used to write for themselves to make motors
turn, to get data from their sensors, and to implement basic competences like
moving around the world. It supports a wide array of robot hardware, and is
increasingly being used by companies across the country. ROS is written and
maintained by a large collection of volunteers from around the world and, like
any large open-source project, has some management challenges. Under this award,
we will identify these challenges, and come up with concrete solutions for them,
to ensure that ROS remains as useful over the coming decade as it was in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning award will survey the ROS community to
identify the areas of the ecosystem and management best practices that need
improvement, with the goal of writing a Community Research Infrastructure
proposal to implement these changes. We will deploy on-line surveys to the
community, and hold focused workshops at both the ROS Developers Conference and
more general robotics conferences. We will analyze the data from these surveys
and workshops, alongside more concrete data from the existing infrastructure
(wiki, Q&amp;A site, etc) to determine what the most pressing community needs
are, and then propose strategies to directly address them in a sustainable
manner that continues to engage the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.