* 1823618
* RUI: Collaborative Proposal:  Gatekeeping Communities:  The Role of Landlords in Neighborhood Change and Gentrification
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* John Balzarini, SUNY College at Brockport
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 56,904.00

During the last few decades there has been an increase in gentrification in
urban areas in the United States, as well as increasing economic inequality. In
addition, there is not enough affordable housing to meet demand. The Great
Recession exacerbated this problem, tightening an already constrained housing
market for renters. Landlords play a significant role in providing or
prohibiting access to housing as cities gentrify and rental housing markets
become more challenging. This project studies how landlords operate under these
conditions. The project addresses the following research questions: How do
landlords make sense of their role in both residential and commercial contexts?
In what ways do landlords amplify or counter neighborhood changes associated
with gentrification? How do the actions or inactions of landlords affect access
to neighborhoods for various social groups? Understanding how landlords make
sense of and react to neighborhood changes associated with gentrification, and
the impact of this on including or excluding various demographic groups, will
allow for increased understanding of the factors that shape racial and economic
residential segregation in the United States. Project findings will have
implications for housing policies in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on gentrification theorizes that landlords are
part of the gentrification process, but few studies have provided empirical
evidence to analyze these claims. The focus of most gentrification research has
been on the experiences of residents (both new and long-time residents)while
analyses of landlords in gentrifying neighborhoods have been sparse. This
project will address this gap by analyzing how both residential and commercial
landlords understand their roles in the context of neighborhood changes
associated with gentrification. The primary data for this project will come from
50 in-depth, semi-structured interviews with landlords and property managers in
four gentrifying neighborhoods in a large northeastern U.S. city. The project
will include property managers because they occupy a unique position as
intermediaries between landlords and tenants in the rental housing relationship.
In addition, in order to better understand the day-to-day activities of rental
property maintenance and upkeep, the project incorporates ethnographic fieldwork
as a means of triangulating the interview data. The ethnographic component of
the research project involves performing the duties of a maintenance technician
for a large rental real estate company. This project will contribute to
scholarship by addressing the gap in research on landlords, analyzing whether
landlords act as gatekeepers in both residential and commercial real estate
transactions, and by utilizing a strategy of participant observation with
landlords, allowing for firsthand observation of their investment, maintenance,
and rental agreement practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.