* 1823495
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neurobiological Correlates of Phonological Awareness and Reading Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Diana Andriola, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 4,838.00

The central role that reading skill plays in the young learner and their ability
to engage in the 21st century economy highlights the importance of high literacy
rates for an innovative workforce. Reading comprehension difficulties and
concomitant lack of access to printed ideas and information is a problem for a
wide range of populations of children with poor reading skills (e.g. poor urban
and rural children, children with dyslexia, and deaf children.) Research
discoveries in each of these populations have advanced our understanding of the
diversity of reading development and supported the development of optimal
instructional strategies for various types of young readers. Deaf children's
reading abilities vary, but on average have remained far behind those of their
hearing peers despite advancements in hearing technologies (e.g., hearing aids
and cochlear implants) and decades of various approaches to providing visible
access to spoken language (e.g., speechreading, Cued Speech, Signed Exact
English). By examining successful deaf readers, researchers have repeatedly
found examined strong correlations between sign language proficiency and reading
outcomes. Unfortunately, it has remained unclear exactly what aspects of sign
language proficiency contribute to reading outcomes in deaf children. One
important predictor of reading abilities in hearing children is phonological
awareness (PA), the ability to identify and manipulate the phonological
structure of words, and recent behavioral research has found that PA for signed
languages is related to deaf children's reading, but whether signed and spoken
language PA are the product of a common cognitive mechanism remains
unclear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the brain basis of
PA for American Sign Language (ASL) and English and address two hypotheses of
phonological awareness and reading development in deaf children. The spoken
language phonology dependent hypothesis holds that spoken language phonology is
essential for reading, and that phonological processing in deaf children is
delayed rather than abnormal. Abstract phonological representations are
assembled from the accessible auditory signal and visual articulatory cues
(i.e., mouth movements) that can be strengthened over time. Though delayed, the
phonological representations are the basis for phonological awareness and
reading in deaf children. According to the modality independent hypothesis,
abstract phonological representations are not tied to speech, but are amodal.
When children have early, natural exposure to language, regardless of modality,
they develop strong phonological representations which give rise to PA skills
for segmenting and manipulating phonological information that can be applied to
learning to read. To test these hypotheses, we will recruit deaf children who
use ASL and hearing monolingual English speakers enrolled in grades K - 6. All
children will be administered standardized reading comprehension and nonverbal
IQ assessments. While undergoing functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS)
neuroimaging, we will assess the brain bases of ASL and English PA using a non-
orthographic, non-linguistic picture-matching paradigm. Analyses will
investigate the relationships between brain regions activated for PA in both
modalities and reading comprehension. Findings from this study promise to
advance our knowledge of the neurobiology of language and to contribute to
educational approaches in literacy instruction with deaf
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.