* 1823645
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  An Ethnographic Study of National Security Policies at the Local Level
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jacqueline Urla, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 24,423.00

One responsibility of any government is to provide for domestic security. A
significant challenge in doing so effectively is that new policies and
supporting technologies often turn out to have differential effects at different
social structural levels particularly in very heterogenous populations. Some of
these effects are unintended and may produce unanticipated local responses. The
research supported by this award will use a case study approach and the
intensive methodologies of anthropology to examine closely how and why this
happens. The research will help illuminate the inner complex structures of
contemporary society, which will contribute to improved social scientific
understanding. Findings from the research also will help policy makers bridge
the gap between the goals of security reforms and local-level consequences and
experiences.

The research will be carried out by University of Massachusetts anthropology
doctoral student, Ana Del Conde, under the supervision of Dr. Jacqueline Urla.
The researcher will undertake 12 months of research in Mexico where the Merida
Initiative, a security reform implemented in 2006 to combat organized crime and
drug trafficking, provides an appropriate research opportunity because it has
been in place long enough to trace out its local effects. In order to produce a
richer and more complete in-depth understanding, the researcher has narrowed her
focus to a particular sub-population, indigenous women in the state of
Michoacan. Using a mixed-methods approach, she will collect data on how the
Initiative is being locally experienced, and how it interacts with other
strategies that people have developed locally to protect themselves. The
research has a cross-sectional design. Data will be collected in three
communities through informal and semi-structured interviews, participant
observation, free-listing workshops, and photovoice workshops to produce
qualitative and quantitative data, field notes, interview transcripts, and
visual narratives. Research results will be shared with multiple stakeholders
including research participants, local government officials, and community
members who seek to improve the effectiveness of security reforms. Results also
will contribute to the growing body of social scientific theoretical work on
conflict and security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.