* 1824360
* SpecEES: Tag-of-Everything: Secured Wireless Powering and Communication Using THz Spectrum for Ultra-Small, Package-Less ID Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ruonan Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 648,000.00

Tagging using radio-frequency identification (RFID) is getting increasing
adoption throughout the supply chains of commercial products. The megahertz
(MHz) and gigahertz (GHz) bands currently used for RFID will soon become
congested, especially considering the interference from simultaneous
interrogations of many co-located RFID devices and the limited bandwidth
allocated for RFID. In addition, limited by their off-chip components for
wireless powering and data transmission, current RFID devices have relatively
high packaging cost and large form factor. The low available power also prevents
the usage of high-security algorithms and hardware on the RFID devices. All
these problems have hindered the effectiveness and application of the technology
in areas like authentications of medicines, semiconductor chips, banknotes, etc.
This project will apply low-terahertz (~0.3 THz in this project) wireless
powering and back-scattering circuit techniques to explore a new electromagnetic
spectrum for future RFID tagging. The 1000 times larger bandwidth and the
highly-collimated downlink and uplink beams will accommodate orders of magnitude
more tags than what we have today. The new THz RFID device realized on a
semiconductor chip will also have a package-less ultra-small form, leading to
dramatic cost reduction and wide range of applications. The proposal will also
develop energy-efficient authentication hardware and algorithms for the proposed
THz RFID chip to secure the storage and transmission of sensitive data related
to, for example, financial and biometric information. The proposed research will
be tightly integrated with a few outreach activities, including a SuperUROP
undergraduate research program, a "Tagging the World" lecture series, an
internship through MIT Summer Research Program (MSRP), a career workshop at MIT
Rising Star, and a few "T-Ray Lab Day" events for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize custom-designed, ultra-
high-speed Schottky-barrier diodes to perform practical THz power rectification,
with an expected THz-to-DC conversion efficiency of up to 50%. A novel antenna
array, which is co-designed with the diode and adopts a multi-functional
electromagnetics methodology, will also be developed to simultaneously perform
large-aperture wireless powering and back-scattering-based data communication.
In addition, low-energy authentication protocols and hardware will be applied to
the system. In particular, the RFID chip will be equipped with a side-channel
resistant elliptic curve processor, which uses dynamic voltage-frequency scaling
(DVFS) to reduce its DC power to microwatt level. Novel CMOS-compatible memory
for secret-key storage, as well as beam-steering of the RFID tag output wave for
anti-eavesdropping, will also be implemented in the chip. The package-less and
battery-less RFID chip is expected to have a volume smaller than one tenth of a
cubic millimeter. Lastly, using high-speed indium phosphide (InP) heterojunction
bipolar transistors (HBTs), the project will innovate a THz interrogator
transceiver to pair with the RFID chips. With a scalable array architecture and
high-versatility transceiver front-end circuit units, the interrogator will be
able to radiate more than 100 mW of power with highly focused beam. The proposed
approach will advance the utilization efficiency and diversity of
electromagnetic spectrum, as well as the end-to-end solutions for secured
wireless data authentication. The project will also generate new design
methodologies for both high-frequency and high-security integrated circuits,
especially under power-constrained conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.