* 1824145
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Plain, Emphatic, and Pharyngeal Consonants in Palestinian Arabic
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Laura Faircloth, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,120.00

Languages rely on acoustic differences (contrasts) between similar sounds to
distinguish words with different meanings, such as between /p/ and /b/ in 'pen'
and 'Ben'. Arabic contrasts three types of sounds: plain dental, emphatic, and
pharyngeal consonants. For dentals, the tongue tip touches the upper teeth,
while pharyngeals have a constriction in the throat. Emphatic consonants combine
the dental and pharyngeal constrictions and sound similar to plain dentals to
those who do not speak Arabic. Speakers must recognize the differences between
these consonants to distinguish words with important meaning differences (such
as between the Arabic words for 'member' and 'enemy'). The acoustic
characteristics of these consonants are not well understood. This research tests
the hypothesis that listeners identify these consonants through their effects on
adjacent and non-adjacent vowels within the same word. This project will explore
how speakers produce and identify plain, emphatic, and pharyngeal consonants in
Palestinian Arabic. The outcomes of this project can improve language
recognition programs, develop teaching materials for learners of Arabic, and
inform our understanding of human language processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected through production and perception
experiments. For the production experiments, native speakers will record words
containing plain dental, emphatic, or pharyngeal consonants. The investigator
will measure acoustic characteristics of these consonants and of adjacent and
non-adjacent vowels to explore how these consonant classes differ, how they
affect adjacent vowels, if they affect different vowels, and whether their
effects extend to the whole word or only the adjacent vowel. The findings of the
production experiments will be used to conduct a perception experiment that
tests how speakers use these acoustic cues to distinguish the different classes
of consonants. The combination of experiments will identify which effects are
crucial to distinguish these classes, and the comparison to pharyngeals may
provide clues about the articulation of emphatic consonants. This project will
further the field of linguistics by expanding our understanding of phonological
and phonetic processes to account for non-local phonological processes in
Arabic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.