* 1824565
* Energy Efficient Millimeter Wave Massive MIMO Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 659,356.00

Low-Power High-Performance Wireless Devices for Massive
Connectivity&lt;br/&gt;A. Lee Swindlehurst and Michael Green University of
California Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The so-called "Internet of
Things'' (IoT) refers to the inter-networking of all types of physical devices
in order to allow them to collect data and communicate with one another, or with
an access point that allows them to exchange data with the internet and hence
the entire world. There is a plethora of applications where such devices could
be useful, including medicine, transportation, civil infrastructure,
environmental monitoring, as well as personal communications. The ability of
these devices to sense their environment and communicate with each other and the
internet will lead to a revolution that will improve our health, our environment
and our overall quality of life. In order for the IoT revolution to become a
reality, significant advances are needed to reduce the cost of these devices (so
that they can be deployed ubiquitously) as well as their energy consumption (so
that they can operate for long periods of time without replacement). Advances in
digital hardware over the past decades has resulted in circuit miniaturization
that has in turn allowed for complicated microprocessors with billions of
transistors to occupy a space no bigger than the head of a pin. Advances in
nanofabrication have allowed for the creation of tiny sensors and actuators that
require only very small amounts of energy or minimal access to their environment
in order to operate. However, the physical constraints associated with analog
electronic conversion, amplification and communication have been slower to be
overcome. The goal of this project is to help remedy this gap, and develop
simple, low-power, low-complexity radio-frequency devices that can be used in
conjunction with sophisticated software to enable the IoT vision to become a
reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New techniques and hardware implementations are
needed that reduce the size, cost and power consumption of transceivers that
will enable ubiquitous deployment of IoT devices as well as energy efficient
gigabit-per-second wireless networks. Motivated by this vision, our project
focuses on several new research initiatives that will push wireless systems in
this direction: (1) A new concept for massive MIMO RF hardware based on
reconfigurable one-bit direct detection (DDA) antennas that potentially require
neither mixers nor local oscillator generation and distribution, and enable
simpler antenna feeding, high energy efficiency, lower cost and ultrafast
signaling; (2) New integrated circuit implementations based on inductor tuning
to validate the DDA concept and illustrate how mixer-less demodulation via
wireless LO distribution can be used to dramatically simplify the RF front end
for millimeter-wave frequency bands; (3) Uplink/downlink channel capacity
results with one-bit ADCs/DACs that do not rely on the assumption of white
quantization noise, based on a new derivation in the angular frequency domain.
These results will be better suited for millimeter-wave channels that tend to be
sparse and frequency-selective. (4) New types of finite field downlink precoders
with one-bit DACs that do not require the standard arithmetic operations of
multiplication and addition (and hence considerably simplify the necessary
digital computations), and yet still substantially outperform conventional
methods and can be combined with channel coding techniques; (5) More realistic
models for low-resolution ADC and DAC hardware that account for out-of-band
emissions and intermodulation products in the data, in order to determine under
what conditions they can be ignored and how they can be mitigated otherwise. The
anticipated research addresses critical challenges for next-generation wireless
systems and is also of high relevance for the success of low-power IoT
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.