* 1824199
* NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Crust and mantle structure and the expression of extension in the Turkana Depression of Kenya and Ethiopia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Rebecca Bendick, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2022
* USD 355,095.00

The basic idea of plate tectonics is built on a simplified view that the
lithosphere (the outermost layer of the solid earth) is broken into rigid pieces
that drift around relative to each other without deforming internally, like
puzzle pieces that are moved around to make a picture but don't themselves
change shape or size. This works well to capture the motions of pieces once
their boundaries are well-developed, but doesn't explain how the pieces are made
in the first place, such as how the African piece breaks into several parts
along the East African Rift System. This experiment is focused on quantifying
the role of three different factors in influencing plate break-up: preexisting
structures in the lithosphere; present topography; and the convecting mantle
beneath. The Turkana Depression of northern Kenya and southern Ethiopia is an
ideal place to investigate these issues: it is probably the location where
anomalous mantle first interacted with the African lithosphere to produce magma,
it has considerable inherited structure, and it has very little topography
compared to adjacent parts of the rift. The scientific and broader impacts of
this project are significant. An international team supported by the U.S.
National Science Foundation and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
and including scientists from the US, UK, Kenya, and Ethiopia will undertake
both field observations and scientific computing. The work will support graduate
and undergraduate students at the two collaborating US institutions. Knowing how
new plate boundaries form in space and time allows us to better understand the
tectonic evolution of the planet over its long history, to identify past,
current, and future plate boundaries, and to understand the natural hazards
associated with tectonic boundaries, such as earthquakes and
volcanos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear interactions among mechanical
competence, gravitational potential, mantle dynamics, and magmatism determine
how continental plate boundaries evolve over time. The East African Rift System
(EARS), is an ideal natural laboratory for rifting processes. For example,
because the far-field boundary conditions on the whole EARS are the same,
systematic comparisons of strain accommodation in melt-rich and melt-poor
sectors have illuminated the role of heating and composition. Comparing sectors
with and without large lateral material heterogeneities has revealed the role of
pre-existing lithospheric architecture; comparing sectors with different total
finite strain can be used as proxies for evolution. What remains to be
considered, however, is the role of gravitational potential energy (GPE) through
a comparison of a rift sector in high topography to one in low topography.
Although the seismically and volcanically active Turkana Depression appears to
represent the end member conditions of very low topography, very high material
heterogeneity, and elevated mantle geotherms, it has yet to be investigated in
detail with modern geophysical methods. This project involves a multi-method
geophysical investigation of the Turkana Depression, combining seismic and
geodetic data collection for seismic imaging, earthquake source mechanisms,
surface kinematics, crustal strain rates, and structural architecture.
Systematic comparisons of the data products to one another, combined with
inverse models of geodetic, structural, and earthquake data and limited forward
numerical simulations of rift topography and strain patterns will test basic
hypotheses about the role of GPE and crustal architecture in continental
rifting. Doing so will help to resolve the longer-term rift evolution,
especially the role of one or two mantle plumes, inherited continental structure
from Mesozoic rifting, and topographic feedbacks in contributing to and shaping
continental breakup. Such constraints on the dynamics of rifting will, in turn,
enable a better understanding of the exchange of mass and heat between the
lithosphere and mantle, long timescale continental tectonic plate and boundary
behavior, and the spatial and temporal distribution of hazards and resources
associated with magmatic rifting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.