* 1824662
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: The Future of Embodied Design for Mathematical Imagination and Cognition
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Mitchell Nathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,995.00

The next generation of digital learning environments for science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) content will be more interactive, more
personalized yet more collaborative; provide developers and teachers with rich,
real time data from users to track engagement and support formative assessment;
and target both conscious and unconscious learning processes. Embodied cognition
research provides promising findings that show how body movement contributes to
STEM education by allowing learners to physically engage with ideas, and by
describing how teachers naturally use their bodies in ways such as gestures to
enhance their instructional effectiveness. Mathematics education, in particular,
can benefit from such innovation in embodied cognition because it serves as the
connective representational "language" across the STEM fields. Technologies
exist now that can track people's movement in real time and provide feedback.
Yet there is no current consensus on the best ways to design educational
technology for supporting embodied cognition for mathematics education. The
timing for motion capture technology, theories of embodied cognition, and
interest among teachers for movement based educational innovations is ideal for
bringing scholars and classroom practitioners together for a workshop on
embodied design for mathematics education. During a 3-day workshop at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison in the spring of 2019, teachers and research
scholars will gather to discuss ways in which new computer technologies support
embodied approaches for improved math education. The workshop participants
examine learning in and out of school, but with a focus on the design of systems
for promoting embodied ways of learning and teaching in classroom
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embodied design for mathematics education, a
research-oriented pedagogical design framework rooted in theories of embodiment
and design-based research as practiced within the learning sciences, supports
the improvement of instructional methodology for students' mathematical
proficiency in the classroom. Currently there is a convergence of theoretical,
technological, and methodological developments in formation that make this a
particularly promising time to support advancements in embodied design for
mathematics education. The workshop will bring research scholars and classroom
teachers together in order to achieve four central objectives: (1) synthesize
current research into a coherent theory of embodied mathematical imagination and
cognition, (2) identify the most promising opportunities for conceptual and
methodological integration, (3) curate a set of evidence-based design principles
for enhancing mathematics education and broadening participation in all STEM
fields, and (4) articulate a future research agenda in the growing area of
embodied cognition. This workshop will assemble an interdisciplinary set of
scholars from education research, cognitive science, the learning sciences,
developmental psychology, movement science, linguistics, computer science, and
mathematics. Presentations and discussions will span grades K through 16 on
topics in arithmetic and algebra, proportional reasoning and fractions,
geometry, complex numbers, statistics, and calculus. The workshop will bring
together an intellectually and ethnically diverse group of scholars to
synthesize the evidence for embodied design as a means to enhance mathematical
reasoning and thereby promote STEM education and participation. The workshop
organization will promote interdisciplinary research and theory building in the
learning sciences and identify current challenges and future research efforts.
The approach is tightly connected to the societal need to foster an educated and
technically competent workforce. A particular emphasis on mathematics is
intended to broaden participation in math and STEM by creating new entry points
for historically underserved ethnic, racial, economic, and gender
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.