* 1824647
* Investigating the Life Cycle Performance of Bio-cementation Soil Improvement: Synthesis, Degradation, and Repair
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Gomez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 441,000.00

Geotechnical ground improvement technologies have traditionally relied upon the
use of high mechanical energy and energy-intensive materials to improve soil
engineering properties. Recently, the emerging field of bio-mediated soil
improvement has shown the transformative potential of natural chemical and
biological processes to improve weak, problematic soils with reductions in
detrimental environmental and societal impacts. Microbially Induced Calcite
Precipitation (MICP), or bio-cementation, is one such technology that uses the
biologically-mediated precipitation of calcium carbonate to improve soil
engineering properties. Despite significant advances, limited understanding of
the factors that control bio-cementation material properties, the processes by
which bio-cemented soils may degrade over time, and the methods by which damaged
bio-cemented soils can be detected and repaired, has restricted our ability to
evaluate the long-term resilience of MICP, quantify process environmental
impacts, and understand the implications of treatment and site conditions on
material engineering performance. This project will address critical gaps
remaining in our understanding of the life cycle performance of bio-cementation
soil improvement related to material synthesis, degradation, and repair through
integrated geochemical and geotechnical experiments and numerical modeling. This
research will improve the resiliency of dependent civil infrastructure systems
and mitigate potential economic, life, and property losses resulting from
failure of bio-cemented and similar cemented/aged geomaterials. Decreased
uncertainty in material long-term performance is expected to increase adoption
of bio-mediated ground improvement alternatives in engineering practice thereby
reducing material and energy consumption, detrimental environmental impacts, and
improving public health. Increased participation of under-represented minority
(URM) and women students in research activities will develop a diverse cohort of
students with multidisciplinary expertise, therefore enabling continued
development of the biogeotechnics field in academia and engineering practice.
Outreach activities will focus on engaging middle and high school students
through hands-on demonstrations and exhibits at events including the University
of Washington Engineering Discovery Days and partnerships with local K-12
schools and the Pacific Science Center. Over 500 K-12 students will be exposed
annually to STEM concepts from engineering, geology, material science,
chemistry, and microbiology to inspire a new generation of multidisciplinary
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will leverage batch and
1D-transport geochemical experiments, triaxial and soil column geotechnical
laboratory tests, reactive transport numerical modeling, and advanced chemical,
biological, and material analyses to: (1) investigate the effect of
biogeochemical conditions during mineral synthesis on the properties of bio-
cementation controlling long-term chemical and mechanical resilience, (2) assess
the chemical permanence of bio-cementation including mineral solubility and
dissolution kinetics, (3) examine the effects of chemically and mechanically-
induced damage on the performance of bio-cemented soils including evolution of
engineering properties, damage patterns, and degradation monitoring methods, and
(4) develop techniques which can protect and heal damaged bio-cemented soils
while minimizing energy and material usage. To achieve these research
objectives, three integrated research tasks will be completed. First, a series
of batch reactor experiments will be performed to understand relationships
between biogeochemical reaction conditions during precipitation, bio-cementation
formation, and precipitate material properties. Second, a series of geochemical
and geotechnical laboratory experiments will be completed to characterize the
solubility and dissolution behavior of bio-cementation as a function of
precipitate properties and subsurface environmental conditions. Obtained results
will inform the development of a dissolution kinetic framework specific to bio-
cementation for prediction of material in-situ permanence. Lastly, geotechnical
and geophysical investigations will be performed to identify non-destructive
approaches for detection of cementation degradation, develop novel repair
techniques, and explore the effect of bio-cementation degradation and repair on
the engineering behavior of bio-cemented soils including changes in material
stress-dilatancy, modulus degradation, elastic and post-yielding response,
critical-state and peak shear strength, and pore pressure and strain
accumulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.