* 1824614
* CAREER: Self-assembling Nanofibers as Next Generation Antimicrobial Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* He Dong, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 456,982.00

Non-technical section:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full range of antibiotic-
resistant microbes found in hospitals and the broader environment represent a
"clear and present danger" to the general public, first responders, and military
personnel. Effective response to this public health challenge necessitates
adoption of an "outside-the-box" strategy for the de novo design of novel
classes of microbicides. The goal of this NSF Career award is to develop a novel
self-assembling antimicrobial nanofiber (SAAN) platform for safer and more
effective therapeutic administration of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) compared
to conventional treatment options. Systematic engineering of SAANs has minimized
host cell cytotoxicity, improved their protease-resistance and their
antimicrobial activity against broad-spectrum bacteria. The success of the
proposed work will open new avenues for AMP-based antimicrobial therapy to treat
a variety of infectious diseases found in both civilian hospitals and military
facilities. The fundamental knowledge developed from the proposed research
activities will provide a powerful new glossary of fundamental design principles
for the synthesis and deployment of AMPs. It will have a transformative impact
on the multi-billion-dollar research focused on conventional antibiotics and
AMPs by re-engineering and "re-formatting" thousands of available AMPs in the
peptide databank to form SAANs, thereby greatly boosting their therapeutic
potential. The multidisciplinary research involving chemistry, microbiology,
engineering, nanoscience, and pharmaceutical sciences provides ample
opportunities to train and educate students at all levels. The fundamental
biomaterials design, supramolecular chemistry and antimicrobial delivery
principle will be integrated into various research and educational activities,
particularly through summer research opportunities provided to high school
students to promote their scientific research interests and enhance their career
awareness. Educational partnership with local high school will be established to
provide summer research internship to high school teachers to incorporate the
fundamental knowledge of the proposed research into various high school
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
section:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) has
brought tremendous opportunities to overcome the prevalence of bacterial
resistance to commonly used antibiotics due to their direct action against
bacterial membrane. However, despite AMPs' exceptional bactericidal activity in
vitro, their susceptibility to proteases, limited circulation half-lives and
severe host cell toxicity represent critical hurdles to their widespread use.
This CAREER award supported by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Clarkson University focuses on a new paradigm of Self-
Assembled Antimicrobial Nanofibers (SAANs) as a vehicle-free AMP delivery system
to alleviate the drawback associated with conventional AMPs. In SAANs, AMPs
serve as both therapeutics and key structural components to program and direct
the assembly through highly specific intermolecular interactions. Through the
proposed work, we will build a toolbox of cationic de novo designed peptides
with expanded chemical functionality by which to construct various SAANs
families, and explore the effect of new functional groups on the molecular and
supramolecular packing of SAANs, antimicrobial activity and hemocompatibility.
Fundamental knowledge about the structure-activity relationship is essential for
the design of new antimicrobial nanomaterials with precise control over
molecular structure, nanostructure, stimuli-responsive antimicrobial activity
and exquisite biocompatibility. The impact of this proposal lies in that SAANs
could potentially be established as a new and unique AMP delivery platform with
well-defined filamentous structure and the ease of incorporating multi-
therapeutics for combinatorial antimicrobial and chemotherapy to treat various
human diseases. The proposed project will integrate supramolecular chemistry,
biomaterials design and antimicrobial delivery principles and techniques with
various education and outreach activities for students at all levels.