* 1824343
* RCN: Planning for a Modeling Collaboratory for Subduction Zone Science
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Thorsten Becker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Subduction zones are fundamental expressions of the evolution of our planet.
Subduction zones also host cascading natural hazards, from volcanoes, to
earthquakes, to landslides and tsunamis, often in regions with high population
density. Any dynamic understanding of our planet therefore has to include a
comprehensive theoretical framework for subduction zone dynamics, and such a
framework should have utility for monitoring and for physics-based forecasting
to meet our fundamental responsibility to society. Several recent community
efforts have focused on subduction zone science, including volcanic and
megathrust processes within that geologic setting. This Research Coordination
Network (RCN) will provide a mechanism for collaboration and interaction of
scientists to organize modeling efforts to understand subduction zones. In
particular, this RCN will serve to identify knowledge gaps and serve to evaluate
the tools and strategies needed by the scientific community to leverage the rich
data sets from international subduction zone observatories and tp create a new
generation of multiphysics and multiscale models. This RCN will strengthen
international collaboration, including researchers from Chile, Costa Rica,
Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom. The RCN will contribute to the training of a diverse workforce, and
outreach efforts will publicize the relevance of subduction zone science to the
larger public. The RCN will engage a diverse community of researchers, including
early career researchers and those from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Research Coordination Network focuses on
a modeling collaboratory for subduction zone science and explores developing
physical models for short- to long-term deformation associated with megathrust
and arc volcano systems. Physical understanding of earthquake cycles and
volcanoes within a plate boundary remains incomplete, even though numerical
models have seen tremendous improvements. This implies that more
observations,laboratory data and better understanding of the underlying physical
processes need to be integrated in better ways to explore interactions between
different parts of the subduction system that affect the temporal evolution of
tectonics and hazards. The scientific community is poised to unify existing data
collection efforts, design new observational and infrastructural initiatives,
and harness diverse international efforts with new integrative approaches. This
RCN has several goals: 1) helping to identify knowledge gaps; 2) developing
multiscale, multiphysics modeling frameworks; 3)providing a pathway for
integrative model development and validation; and, 4) providing tools for
transforming geological, rock mechanics, geophysical and geodetic data into
formats that can be effectively assimilated into models and used for model
validation. This effort would facilitate the development and enhancement of
models, ranging from conceptual to numerical simulators, aimed at subduction
zone megathrust cycles and associated tectonic processes including magma
transport and volcanic eruptions. The work will progress through a series of
workshops and community interactions to ensure a broad representation of the
researchers and scientific fields involved in subduction
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.