* 1824014
* EAGER: Control Theory for Real-time Privacy-preserving Consensus Control of Engineering Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Yongqiang Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2019
* USD 111,568.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project considers how
well-understood control architectures can be modified to produce novel consensus
control strategies in the context of privacy protection for engineering
networks. Communication and computing capabilities are increasingly being
integrated into even the most commonplace items, forming an interconnected
network of devices capable of independent and cooperative action. These
connected objects can coordinate their actions to improve the efficiency and
performance of systems such as smart power grids and automated traffic control
systems. However, the widespread sharing of data also risks divulging private
information. For example, the exchange of very detailed consumer usage profiles
between network operators and dispatch units enables optimized power forecast,
generation, and distribution in a smart grid, but also allows others to infer
knowledge about the presence, absence, or even the specific activities of a
home's occupants. Classical encryption is too slow to be deployed in time-
critical engineering applications such as self-driving cars, where carefully
tuned controllers generate tens or hundreds of commands per second. The insight
developed in this project is that exchanged information, and even control
commands, can be obscured by the innovative application of existing control
architectures. This project will demonstrate the feasibility of this approach
and outline its major features. The results of this project will advance
national prosperity by offering the economic advantages of communication and
coordination, without violating confidentiality. The research results will be
integrated into the graduate curriculum, and into undergraduate research
projects supervised by the Principal Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore the stabilization of decentralized coordination algorithms
under random time-varying coupling weights which will be used for obscuring
information. With recent advances in wireless communications and networking,
decentralized coordination algorithms have become widespread in networked
robots, sensor networks, and intelligent transportation systems. Although their
inherent flexibility and scalability make decentralized coordination algorithms
appealing for large-scale systems, they also pose significant challenges to
privacy protection design. This is because conventional privacy-preserving
mechanisms rely on the assistance of a central data aggregator or a trusted
third party -- mechanisms that are ruled out in a decentralized implementation.
This project builds upon recent results by the Investigator, specifically a
privacy-preserving mechanism which obscures information through uncertain time-
varying controls. The approach does not need the assistance of any third party
and is superior to existing approaches in terms of flexibility, scalability,
accuracy, and computation overhead. However, this privacy-preserving approach
leads to random time-varying coupling weights, whose influence on decentralized
coordination is unclear. This project will address this problem through rigorous
analysis of the convergence conditions and speed of decentralized coordination
under random time-varying coupling weights. The main thrusts of the project are
first to characterize the condition under which nonlinear consensus can be
achieved when coupling weights are time-varying and randomly chosen from a
certain interval, next to analyze the convergence speed of decentralized
coordination under random time-varying coupling weights, and finally to
systematically verify obtained results using a multi-robot test
bed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.