* 1824961
* CNH-L:   Coupled Dynamics of Tourism and Mosquito-Borne Disease Transmission in the Americas
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Shaowen Wang, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,576,688.00

Focusing on the Americas, this research project will examine the relationships
among the spread of mosquito-transmitted diseases, perceptions of disease risk,
and human travel. The movement of infected humans has the potential to spark
global epidemics of poorly-known mosquito-borne diseases, similar to those that
occurred in the Americas following the first detection of chikungunya and Zika
viruses in 2013 and 2015, respectively. The researchers will investigate the
contribution of human movement patterns to mosquito-human interactions and to
the spread of mosquito-borne viruses across regions (from local to continental
distances). The project will seek to understand how infectious disease outbreaks
influence the decisions of individuals to travel as well as marketing strategies
of tourism businesses. The team will also look at how changes in human mobility
in response to outbreaks and marketing might alter outbreak paths. The project
will benefit society by offering interdisciplinary education and training
opportunities in disease ecology, mathematics, and geographic information
science for undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers in
the U.S. Participatory workshops with public health and tourism stakeholders
will seek to develop management strategies and actions to address mosquito-borne
disease threats. The data sets developed as part of the project will be made
available through public repositories accompanied by online and face-to-face
educational workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use epidemiological
modeling and data science techniques to model human movements and their impact
on outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases (i.e., chikungunya and Zika viruses),
from hemispheric to local spatial scales using a rich stream of information
sources (e.g., mobile phone and social media data). In particular, the
researchers will evaluate the significance of the most traveled routes of real
human mobility networks (i.e., the network backbone) as potential dispersal
pathways for mosquito-borne viruses, and assess the ability of theoretical
indicators of vital network nodes (e.g., most connected cities and countries) to
predict the occurrence of super-spreading hubs of high transmission during the
recent outbreaks of Zika and chikungunya. This research will incorporate human
mobility as a parameter in predictive models for mosquito-borne disease risk.
The results will be integrated with a social science mixed methods research
approach to represent how outbreaks of infectious disease, together with
associated travel warnings and changes in tourism marketing, influence
individual travelers' movement choices and how these choices scale up to alter
the trajectory of epidemics. The consideration of mosquito-borne disease
emergence and international and domestic tourism as a coupled natural-human
system will allow the researchers to assess the efficacy of different
intervention strategies to inhibit transmission, the impacts of knowledge of
mosquito control efforts on the health risk perceptions of travelers and tourism
companies, and the potential for altered travel patterns in response to disease
risk perceptions to influence the spatio-temporal trajectory of an
epidemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.