* 1824818
* I-Corps:  A Smartphone-Based Pathogen Detection Device for Remote and Low-Resource Settings
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Tamara Kinzer-Ursem, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable a
consumer device for the detection of infectious pathogens at the point-of-need
instead of in a central laboratory environment. The project will enhance current
approaches to disease detection and monitoring in remote and low-resource
settings by rapid and sensitive detection of infectious agents and automated
data-logging. The commercial impact of the detection system leverages current
smartphone capability in concert with advances in imaging, microfluidics, and
enhanced computation to deliver detection of multiple important human pathogens
all within a portable format. Further, widespread user experience with
smartphone technologies mitigates the need for additional training steps and
lowers barriers to adoption. This project will support extensive customer
discovery with field workers, healthcare community workers, clinicians, nurses,
and procurement officials within governmental and aid organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project integrates the smartphone with
external hardware and disposable microfluidic chips to enable a portable
pathogen detection platform. The intellectual merit of the project stems from
the implementation of newly developed particle diffusometry technology, an
optical-based method that quantifies the Brownian motion of particles within a
fluid. Combining particle diffusometry with nucleic acid-based DNA amplification
methods that are standard for point-of-care device industry allows for order of
magnitude increases in the sensitivity of pathogen detection. In the presence of
pathogens, DNA amplification occurs and causes a decrease in the motion of
particles in the sample solution that is imaged by the smartphone
camera/external hardware microscope lens system. A smartphone application
performs all of the quantitative computation, providing both detection results
and immediately logging the data. Data can be readily pushed to the cloud where
organizations can track detection events in real-time. Therefore, this I-Corps
project will explore the market potential for smartphone-based pathogen
detection in remote and low-resource settings and for applications where disease
surveillance and monitoring is of great utility. To this end, this project will
provide fast and affordable infectious pathogen detection solutions while aiding
in effective healthcare resource distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.