* 1824469
* Gender Differences in Negotiation and Job Search: Evidence from Business Majors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Jessica Pan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2020
* USD 374,999.00

This research project uses sophisticated research methods to explore how gender
differences in three specific behavioral traits ? willingness to negotiate,
confidence, and risk aversion ? affect job search behavior and, therefore
earnings in the marketplace for talented individuals. Despite considerable
advances by women in education and the labor market, gender gaps in earnings,
particularly among the highly-skilled, continue to persist. This project focuses
on less traditional explanations, such as the role of systematic differences in
preferences and beliefs between men and women in the job search process in
explaining the observed gender wage gaps. The proposed research will be based on
a survey of recent business school graduates of Boston University. This is the
first study that uses this unique approach to explain the gender wage gap at the
beginning of careers. The insights from this research can help individuals make
informed decisions in the job search process and enable policymakers to design
more effective policy interventions to tackle gender disparities in the labor
market. The findings also have implications for how to improve the job search
process, such as design of effective recruiting policies and informational
interventions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, consisting of two projects,
investigates the effects of willingness to negotiate, overconfidence, and risk
aversion on the observed gender wage gap. It is based on a large-scale survey of
negotiation and job behavior that the researchers conducted among recent
undergraduate alumni from Boston University?s Questrom school of Business. The
first project is motivated by the empirical observation that women are less
likely to negotiate in a variety of settings. The PIs will use a randomized
field experiment to assess whether providing information about gender
differences in negotiation rates and the efficacy of negotiation is effective in
closing the gender gap in negotiation and starting pay among current Questrom
business graduates. The PIs will also collect experimentally measured traits to
reveal channels through which information impacts graduates. The second project
utilizes information on job offers and acceptances from the alumni survey to
study the interactions among risk preferences, overconfidence, and job search
behavior, and the resulting impact on the gender earnings gap. Because job
search is a dynamic process that involves uncertainty, gender differences in
preferences and beliefs are likely to lead to gender differences in job search
behavior and starting salaries. This project will establish basic facts about
gender differences in the job search process, and explore how these relate to
gender differences in risk preferences and overconfidence. The PIs will also
conduct sequential job search experiments in the laboratory to understand how
gender gaps in labor market outcomes evolve under different
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.