* 1824421
* Collaborative Research: Long-Term Effects of Unconditional Cash Transfers to the Poor
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Paul Niehaus, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2022
* USD 99,999.00

Governments engage in short-term income and wealth transfers to individuals and
households to alleviate poverty. The viability of this approach depends on the
long-term effects of such transfers. However, little is known about the long-
term effects of such short terms income transfers on several outcomes including
education, work and income, asset accumulation, and health; and what form an
effective short-term transfer might take. This proposed research will use field
experiments to study the long-term effects of a one-time unconditional cash
transfers to low income families on several outcomes, including health, income
and wealth. This research will answer two questions: what are the long-term
effects of one-time income transfers on recipients? Do the effects depend on
whether the transfer is unconditional or conditioned on the recipients behaving
in certain ways? The researchers will compare outcomes of families that received
unconditional transfers to those of households that did not receive transfers as
well as those who received the same amount of transfers but with conditions
attached. The results of this research project will help improve the US
government's transfer program and in the process, reduce poverty. The research
results will also be used as inputs into formulating and implementing US aid
policies. Finally, the results of this research will establish the US as the
global leader on reducing poverty through one-time income transfers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Governments around the world engage in
redistribution of wealth and income in response to economic fluctuations and
poverty. The long-term effects of such policies on economic, social, and
political behavior is therefore of policy importance. This project will provide
a first-of-its-kind analysis of the long-term effects of a large-scale infusion
of wealth on outcomes on recipients. The project builds on a large-scale
experiment conducted by an NGO, GiveDirectly (GD), which makes unconditional
transfers to poor households. Starting in 2014, GD randomized among a sample of
653 villages to receive these transfers and "treated" 11,000 households to
receive $1,000.00 each in the selected villages. An initial end line survey was
conducted in 2016-2017, with the median survey conducted 10 months after
transfers were delivered. This research will collect and analyze data in a
second end line conducted about 3 years after the transfers were delivered. The
measurement encompasses a wide range of outcomes including asset holdings;
consumption; income; business revenue; subjective well-being; health status;
education; female empowerment; food security; and labor supply. The results of
this research project will help answer whether one-time cash transfers have
significant effects on recipients and whether such effects depend on the
transfers being unconditional or conditional. The results will also establish
the US as the global leader in poverty alleviation through short-term income
transfer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.