* 1824547
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impacts of Special Education Access on Student Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Scott Carrell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2019
* USD 19,625.00

This proposed research project will use data and policy change in Texas to study
the long-term effects of special education (SE) on students. Even though about
13 percent of public school students in the US are in SE and large amounts of
money is spent on it, very little is known about the long-term impact of SE.
This research project fills the gap. In 2005, the Texas legislature introduced a
district level SE enrollment cap of 8.5% at a time when the average district had
SE enrolment rate was 13%. To be compliant, school districts sharply reduced SE
enrollment. The proposed research will use this policy change to identify the
short- and long-term effects of participation in SE. The results of this
research will shed light on the benefits and costs of SE as well as provide
policy inputs into the design and implementation of SE programs. The results of
this research project will therefore improve the development of US human
capital, and as a result, increase economic growth.

This proposal will use an exogenous change in policy to identify the causal
impact of SE on short-term and long-term student outcomes. The study will
exploit a 2005 policy change that mandated SE enrolment in Texas school
districts to not exceed 8.5% at a time when the average SE enrolment rate was
13%. This resulted in several districts sharply cutting back SE enrolment.
Utilizing across district variation in distance from this enrolment cap and
students' years of policy exposure, the PIs will construct an instrument that
captures the strength of policy pressure to reduce SE enrollment. The IV
estimates reflect a local average treatment effect (LATE) for students whose
diagnosis could be altered by school district change, thus providing the causal
impact for students on the margin of SE placement. The results of this research
project will provide guidance on policies to improve special education and human
capital formation in the US. In addition to the estimates, the research project
will create a large data set on SE that will be used as other researchers will
use it to study the effects of special education in the US.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.