* 1824529
* SpecEES: DoS Resilience, Secrecy, and Throughput in Massive MIMO
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The project's objective is to develop the foundations for realizing denial of
service (DoS)-resilience, secrecy, and high throughput in next-generation
wireless networks in which base stations or access points (APs) scale their
antenna and computing resources to massive multiple-input/multiple-output
(massive MIMO). This project considers a practical yet strong adversary that
launches both active attacks, attempting to collapse network throughput by
polluting AP measurement of Channel State Information (CSI), as well as passive
attacks, that attempt to intercept communication via potentially distributed and
nomadic eavesdroppers. The first project thrust targets to detect and defend
against pilot contamination attacks with zero startup cost, i.e., without
requiring prior measurements of conditions without an attack. The second project
thrust experimentally explores passive eavesdropping under realworld factors
such as a large but finite number of antennas and a discrete and limited set of
modulation and coding schemes (MCS). With a discovery of MCS saturation
vulnerability, the project will study power control designed to overcome this
vulnerability and thwart the adversary. On the uplink, the third project thrust
develops antenna index coding as means to target reception on a subset of the
massive MIMO array. A key outcome will be both derivation of the secrecy rate as
well as experimental evaluation of this new mechanism. All three project thrusts
will include an extensive experimental study using the Rice massive MIMO
platform and over-the-air measurements. As computing and communication resources
must be devoted to realizing the aforementioned counter mechanisms, this project
will yield empirical understanding of the tradeoffs in realizing both high
spectral efficiency and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
agenda will enable new wireless security defenses and will provide an in-depth
understanding of securing next generation communication systems such as massive
MIMO. This project will yield new understanding of the design space that spans
from traditional throughput optimization to jointly realizing security features
and providing security by design. This project will yield new understanding of
the security capabilities and limits of designs based on CSI as a shared secret.
This project will impact standards bodies as it will expose fundamental limits
of existing security mechanisms and will show how enhancements to standards can
yield dramatically improved security capabilities. This project will impact
industry through demonstration of results coupled with the researchers'
extensive collaborative industry network. Finally, the project includes an
inter-disciplinary methodology and the team includes multiple Ph.D. students
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.