* 1824557
* Collaborative Research: Linking sediment dispersal, stratal architecture, and tectonic subsidence mechanisms in the Late Cretaceous Cordilleran Foreland Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Jolante Van Wijk, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 194,114.00

This multidisciplinary collaborative project evaluates the role of subsidence of
the lithosphere and deposition of sediments in Cordilleran foreland in response
to Cretaceous subsidence caused by subduction of an oceanic tectonic plate
beneath the western margin of North America. The research has the potential to
transform understanding of lithosphere-scale processes by clarifying the effect
of flat subduction on the upper crust and basins using a combination of
sedimentary and basin analyses, thermochronology and geodynamic modelling to
enable discrimination of the relative contributions of crustal loading
mechanisms. In addition to the scientific goals of the project, the
collaboration is advancing important societal outcomes by contributing to STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) educator development, the
broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in science, the training
of a postdoctoral researcher and graduate and undergraduate students. Public
outreach efforts by the University of Alaska and education of middle school
students through newly established relationships between the University of
Houston and local middle schools and middle-school aged homeschooled students
contributes to increased public scientific literacy and public engagement with
STEM. The project also supports the development of a new partnership between the
participating universities and industry, thereby contributing to the increased
economic competitiveness of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
migrating dynamic subsidence has long been invoked to explain the broadening and
migration of the Late Cretaceous depocenter, no research has taken a high
resolution, large-scale approach to characterizing the timing or direction of
migration or to discriminate flexural from dynamic subsidence. However, flexural
loading and subcrustal loading leave distinct foreland-basin deposits that
record sediment source area and source area exhumation rate and have a
characteristic fill geometry that records the locus and rate of subsidence.
Detailed investigation of stratigraphic architecture, sediment volumes, sediment
sources, and depositional products allows the research team to explore the
potential influence of flat subduction of an oceanic plateau versus continued or
enhanced thrust belt exhumation or incipient basement-cored uplifts. The
Cordilleran system presents an unparalleled opportunity to establish the effect
of flat subduction of an oceanic plateau in the best dated retroarc foreland
basin system on the planet; thus, the results of this investigation are
applicable to other ocean-continent convergent systems. The research team is
evaluating mechanisms for observed changes in basin architecture by integrating
sandstone compositional data, detrital thermo- and geochronology, high-
resolution sequence stratigraphy, high-resolution isopach maps, geohistory
analysis, and forward stratigraphic, flexural, and geodynamic modelling. New
detrital geochronology and sandstone compositional data are supplementing
published geochronology and sedimentology to more accurately identify changes in
sediment provenance and routing during this time. Detrital thermochronology is
delineating up-section changes in lag time, corresponding to changes in source
exhumation rates, or introduction of a new sediment source. Sequence
stratigraphy, decompacted isopach maps, and forward stratigraphic modelling
allow calculation and comparison of the average sediment supply to discriminate
changes in basin architecture due to sediment supply from accommodation-driven
changes. Reconstruction of basin subsidence is being accomplished using detailed
isopach maps and geohistory analysis, which facilitates discrimination of
crustal loads from a subcrustal load. Finally, flexural and geodynamic modelling
enables discrimination of the relative contributions of loading mechanisms. This
project will combine, for the first time, the strengths of detrital geo- and
thermochronological double-dating, high-resolution sequence stratigraphy, and
multiple modeling efforts at a scale and resolution capable of discriminating
the mechanisms for subsidence. As a result of this collaboration, this project
has potential to transform the understanding of lithosphere-scale processes by
clarifying the effect of flat subduction on the upper crust and
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.