* 1824063
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociolinguistic Style and Discourses of Conservation Among Rural American Stakeholders
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Mary Bucholtz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 15,120.00

In the contemporary United States, environmental conservation discourse is
characterized by deep divides in the perceived beliefs and values across social
groups. Moreover, these discourses about conservation, both within academia and
the general population, often focus on broad social categories, such as
ideological affiliation, and socioeconomic status, and ignore the more complex
perspectives of local communities. This project addresses that gap by
highlighting the viewpoints of rural American stakeholders, who constitute a
large and very active group in conservation activities, with historically deep
roots to conservation. They are therefore a crucial focus for the investigation
of language and identity in environmental ideologies and practices, and their
ties to both conservatism and environmental conservation demonstrate the need
for community-level analyses of conservation discourse. This research will
contribute to a more inclusive understanding of conservation in several ways.
First, the research will assist scholars and practitioners in communicating
science to the public. Moreover, this project will also create a collaboration
between the academy and rural western stakeholders. Rural populations in the
western United States are understudied within anthropology and the other social
sciences that study conservation, and the proposed study, which will be
completed in collaboration with a conservation organization that serves a rural
audience, will bring new, and often overlooked, voices into the academy and into
discussions of conservation. The study is also a timely addition to the
interdisciplinary field of environmental science. Findings from this study will
make important contributions to improving the robustness and reliability of
cultural anthropological and linguistic science.

Jessica Love-Nichols, under the supervision of Dr. Mary Bucholtz of the
University of California at Santa Barbara, will test whether theories concerning
conversation discourse and listener perception are reliable when subject to
variance in geography and sociolinguistic style. In order to ensure that the
analysis is relevant to the perspectives of the rural communities, a mixed-
methods approach will be used for data collection. The researcher will first
collect and analyze ethnographic data through interviews and recorded
participant observation, which will ensure that the subsequent quantitative data
collection and analysis are rooted in an understanding of the ideologies and
practices of the community. Ethnographic data will be collected through
participant observation of hunter education courses and hunting and fishing
activities, and interviews with sportsmen and women. Experimental data from a
sociolinguistic perception task will then be collected and analyzed.
Participants will listen to several conservation-related audio clips. In one
version of the clips, the speakers will use a more "country"-sounding (i.e.
rural) way of speaking. In another, they will read the message in a non-rural
guise. For each audio segment, participants will be asked to answer several
survey questions evaluating their attitudes and perceptions of the speaker,
testing the hypothesis that clips which are sociolinguistically-aligned with
rurality will be perceived as more authentic and hence more trustworthy when a
pro-conservation stance is taken. After completing the survey, speakers will be
given the opportunity to express longer opinions in written form. Findings from
this research will expand understandings of the conservation values and
practices of an overlooked community and will assist scholars and practitioners
interested in conservation in engaging with a wide variety of audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.