* 1824321
* The 2007-2009 Housing Crisis: Causes, Policy Responses and Long Term Implications
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Stefania Albanesi, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 285,680.00

This project will give us new insight into the determinants and long-term
effects of the mortgage crisis experienced in the U.S. between 2007 and 2009.
The team has already uncovered important facts about the distribution of
mortgage debt and defaults in the years before and during the crisis that
suggest that the real cause of the crisis was not subprime mortgages, but rather
real estate investors. The team will therefore carry out a comprehensive study
of the role of real estate investors during these years. The research will
develop and test theories about how credit supply, housing demand, and
expectations about housing prices affected investor behavior. The team will also
analyze the effects of the mortgage crisis on people who were young adults
during the crisis years. Tighter mortgage standards have made it harder for
these families to purchase housing, while at the same time these young
households have much higher student debt. This part of the research will measure
the longer-run effects of the mortgage crisis on these young American families.
The results of the project will help us understand the pros and cons of
regulations affecting mortgage and housing markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research makes important contributions to the scientific understanding of
housing and mortgage markets. It offers a comprehensive study of real estate
investors. This class of borrowers has been overlooked in previous research
because they are hard to identify in the data and because it is difficult to
incorporate real estate investment in equilibrium models of the housing market.
The results will help us understand whether investor activity affects
fluctuations in house prices and will also demonstrate whether or not current
credit scoring models adequately capture the default risk of investor mortgages.
The research also gives us new insights on the long-term implications of the
2007-2009 crisis. Given the permanent effect of initial conditions on labor
market outcomes, and the tight relation between the life cycle path of income
and debt, we would expect lower lifetime earnings and mortgage balances for
workers who first entered the labor market close to the crisis relative to
previous cohorts. Two aggravating factors amplify this effect. First, based on
the misplaced emphasis on subprime borrowers, low credit score households were
all but excluded from mortgage markets, which especially hurt the young.
Additionally, young households held unprecedentedly high levels of student debt
in this period. This was driven by rising tuition, but also by the loss in net
worth experienced by parents as a result of the
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.