* 1824233
* I-Corps: Autonomous Indoor Blimps as Data Terminal for Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Fumin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
effective aerial sensing solution for indoor environments. Persistent
environmental monitoring, infrastructure inspection, and security surveillance
are essential for large indoor facilities to provide safety and comfort.
Existing aerial sensing solutions are mainly for outdoor applications. They are
not suitable for human-occupied indoor environments due to short flight
duration, disturbing noise level, and safety concerns. The proposed technology
is based on specially designed robotic blimps that offer long flight duration,
quiet sound profile, and safety for collision. The technology can potentially
fill the market vacancy for indoor aerial sensing. In addition to indoor aerial
sensing, the robotic blimps can also be marketed as a research and teaching tool
for researchers, teachers, students, and hobbyists who are interested in
performing indoor experiments on human friendly flying robots. The robotic
blimps may also be extended to serve as companion robots for the elderly, or as
intelligent toys for children.

This I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of an aerial sensing
solution that is developed around a robotic blimp. The blimp is cushioned with
Helium-filled envelope, and can fly safely among people. Buoyancy from the
Helium gas helps reduce the power consumption of the blimp, enabling it to
operate quietly for hours. Unique aerodynamic shape of the blimp ensures high
maneuverability in indoor environments. The blimp represents an integration of
research efforts in mechatronic design, mobile sensor networks, and control
systems. The blimps have been successfully employed to support a broad spectrum
of research supported by NSF grants, including indoor wind field mapping,
swarming control, and human-robot interactions. The basic functionalities of the
blimp are stable and reliable, ready to be transitioned into the
commercialization stage. Through this I-Corps program, the team will develop
better understanding of market scale, customer needs, and commercialization
feasibility of the invention.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.