* 1824005
* Improving and Integrating Global Diversity Estimates Using Transparent Methods
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Avital Livny, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 315,583.00

Understanding the socio-political impact of ethnic, religious, and linguistic
diversity is a vital concern for both social scientists and policy-makers. Using
several different datasets measuring diversity around the world, researchers
have found that it often has a negative impact on democracy, development and
political stability. However, these findings rely on fundamentally flawed
datasets: their demographic estimates come from questionable sources and do not
vary within countries or over time. This makes them ill-suited to studying
outcomes like war and development, which often change rapidly and cluster in
space. In addition, the existing datasets cannot be directly compared, making it
difficult to assess their accuracy. Rather than investing time and money in the
collection of new data, this project builds on an existing resource: 9 million
survey responses from 175 countries around the world. By using Artificial
Intelligence (AI) methods to compare these surveys to official statistics and
generate improved diversity estimates, other researchers will be able to apply
this method in other areas like health and inequality where government
statistics are missing or questionable. Further, this project will make our
results directly comparable to existing datasets. These data and methods will be
made available through a user-friendly online portal, where scientists, policy-
makers, and members of the public will be able to explore the data. They will
also be able to create their own datasets and use visualization tools to see how
the world's demographics are changing and consider what this means for our
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing estimates of ethnic, religious, and
linguistic diversity are correlated cross-sectionally with a number of socio-
political and economic outcomes including development, conflict, and social
capital. Close examination of these data raises validity concerns: few are based
on high-quality official statistics, the majority coming from questionable
secondary sources. Further, criteria for group inclusion (i.e., ontologies) are
opaque and inconsistently applied. Even where they appear accurate, data are
static and aggregated at the country level, although they are often used to
explain time-varying and spatially disaggregated outcomes. Ontologies in extant
datasets are also incompatible, making comparison and integration difficult.
This proposal improves existing measures by applying machine learning methods to
compare 9 million responses across 175 countries with a new database of census
results. An algorithm will identify survey design features that maximize
accuracy, to define a compensatory weighting scheme across these features. The
result is a set of survey-based demographic estimates with improved validity,
even for countries lacking reliable census data. This method of triangulating
surveys and official statistics is generalizable to research areas that use
either source and can also inform improved survey design. The project will also
develop tools for linking surveys, censuses, and existing datasets based on
explicit and transparent decision rules to facilitate their comparison and
integration. An online portal will provide access to datasets and code,
supporting customized data manipulation and visualization. The methods and tools
proposed here -- emphasizing accuracy, transparency, and cross-resource
integration -- should serve as a model for future data
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.