* 1824617
* Effects of Turbulence on Droplet Evaporation and Combustion: Droplet-Resolved Direct Numerical Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Seung Hyun Kim, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2022
* USD 289,960.00

In most combustion engines used in automobiles and airplanes, fuel is injected
in the form of the liquid. The evaporation of liquid fuel droplets and
subsequent mixing with the surrounding air determine how fuel is ignited and
burned. Turbulent fluid motions in the combustion engines enhance the rates of
evaporation, mixing and burning. Better understanding of these processes will
lead to more efficient engines. In this project, the effects of turbulence on
the evaporation and combustion of fuel droplets will be investigated using a new
computational method. Numerical simulations that resolve all relevant processes
around and inside the droplets will be performed to advance the fundamental
understanding of the droplet-turbulence-chemistry interactions under engine-
relevant conditions. The advanced fundamental understanding will guide the
improvement of engineering models and accelerate the development of combustion
engines that meet future standards for fuel efficiency and pollutant emissions.
The educational component includes the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in computational combustion research and the K-12 outreach through an
established program in the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to
characterize the effects of turbulence on droplet evaporation rates, inter-
droplet scalar mixing, ignition, and flame structures, when the size of droplets
is comparable to or larger than the Kolmogorov scale, the smallest turbulence
length scale. A new computational method, which can enable the accurate and
stable computation of droplet evaporation and combustion in turbulent flows
under engine-relevant conditions, will be developed. Direct numerical simulation
(DNS) of the evaporation and combustion of single-component and bi-component
fuel droplets in homogeneous isotropic turbulence and in temporally developing
mixing layers will be performed using the developed method. The DNS data will be
analyzed to delineate the conditions under which the existing laminar theory for
the droplet evaporation rates can be used. The emphasis of the analysis will
also be placed on identifying the key parameters that characterize the
turbulence effects on the evaporation rates. The small-scale mixing statistics
in the vicinity of evaporating and burning droplets will be analyzed to help
improve spray combustion modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.