* 1824998
* Synthesis and design workshop: Research Priorities in Learning Analytics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Stephanie Teasley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

This workshop is funded through the "Dear Colleague Letter: Principles for the
Design of Digital Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Learning Environments (NSF 18-017)." Post-secondary educational institutions are
being buffeted by three major transitions: changes in the nature of the
competencies students need and want, changes in the demographic mix of people
that they serve, and changes in the technologies and strategies available to
build, measure, and communicate competence and expertise. Powerful new
information technologies, unprecedented opportunities to gather and analyze
large volumes of data, and new insights into how people learn, make it possible
to imagine designing learning environments that make learning more productive,
more affordable, and more gracefully adaptable to individuals throughout their
lifetimes. The new field of learning analytics has made major advances in
understanding how educational Big Data can produce insights to improve classroom
practices. Yet, a number of critical questions remain unanswered in important
areas to ensure all Americans receive the education they need to prosper in a
modern economy. The aim of this workshop is to investigate the role of learning
analytics in contributing to advances in technological learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together interdisciplinary experts
to articulate the state-of-the-art and propose research priorities for learning
analytics in the coming decade. A central theme will be to explore new ways to
use powerful tools in data science (machine learning, social network analysis,
analytics and visualization of complex data, temporal, multi-scale and
statistical models, integration of heterogeneous data, data scrubbing, wrangling
and provenance tracking, data privacy and cybersecurity) to define competence,
measure it, and build it using a rich array of new approaches to study learning.
The workshop will also explore how the full power of these tools can be applied
to the most critical challenges faced in learning analytics. The outcome of the
workshop will be a clear definition of the highest priority research needs in
learning analytics and a practical roadmap to guide public and private research
support in these areas. The resulting white paper will provide insights to
improve a wide range of learning environment contexts in in post-secondary
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.