* 1824924
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: Distributed Collaboration in STEM-Rich Project-Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Eric Hamilton, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This project will convene a synthesis and design workshop on next generation
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning. It envisions
a two-tier timeline that looks three years and then ten years into the future.
One primary workshop topic involves design considerations for "boundary-
crossing" project-based learning, by which students (middle school through
college) collaborate on challenging STEM projects while they reside in different
national, economic, cultural, and academic settings. Based on preliminary
research, such "distributed" collaboration has important potential to become a
life changing, abundant, and seamless aspect of enhanced, next generation STEM
learning. The workshop, along with its preparations and the discussions and
draft iterations that follow, will culminate in a synthesis and design paper
suitable for use by the National Science Foundation and by STEM education
practitioners, designers, policy-makers, and researchers. The workshop will
benefit from the participation of internationally prominent participants from
Finland, Mexico, and Singapore, engaged in similar next generation STEM
education design efforts in their countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop,
along with a preceding series of webinars, is intertwined with crucial and
exciting areas currently unfolding in education research, innovation, and the
learning sciences. Its primary theoretical frameworks originate in computer
supported collaborative learning and social cognition literature. The synthesis
represents a prospectus that incorporates the interconnections of next
generation teacher roles, sociocultural and affective dynamics in STEM
cognition, computational thinking, and the integration of content, assessment,
and management in personalized and collaborative learning. The design task of
the workshop is to organize principles responsive to the synthesis, while
furnishing overall design guidance by which a) the energy and intrinsic draw of
distributed collaboration; b) the appeal, challenge, and intrigue of STEM-rich
collaborative projects; c) the intrinsic pleasure and satisfaction of teaching
others and helping others to succeed; and d) the intrinsic satisfaction of
creating and making, are all operational and mutually
reinforcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.