* 1824263
* EAGER: manipulating spin dynamics in thionated perylene diimide organic semiconductors: towards organic spin caloritronic devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Luisa Whittaker-Brooks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 312,514.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Moore's Law, the dominant strategy for improving
the speed and efficiency of electronic devices, relies on scaling down the
transistor dimensions, so that more of them fit in a defined area, but
technology is approaching a size scale in which pursuing this strategy further
can only be done with an enormous increase in fabrication cost. Fundamentally
new strategies are needed to accommodate society's increasing technological
demands. Spin-based solid-state systems (spintronics), represent such a
fundamentally new strategy. Unlike conventional electronics, where the charge of
electrons is used to store and process information in transistors, spintronics
uses the spin of electrons to carry digital information. With this award, which
is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division
of Materials Research, the principle investigator synthesizes novel n-type
organic semiconductors that are good candidates for spin-based computing
technologies. Due to their strong spin-dependent properties they are efficient
spin-transistor materials. Additionally, the researchers investigate, if waste
heat from a device may also be converted into spin currents thus increasing the
overall efficiency of spin-transistor devices. An innovative education and
outreach program, which includes bi-weekly hands-on research experiences related
to energy conversion and storage into the science curriculum of a local urban
high-need school in the Salt Lake City area, is part of this research project.
Additionally, underprivileged students from local high-schools are given the
opportunity to pursue research over the summer in the principle investigator's
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in the field of organic electronics have demonstrated that the physical
and chemical properties of organic semiconductors can be vastly improved by
tuning the molecular arrangement of the sp2 hybridized backbone system or by
oxidatively doping the organic molecule to form either a p-type or n-type
semiconductor. Although p-type organic semiconductors have been largely explored
as potential thermoelectric and spintronic materials, n-type organic
semiconductors have fallen behind due to their low electron affinities. As part
of this award, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, the principle investigator
synthesizes novel n-type organic semiconductors based on the thionation of
perylene diimides. Additionally, fundamental mechanistic understanding of the
influence of electronic structure, morphology, intrinsic and extrinsic doping,
and spins on the thermoelectric and spintronic properties of these perylene
diimide n-type organic semiconductors is being elucidated. The studies
investigate new breakthroughs in both materials design and modulation of
fundamental physical phenomena by carefully elucidating the role of spin-orbit
coupling, electron-phonon coupling, and solid-state crystal chemistry on the
performance of thionated perylene diimide thermoelectric and spintronic
materials. An innovative education and outreach program, which includes bi-
weekly hands-on research experiences related to energy conversion and storage
into the science curriculum of a local urban high-need school in the Salt Lake
City area, is part of this research project. Additionally, underprivileged
students from local high schools are given the opportunity to pursue research
over the summer in the principle investigator's labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.