* 1824228
* CAREER: Harnessing Implementation Flexibility to Enable Runtime Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/08/2018,08/31/2023
* Geoffrey Challen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 525,582.00

Smartphones and the applications (apps) that they run are transforming our
world. Web apps and software marketplaces have made it easier than ever before
to distribute software to anyone and anywhere. However, writing good smartphone
apps remains challenging. Developers must anticipate and adapt to numerous
different devices and users, and to the changing conditions and environments
caused by mobility. One minute the network is fast and free, the next it is slow
and metered. The importance of adaptation to successful mobile apps is well
understood. However, little language and system support exists to help
developers create and improve adaptive mobile apps.&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates a new system enabling the next generation of adaptive apps. Central
to the approach is a new language construct that allows developers to express
flexibility within their source code. This allows decisions that today must be
made during development to be deferred, and leaves flexibility that can be
harnessed to enable adaptation. Intelligently utilizing flexibility exposed by
developers requires novel approaches to automated pre-deployment testing and
dynamic adaptation policy generation. The project also explores how to guide
developers toward useful flexibility, and how flexibility should be managed and
exposed in current and next-generation programming
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated educational plan also explores
how to harness flexibility, but uses it to adapt online courses to make them
more effective. Beginning with a concept library containing overlapping and
self-reinforcing lessons, the project explores two forms of flexibility. Lessons
can be reordered to express different prerequisites, and within each lesson
multiple explanations an be used for different students. Integrated quiz results
and other forms f feedback will be used to determine the success or failure of
different approaches. These new personalized learning techniques will be applied
to an existing online course on the internet created by the investigator.