* 1824223
* RAPID: Deploying a dense network to record seismicity at the Rattlesnake Ridge landslide
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Amanda Thomas, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 01/31/2019
* USD 8,719.00

In October of 2017, a series of cracks were discovered on Rattlesnake Ridge
south of Yakima, WA. At that time, they were ~1 m deep. As of late December
2017, just two months later, those same cracks had grown to over 80 m deep.
These cracks represent the lateral margin of the Rattlesnake Ridge landslide,
which consists of an estimated 4 million cubic meters of material that is making
its way downhill slowly. The slowly moving rock mass sits atop a (weak)
sedimentary rock layer between thicker layers of Columbia River flood basalt.
The best case (and most likely scenario) is that this material continues to move
south slowly and fall into an asphalt quarry. However, an alternative (unlikely)
scenario involves catastrophic failure which could block Highway 82, and dam the
Yakima River flooding the surrounding area. The objective of this RAPID proposal
is to deploy 40 nodal seismometers in the surrounding area to continuously
monitor seismic signals coming from the slide. Nodal seismometers (or nodes) are
small, lightweight, cable free, three-component seismometers. This state-of-the-
art technology was developed for oil and gas exploration, however, nodes can
also be used to study a variety of other seismic processes, such as earthquakes
and landslides. The size and (relatively) low cost of individual sensors allows
for easily deployable, dense observation networks that produce high-quality
data. The resulting dataset can be used to determine the location, timing and
nature of seismic signals coming from the slide. The spatial and temporal
evolution of slide related seismicity can be used to better characterize the
landslide and potentially to predict when failure may
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forty nodal seismometers will be deployed around the
Rattlesnake Ridge landslide near Yakima, WA. These instruments will be "hot
swapped" every 30 days until the landslide fails or until the landslide reaches
steady-state. These deployments will result in three component seismic data from
which travel times will be computed to form a 3D grid of potential sources. A
network beamforming approach will be followed to detect, locate, and
characterize seismic signals coming from the landslide. This information will
provide new insight into the size and nature of the slide of this rock block as
well as the degree of internal deformation. This project has a potential broad
societal impact and will help quantify and understand the landslide process in
general.