* 1824434
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Energy Efficient Millimeter Wave Cellular Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Elza Erkip, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The millimeter wave (mmWave) frequencies and other bands above 6 GHz are a new
and promising frontier for cellular wireless communications and the focus of the
fifth-generation (5G) standardization efforts. Due to the massive available
bandwidths, the mmWave frequencies offer the possibility of orders of magnitude
greater capacity than current cellular systems in the highly congested bands
below 3 GHz. However, a key challenge in realizing mmWave mobile cellular
networks is energy consumption. Mobile devices and small-cell access points must
operate under highly-constrained power budgets, and developing mmWave systems
within these power limits is a formidable task. This project will investigate
energy consumption from a system's perspective to address the issues in an
integrated and coherent manner. The project will develop mathematical models for
understanding energy and performance tradeoffs. New technologies for the radio
frequency (RF) circuits, antenna array system, signal processing, and network
protocols will be jointly developed to optimize performance and deliver energy-
efficient mmWave devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will pursue
four key thrusts: Thrust 1 will seek to understand the fundamental relation
between throughput, processing power, and spectral emission constraints, and
optimizes this tradeoff by dynamically controlling key energy drivers including
bandwidth, quantization resolution, antenna architecture, and waveform
selection. This is combined with novel energy-aware scheduling policies and
signal processing techniques. Thrust 2 will focus on idle mode power savings and
associated problems of energy-efficient directional channel estimation and delay
in dynamic environments. Thrust 3 will develop fundamental circuits technologies
that enable Thrusts 1 and 2, in particular the novel techniques for both high-
efficiency power amplifiers and low-power fully digital RF transceivers. Thrust
4 will obtain the necessary channel models and build circuit prototypes to
validate the concepts in Thrusts 1 to 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.