* 1824252
* Collaborative Research: Chamber or Conduit - Constraining Explosive Through Effusive Eruption at Cordon Caulle, Chile 2011/12
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Helge Gonnermann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 297,429.00

Volcanic eruptions pose one of the principal hazards at tectonically active
continental margins, such as the Pacific northwestern United States, which are
of ever increasing economic and existential importance to expanding populations.
The project will enhance knowledge of the conditions that lead to eruptions of
silica-rich magmas, which can be large and impactful. Achieving this goal is
contingent upon the integration of observations through reliable physics-based
models that have been tested in their predictive capabilities. This is the
project's principal focus and it will advance understanding of the fundamental
processes that determine the progression of volcanic eruptions, from inception
to cessation, which remains difficult to forecast. Consequently, the project
transcends the purely academic and is societally relevant by advancing natural
hazard assessment capabilities. Furthermore, the project supports education by
enabling the interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students
as well as a postdoctoral scholar, thus contributing to the development of a
diverse and globally competitive workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
objective is to advance fundamental knowledge of how volcanoes work by
simulating a volcanic eruption from initial explosive activity through lava
effusion, to termination of the eruption and post-eruptive inflation, using the
2011/12 Cordon Caulle eruption in Chile as a case study. For this eruption the
run-up, the syn-eruptive evolution, and the post-eruptive reconfiguration of the
volcanic system were documented in unprecedented detail. The eruption was
initially explosive and over time eruption rates decreased with activity
shifting from purely explosive to effusive, resulting in the formation of a
large lava flow and shallow laccolith. The current view about these types of
eruptions is that over some range of identical conditions effusive or explosive
activity is possible and with potentially rapid transitions from one to the
other. One goal of the project is the assessment of conditions resulting in
transitions in eruptive activity in order to test this explosive-effusive
bistability hypothesis. Moreover, rapid post-eruptive inflation was observed and
a further goal is to assess the extent to which the system has been driven back
toward a critical state. These goals will be achieved by integrating the
different observational data within extensive physics-based model simulations
that will lead to improvements in model reliability and further our
understanding of underlying processes at Cordon Caulle and similar hazardous
volcanic systems elsewhere. The project as such is multi-disciplinary and
encompasses geochemistry, petrology and geodesy, in addition to numerical
simulation of magma storage and eruption. As a consequence, the project is also
multi-institutional and in addition to existing observations, new data will be
acquired through efforts led by the other collaborating institutions. The
portion of the project that Rice University will focus on - in collaboration
with the other institutions - are the numerical simulation and the integration
of the different types of observational data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.