* 1824715
* Travel Support for an International Meeting on Monsoons and Tropical Rain Belts; Trieste, Italy; July 2-5, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Michela Biasutti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award funds participation of students and early-career US researchers in a
workshop on the dynamics of monsoons and tropical rain belts to be held 2-5 July
2018 at the International Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy. The
workshop, sponsored by the World Climate Research Program (WCRP), brings
together researchers with expertise in tropical convection and precipitation,
theoretical climate dynamics, climate modeling, and paleoclimate records. The
goal is to develop a better understanding of the fundamental processes
responsible for the behavior of monsoons and tropical rain belts in past,
present, and likely future climates. The event contributes to the advancement of
science by providing an assessment of the state of the science, providing a
venue for students and early-career scientists to interact with leading
researchers in the field, and coordinating research efforts around the globe.
Travel funds provided under this award are distributed through a competitive
application process.

The award has intellectual merit as it addresses fundamental questions in
tropical meteorology and monsoon dynamics. It has broader impacts by training
the next generation of scientists in this research area. In addition, the
questions addressed in the workshop are of societal interest given the large
portion of the world's population living in areas affected by monsoons and
tropical precipitation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.