* 1824317
* The Economics of Carpooling, Road Pricing, and Autonomous Transportation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Ostrovsky, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 238,752.00

This project funds new work in economics that will consider how to best
implement three different and complementary transportation technologies. The
first is time-sensitive variable tolls (already in use in some areas). The
second is mobile ride-sharing apps seamlessly match a driver with additional
passengers (to create instant carpools). The third is autonomous passenger
vehicles. These technologies are interdependent in many ways, and understanding
the likely effects of these technologies requires answers to many different
questions. How should tolls be set? How should carpools be created? How much
should carpooling passengers pay for the ride? How should the tolls paid depend
on the number of passengers in a car? The researcher will use techniques from
game theory and economics to answer these questions. Because traffic congestion
is a major concern in many urban areas this project will help us understand how
to use new technologies to solve an important problem that affects the health of
regional economies around the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework
used in the formal modelling blends ideas from coalition formation games (riders
form coalitions to carpool and share costs) and competitive equilibrium (road
prices are set at levels that clear the market). The framework incorporates
interactions between the two components. Tolls impact which carpooling
coalitions get formed; in turn, the carpooling coalition formation process
impacts the demand for roads. The project also contributes to empirical
economics. It will jointly characterize efficient tolls and efficient carpooling
arrangements in a unifying framework. The new framework will facilitate and
enable the analysis of a variety of other applied questions in transportation
economics. The team will also use the framework to conduct simulations of
various transportation policies and evaluate the effects on economic welfare and
other desired social goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.