* 1824677
* Group Travel Award: XXXVth SCAR Open Science Conference
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Deneb Karentz, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 01/31/2019
* USD 71,000.00

This award supports attendance for up to 40 U.S. scientists at the 35th SCAR
Open Science Conference (OSC) to enable them to present their scientific
findings, develop new collaborations with international scientists and become
involved in SCAR-related activities and SCAR specialists groups. In previous
symposia, U.S. scientists have made important and significant contributions to
the success of the SCAR Open Science Conferences. The SCAR-OSC provides a key
platform for generating or augmenting international collaborations not generally
available for graduate students and early-career researchers. The 35th SCAR-OSC
meeting: Polar 2018 will bring together Antarctic and Arctic researchers for a
unique bi-polar event and exchange of information in Davos, Switzerland, June
19-23, 2018. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific program for the SCAR Open
Science Conference emphasizes interdisciplinary research that places Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean in a global context, providing essential perspective for
students and early-career researchers. In 2018 the meeting is being organized
around 12 science themes that include polar (arctic and Antarctic) physical,
biological, and social sciences. In addition, there are a myriad of side-
meetings, activities, trainings, and workshops surrounding the main sessions.
This support will allow a more diverse group of researchers to participate in
defining the future direction of international Antarctic and polar research and
will encourage global collaboration and cooperation. It will augment the
training and development of graduate students and young investigators as they
benefit from the opportunity to interact with the international community of
Antarctic (and Arctic) researchers. Individuals at all levels (students to
senior researchers) interested in engaging in international collaborative
activities and, potentially, assuming active leadership roles in SCAR groups,
will be targeted for support. The Association of Polar Early Career Scientists
(APECS), an international organization that aims to facilitate interdisciplinary
research collaborations and develop future leaders in polar research, education
and outreach, will have a one-day career development workshop available for
early-career researchers at the 35th SCAR Open Science Conference.