* 1824092
* Social Movement Impact on Policy Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Charles Seguin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 175,433.00

This project studies the representation of social movements at committee
hearings and their impact on policy outcomes in the twentieth century. We know
comparatively little about which social movements appear before a legislature
and when they have an impact. This project addresses this gap by collecting data
on which social movement organizations are invited to give testimony or are the
subject of committee hearings. The result will be a better understanding of
which groups get invited, how and when committee hearings are used to
investigate social movement mobilization, and a map of the relationships between
the different social movements that are represented at hearings. One benefit of
this project is a new dataset of broad interest to social scientists studying
politics that also builds bridges between existing NSF datasets. Student
research assistants will benefit from training in computational social science
methods and hands-on research experience with complex data. Finally,
understanding how and when a legislature and movements can work together to
effectively address social issues will highlight tangible steps citizens can
take to aid the policy making process.

Drawing on computational social science methods, a set of systematic data on
committee representation for a broad cross section of social movements and
associated organizations is constructed in this project. The dataset describes:
1) the population of US social movement organizations' representation as
subjects or witnesses before committee hearings over the twentieth century; 2)
the committees and subcommittees before which social movement organizations
appear; 3) the subjects of the hearings where social movement organizations are
represented; 4) details on the other witnesses they testify alongside (e.g.
academics, police agents, etc.); and 5) any legislation associated with the
hearings. The analysis examines social movements' influence by looking at which
social movement organizations gave testimony, on which bills, and at network of
connections within and across social movement organizations. Also analyzed are
cases of potential repression, in which social movements are the subject of
investigative hearings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.