* 1824265
* Designer Topological Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Pouyan Ghaemi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on a new state of electronic matter, topological
superconductivity, induced by light. The study of the interaction of light and
matter, such as in the frequency dependence or spectrum of light emitted by an
excited atom and the photo-electric effect where light on the surface of a
material can liberate electrons, played a central role in the development of
quantum physics. The interaction of light with quantum mechanical states
facilitated technological advances like the development of lasers with wide
applications from optical communication to medical devices. On another front, it
has been realized that interaction and entanglement of a macroscopic number of
electrons could lead to the development of novel quantum mechanical phases, such
as superconductivity and topological states. In the former case, electrons
participate in a collective bulk quantum mechanical state that can carry
electric current without loss. The bulk of a topological insulator, an example
of the latter case, is insulating but has a metallic state that covers the
surface and edges that can also carry electric current without loss, albeit for
reasons different from that of bullk superconducting states. This research
project brings the concepts of superconductivity and topological states together
by exploring the interaction of light with electrons in layered materials to
generate and control a topological superconducting state. The PI aims to advance
theoretical understanding of how optically controllable topological
superconducting states could be designed, created, and controlled. If realized
in the laboratory, these states could form the foundation for the development of
the next generation of quantum technologies, such as quantum computers and
quantum communication devices which function through the manipulation of quantum
mechanical states. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach and educational
activities. Minority students underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) related fields will gain cutting-edge research
experiences through the outreach efforts in this project. The PI will design a
colloquium series related to the technological impacts of the project that will
explore everyday applications of quantum physics and their relationship to
potential technological revolutions through quantum computing and spintronics.
Presentations will be at different venues, including nonprofit organizations
devoted to educating African-American students in stem and energizing them to
pursue careers in STEM related fields, as well as the CUNY Advanced Science
Research Center which provides resources for public outreach in the New York
City Harlem neighborhood. The PI will also organize these seminar series in the
form of a chapter on quantum properties of materials to be implemented in high-
school courses on modern physics. This effort is carried out in collaboration
with high-schools in greater New York City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research,
and education on topological superconductivity. Signatures of superconductivity
observed after the application of laser pulses to certain materials has recently
drawn much interest. A major achievement is the realization of superconductivity
at temperatures much higher than the equilibrium critical temperature. On
another front, it leads to further questions of what other quantum states might
be stabilized out-of-equilibrium. The possibility of designer topological phases
is particularly interesting and of practical use. The PI will investigate
topological superconductivity achieved through the modification of the
electronic band structure and control of electron-electron interactions in two-
dimensional materials like single layer transition metal dichalcogenides. The PI
will study the optical generation of Josephson junctions and vortices,
controlled by the specific polarization pattern of the optical pump and the
vortex structure of applied light beams. The PI aims to investigate how defects
may be used to optically generate excitations such as Majorana states and to
examine the dynamical displacement of the defect modes that would generate
quantum braiding. The optical signatures of the defect modes and their braiding
statistics will be also determined. The PI plans to investigate the effect of
thermalization, heating, and disorder on stabilizing these states. Analytical
and numerical approaches based on the master equation and Keldysh formalism will
be used. Even though the main focus of the project is on topological
superconductivity in two-dimensional metal dichalcogenides, the efforts could
extend to a wide range of light-induced interacting topological states, such as
topological Mott insulators and fractional anomalous Hall phases, in different
materials like single layer Bismuth or twisted bilayer graphene depending on
theoretical advances that are made as the research is
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.