* 1824727
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: Digital Science and Data Analytic Learning Environments at Small Liberal Arts Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* John Symms, Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

This workshop is funded through the "Dear Colleague Letter: Principles for the
Design of Digital Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Learning Environments (NSF 18-017)." Driven by rapid technological change, the
United States is facing a critical workforce shortage in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professions. Furthermore, employers across
all fields are increasingly seeking employees who possess computational thinking
and data science and analytics skill sets. Eighty percent of the nation's
colleges and universities are classified as small institutions and enroll 5,000
or fewer students. Many of these small colleges and universities are grounded in
the liberal arts and have a tradition of infusing personalized learning and
common thought across disciplines within their general education curricula. This
makes them particularly well-suited for preparing students in human literacy,
technological literacy, and data literacy. Because computational thinking and
data science and analytics work is most often conducted digitally, it is
imperative that students learn these skills in digital environments to prepare
them for what they will encounter in the workplace. The next generation of
digital learning environments encompassing five areas (interoperability;
personalization; analytics, advising, and learning assessment; collaboration;
and accessibility and universal learning design) will be used by students to
learn data science and analytics skill sets. Small colleges and universities
often lack the financial resources to build the necessary human and
technological infrastructure to support digital learning. This workshop will
design digital learning environments that will meet the substantial need for
data science and analytics-educated professionals, promote equity in learning,
and assist small liberal arts colleges and universities to contribute to the
early development of these efforts. Experts will advise teams to design digital
science and analytics curricula that will be incorporated in blueprint designs
for next generation of digital learning environments meeting the needs of
learners and the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
convene a workshop that results in blueprint designs of next generation of
digital learning environments to answer the question - How can science,
technology, and mathematics digital learning environments be designed to enhance
the digital science and data analytic skill competencies of learners at small
liberal arts institutions of higher education? The research questions include:
1) How will the innovative digital learning environments prepare students for
employment that requires data science and analytics? 2) How will the design of
data science and analytics digital learning environments account for the
variability of learners? 3) How will data be collected and learning environments
assessed to measure students' data science and analytics competency? 4) How will
a national consortium form and function to sustain and expand the workshop
outcomes? Based on the tradition in small liberal arts colleges and universities
of offering personalized learning, universal design learning for technology will
be emphasized and serve as a model for supporting more underrepresented students
in STEM to persist to graduation. The complexity of data sciences and analytics
skill sets require an assessment of the workshop participants' progress toward
meeting the planned outcomes, and education on individual motivations, both
which are done through team science. Team science is also innovatively
incorporated into the data science and analytics undergraduate curriculum design
to educate students how their skills can contribute to a greater product that is
the result of the collective contribution of the multidisciplinary team. The
project draws upon the expertise of national experts who provide content
knowledge not otherwise available to small liberal arts colleges and
universities. The forming of a national consortium for digital learning at small
liberal arts colleges and universities will sustain and expand the workshop
outcomes. It will provide authentic hands-on digital learning research
experience through curriculum innovations that introduce students to
computational thinking, data science, and analytic skills. The result will be
prepared students who fit the workforce need in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.