* 1824594
* Cognitive Barriers to Understanding Complexity in Human-Technical Systems: Evidence from Engineering Students and Practitioners
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Konstantinos Triantis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 403,178.00

According to the National Academy of Engineering, poor understanding of complex
human-technical systems, i.e., systems that have many interacting parts, has
been a major cause of "man made disasters" that include, for example, the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the
Gulf of Mexico. Various studies show that even well-schooled engineers have
difficulty understanding basic concepts of complex human-technical systems. This
research will provide insights of the important cognitive (e.g. reasoning,
thinking) skills for the understanding of complex systems for both engineering
students and working professionals. Examples of cognitive barriers are for
example, the experts' tendency to look at details at the expense of looking at
the big picture, and the human tendency to focus on short-term as opposed to the
long-term outcomes, among others. This research will address the needs of
industry and government to educate and develop complex problem solvers for the
US workforce so that the US maintains its economic competitiveness, national
security, and position as a global leader in innovation. Given that engineers
design, build and manage human-technical systems throughout their careers, it is
important to study the effect of the cognitive barriers during and after their
formal education. From an educational point of view, the research will integrate
the results into engineering courses, case studies, team assignments and
simulation platforms. From an outreach point of view, the research will use the
results for the design and offering of company, government agency, and
University workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-disciplinary project,
which lies at the intersection of complex systems and engineering education and
will study undergraduate students with different educational experiences as well
as professionals with different work experiences. Central conceptualizations of
systems thinking is the focus on understanding the workings of complex
interconnected socio-technical systems. In our project, our specific definition
aligns with the system dynamics school of thought, which provides established
methods for analyzing system behavior whose final behavior over time might be
counter-intuitive. The research assumes that engineers can recognize and manage
system complexity and that classroom education and field experiences can be
essential for learning how to understand complex systems. The central research
hypothesis is that education in engineering programs and real world experiences
influence (positively or negatively) engineers' understanding of complex
systems. In order to investigate the main hypothesis, four specific research
questions (RQ1-RQ4) are studied. Three vignettes with different levels of
structuredness and complexity representing engineering tasks will be used. The
research questions are as follows: RQ1: What is the relationship between
engineering students'/professionals' level of education/expertise and their
performance on three vignettes that vary with respect to problem structuredness
and complexity? RQ2: What is the relationship between engineering
students'/professionals' perceptions of their own systems thinking competencies
and their performance on three vignettes that vary with respect to problem
structuredness and complexity? RQ3: How do engineering students and
professionals differ in their approaches to solving problems that vary with
respect to problem stucturedness and complexity? and RQ4: How do engineering
students and professionals describe how and where they developed their cognitive
skills of understanding complex systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.