* 1824807
* CNH-L: Stormwater Management Across Urban Ecosystems: Diagnostic Tools and Community Engagement for Ecological Restoration, Equitable Community Development and Revitalization
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Hubert Montas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,499,833.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excess nitrogen, phosphorous and sediment
associated with urbanization is a threat to water quality and environmental
health in many locations. This project will investigate how urban watersheds can
be improved through better stormwater management. The research will examine two
watersheds in Washington, DC and Baltimore, Maryland that possess different
degrees of urban decay and revitalization. It will compare the effectiveness of
different interventions, both technical and social, at reducing unhealthy
processes and feedbacks between the environment and people. Specific research
objectives and activities are to: (1) document neighborhood issues and needs in
informing stormwater best-management practices; (2) evaluate stormwater volume
and quality, flooding risk, trash accumulation, and mosquito production within
the watersheds; (3) develop a tool that uses Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) to guide watershed management; and 4) enhance community awareness and
positive behaviors to improve water quality and protect urban green space. This
project will develop and evaluate practices that foster sustainable water
resources and help educate participants, from teachers to students to all
residents, many of whom are racial and ethnic minorities and socially,
economically, and educationally disadvantaged, on processes and strategies
involved in addressing water sustainability. It will train interdisciplinary
graduate and undergraduate students in interactive social, biological, and
ecosystem sciences as they relate to water resources sustainability,
neighborhood planning, mosquito ecology, and environmental justice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses key biophysical and social drivers
of nutrient pollution in watersheds, and the associated factors related to the
socio-ecological matrix of the built environment, urban decay and
revitalization, and resident attitudes and behaviors. Coupled stormwater-human
dynamics have the potential to become a signature model for developing new
socio-ecological theory about urban ecosystems, improving quality of life and
environmental justice, and initiating sustained community-oriented management of
natural systems. This project integrates the required expertise and theory from
social science, city planning, hydrological science, ecology, adult and youth
education, and environmental justice to explicitly characterize stormwater-human
systems. This research combines socio-demographic measures of human behavior and
stormwater quantity and quality to dynamically model pollution hot spots, assess
the efficacy of interventions, and explicitly quantify the feedback of these
variables. It represents an advance in the knowledge of coupled pollution-human
dynamics in an urban context and provide valuable information for urban
planning, remediation, and public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.