* 1824951
* CNH-S: What Does It Take to Cooperate Over Transboundary Groundwater Resources?
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2022
* USD 749,932.00

While crucial to the health and livelihood of billions of people, groundwater is
being depleted globally at alarming rates. Groundwater is a shared resource,
where pumping by any user decreases groundwater levels and thus the ability of
other users to also exploit this resource. This phenomenon can cause users to
strategically over-exploit groundwater in a "pumping race" that can accelerate
its depletion. Unfortunately, few regulations address this tragedy of the
commons because the underground nature of the resource makes it particularly
challenging to monitor. This research seeks to estimate the extent to which
strategic over-exploitation accelerates global groundwater depletion, and to
identify new mechanisms to explain why groundwater is particularly prone to
strategic over-exploitation, especially at jurisdictional boundaries. These new
insights will be used to explore new regulatory approaches to curtail this
behavior. This research will benefit society by integrating hydrology,
economics, and law to improve cooperation over shared groundwater resources. It
will also provide interdisciplinary training for three graduate students and
create valuable infrastructure that will be shared broadly with businesses and
the public sector.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Adverse selection is the tendency for
markets to break down under asymmetric information, because uncertainties cause
agents to attribute ulterior motives to other agents' willingness to make a
deal. A similar mechanism likely arises for groundwater due to asymmetric hydro-
geologic uncertainty. This research will test the hypothesis that adverse
selection explains why agents do not cooperate over shared groundwater
resources. The project has four components: (1) perform a global assessment of
the role played by tragedies of the commons in the depletion of international
aquifers; (2) derive a micro-economic model to investigate whether adverse
selection can explain the dearth of international agreements on shared
groundwater; (3) develop coupled human/groundwater models to investigate why
cooperation has emerged in specific aquifers, through case studies in Europe and
South America; and (4) investigate the potential for satellite data to attenuate
information asymmetry and facilitate cooperation by averting adverse selection,
focusing on a vulnerable aquifer identified in component
(1).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.