* 1824278
* I-Corps:  An Investigation of the Commercial Potential of Cyber-physical Security for Advanced Manufacturing Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Gregory Purdy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will provide the
manufacturing industry with an approach to identify and detect cyber-physical
attacks within their production environments in real-time. Currently, the
manufacturing industry is operating production systems vulnerable to malicious
attacks, which may cause produced parts to not meet intended design
requirements. Such a deviation from design intent could result in damaged
products, loss of customer trust, and potentially injure employees and/or
customers. The adoption of the proposed approach will secure manufacturers from
cyber-physical attacks and create a strong supply chain. This will allow
manufacturers to continue to produce sensitive parts both for the general public
and the defense industry, increasing the difficulty of a malicious attack to
affect part production. Through successful completion of this program, the
I-Corps team will further develop awareness in this area through mentoring
graduate students and discussing cyber-physical security with manufacturers
across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project employs both
traditional decision analysis and data analysis techniques to identify and
detect malicious events within manufacturing systems. This is done through a
two-phase approach. First, a cyber-physical vulnerability assessment is
completed which highlights areas within the production environment susceptible
to malicious attack. Employing decision trees and process mapping, the
vulnerability assessment is used to provide a high level overview of the cyber-
physical resiliency of a manufacturing facility. Second, the proposed detection
approach consists of an air-gapped sensor suite which can be placed on any piece
of critical equipment to detect malicious events in real-time. The proposed
approach analyzes side-channel measurements independent of the machine such as
power consumption, vibration, and sound to identify anomalies within the
process. Through performing the vulnerability assessment and implementing the
proposed sensor suite, the entire production facility can be secured from
malicious cyber-physical attacks intended to reduce part quality and/or sabotage
produced parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.