* 1824448
* An Empirical Model of Limited Consideration: Robust Inference for Risk Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Levon Barseghyan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 395,982.00

Much empirical work in the social sciences is devoted to learning individuals'
preferences from observing their choice of a product from a finite collection of
alternatives (often referred to as "feasible set"). Yet, there is a large body
of theoretical and applied literature spanning microeconomics, behavioral
economics, marketing, and psychology, suggesting that often individuals do not
actually consider every alternative in the feasible set before making their
choice. There is also a wide literature documenting that individuals'
preferences -- their tastes over different products -- exhibit large
heterogeneity even within a group of individuals with similar characteristics.
The investigators put forward two broad classes of empirical models of discrete
choice that allow both for unobserved heterogeneity in the collection of
alternatives that the individual considers, i.e. "consideration set", and in the
preferences that each individual holds. In one class of models, heterogeneity in
preferences and heterogeneity in consideration sets are allowed to depend on
each other. This research develops a method to estimate the distribution of
preferences and/or consideration sets, and conduct inference on the estimated
distributions. It also develops a method to estimate (and conduct inference on)
the welfare effect of policy interventions, e.g. ones that make consumers more
aware of specific products or product attributes, or those that change the set
of products in the market, etc. A primary output of this research is a
collection of portable computer programs implementing the methodology, that will
be shared with the community openly and free of charges or restrictions.

This research puts forward new empirical models of discrete choice with
unobserved heterogeneity in consideration sets. In the models considered in this
research, decision makers are heterogeneous both in the products they consider
and in their preferences. The first class of models places no restriction on the
consideration set formation process and, in particular, allows for unrestricted
forms of dependence of the decision maker's random consideration set with her
preferences and with the observable characteristics of the available
alternatives. Due to its flexibility, this model is partially but not point
identified. The second class of models assumes specific distributions (known up
to parameters) for the random consideration sets, building on recent theoretical
advances in the microeconomic theory literature on limited
consideration/attention. It then aims at providing weak conditions to achieve
non-parametric point identification of unobserved heterogeneity in preferences,
as well as identification of the distribution of consideration sets. This
research aims at suggesting specific estimators/inference methods for the point
or set identified distributions. This research further develops computer
packages that empirical researcher can use to implement the methods, and that
will be shared with the community openly and free of charges or restrictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.