* 1824851
* Track I IRES Sites: Training with Smut Fungi in Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Michael Perlin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 296,889.00

This award is co-funded by OISE and EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungal
infection of plants is an ongoing major threat to human agriculture, thus
stressing the importance of the research proposed in this project. The fungal
pathogens studied in the US lab of the PI and the two labs in Germany, serve as
models for understanding basic mechanisms of infections, but also for
understanding host specificity and emerging infectious disease through host
shifts. It is expected to gain alternative perspectives to address these
research themes by the collaborative approaches. This IRES project provides an
opportunity to 7 students each year to participate in the exchange. Although all
three labs work with fungi, each has its own areas of expertise and each
provides different approaches for conducting research. Each summer, a joint
meeting will take place with all participants and PIs to discuss and present the
ongoing projects in a unified group setting, alternating each year in Bochum or
in Aachen, Germany. This project is of particular importance because it may lead
to the development of new methods for protecting agricultural crop plants from
fungal diseases. Also, this project will allow active participation by students
and help them develop skills in experimental design, and broaden participation
in basic science by underrepresented groups (especially, African-Americans,
women, and Appalachian students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying research
theme for this proposal is host/pathogen interaction, including components of
virulence and overall fitness of the pathogen. This project requires, and will
benefit from, training in the two German labs, rather than having all students
work in the same lab. First, the collaboration with two labs spreads the
responsibility of the host labs and allows for more students (i.e., up to 7) to
participate each year in the exchange. It is expected that the strong impact of
these collaborative research/training exchanges will be in the longer-term
appreciation of cultural differences and alternative approaches to research
questions. The broader investigation of fungal/host interactions will benefit
from this varied, collaborative approach by streamlining exchange of ideas and
expertise. The proposed effector and protein interaction studies will be used by
a wide community of scientists interested in basic fungal biology, host-parasite
interactions, fungal evolution, and the development of new methods for
protecting agricultural crop plants from fungal diseases and could lead to a
better understanding of the basic infection mechanisms and disease process of
obligate plant-parasitic fungi. Educational opportunities for students will be
provided to actively participate in fungal genetics, transcriptomics and bio-
informatics research, to learn fluorescence and electron microscopy techniques,
to develop skills in experimental design, and will broaden the participation in
basic science by underrepresented groups (specifically, African-Americans,
women, and Appalachian students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.