* 1824258
* EAGER: Visualizing Cyber Defense Networks
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Phillip Porras, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,947.00

SRI International (SRI) and Asylum Labs (Asylum) propose using 3D virtual world
gaming technologies to enhance the understanding, engagement factors, and the
recruitment impact of Cyber Challenge Competitions (C3). This project intends to
address the C3 engagement challenge by designing visualization and presentation
technologies that have proven highly successful in e-Sports leagues. The project
will demonstrate how C3 forums can be transformed with a high-engagement
visualization layer for cybersecurity talent recruitment. This project has a
potential to increase student and researcher community engagement in cyber-
challenge academic competitions. It will implement key innovations and lessons
from e-Sports competitions as potential design alternatives for the
visualization framework. By increasing the interest and impact of C3, it will
help to identify and attract talented individuals. Elevating the experience of
participants and spectators at C3 events has a potential to increase interest in
the cybersecurity profession, promote cybersecurity to a larger talent pool, and
decrease the age at which people become interested in this field. Currently,
e-Sports events draw a broader following among minority groups than C3 events.
The project aims to increase the appeal of C3 events to a younger and broader
audience and to understand specific factors that inhibit female and minority
student participation in fields related to cybersecurity.

The purpose of this project is to identify and develop critical cybersecurity
skills. The engagement strategies and human-intuitive presentation methods
employed in the current generation of C3 events seem to attract those who have
already acquired an interest in cybersecurity. The proposed underlying 3D game-
like visualization of network attack and defense systems may lead to operational
enhancements to future threat-analysis environments. The project will primarily
focus on human engagement and understanding of complex data presentation in
fast-paced computer attack and defense competitions. The project's system design
will incorporate perspectives and prior research from the Human Computer
Interaction (HCI) research community, including abstraction, inclusive
demographic and gender appeal, intuitive iconography, and visual-cognitive load
management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.