* 1824150
* 2018 Plasma Processing Science: Fundamental Insights in Plasma Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Peter Bruggeman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

CBET-1824150&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bruggeman, Peter J. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
will provide partial support for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and
early career scientists to attend the 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Plasma
Processing Science (GRC-PPS) that will be held from August 5 to 10, 2018, at
Bryant University, Smithfield, RI, USA. This conference aims to provide a forum
for highlight the scientific advances at the cutting edge of plasma processing
science. During the meeting, new emerging topics and trends, with a focus on the
mechanisms that contribute to the existing and future application of plasmas
will be discussed. Plasma processing is used in a wide range of established and
emerging applications in the areas of energy, advanced materials, human health
and environmental sustainability. The special format of the Gordon Conferences,
with programmed discussion sessions and ample time for informal gatherings in
the afternoons and evenings, will provide for a fertile atmosphere of
brainstorming and creative thinking among all attendees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the 2018 GRC-PPS is to identify common
threads in different plasma sub-communities and to translate knowledge to enable
technological breakthrough and accelerate innovations. Several sessions will
focus on the translational common thread of different plasma processes with a
strong emphasis on the fundamental mechanisms of plasma processes underpinning
applications. Among the scientific sessions are sessions addressing novel
developments in plasma diagnostics, modeling, material interactions and
multiphase plasmas. Four new topics have been introduced: Plasma Catalysis,
Plasma Combustion and Flow Control, Exploring New Plasma Regimes, and Plasma
Agriculture. The planned activities focus on exploring creative and original
concepts as well as transformative concepts in plasma processing science. The
scientific impact of attending the Conference will be significant for the junior
researchers supported by this grant. Further benefits to society include the
education of the future generation of scientists in plasma processing science
and the advancement in technological important areas utilizing plasma
technology. The Conference will include a mentoring session for graduate
students and postdocs about career opportunities with experts from diverse
backgrounds. The Conference will also feature for the first time a "Power Hour"
intended to support the professional growth of women in the PPS scientific
community and provide an open forum for discussion and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.