* 1824466
* Development and Implementation of a Global Human Metabolic Physiology Database
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Herman Pontzer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 68,000.00

Daily total energy expenditure (TEE) is the total number of calories an
individual burns each day. TEE measures are critically important for
investigating fundamental questions about energy allocation, human physiology
and adaptations, as well as for understanding how individual characteristics and
lifestyle factors are related to common morbidities such as obesity and
diabetes. However, TEE data are difficult to obtain and use given the expense of
data collection and limited data accessibility across projects. This project
will support the development of a freely accessible global database of over
10,000 TEE measurements, contributed by leading TEE laboratories in the U.S. and
other countries. Making these TEE data openly available to researchers will
advance science in biological anthropology, physiology, and public health. This
project will also support training and education workshops, with outreach to
underrepresented groups in STEM, to educate researchers in biological
anthropology and related fields in current techniques and advances in metabolic
research, and to foster synergistic research across basic and applied sciences
in human biology and health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The database will house
n=10,000+ measures of TEE and related data (anthropometrics and ecological
variables) for populations around the globe. All TEE data are from doubly
labeled water measurements, the gold standard for TEE. This project will use
these data to test the effects of anthropometrics, reproductive status, and
ecological factors on TEE. The online database and freely available R scripts
will be developed to encourage and support use of the database by researchers
worldwide. A workshop will be held to train researchers (especially early career
and underrepresented groups) in modern methods of metabolic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.