* 1824121
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Convex Preferences Over Lotteries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Charles Sprenger, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 17,000.00

This award funds research that the coPI will undertake as part of his doctoral
dissertation. He will conduct decision making experiments in a laboratory
environment. The goal is to test whether the participants behave in the specific
ways predicted by economic theory. The coPI will use a new experimental design
to test hypotheses drawn from different models of choice under risk that are
used in behavioral economics. This new design has more power and does not
require specific assumptions that are needed by other experimental designs. The
experiments can be adapted to investigate a wide variety of issues, from
decision making over time to the effect of altruism on economic decisions. The
project will help us better understand how people make important economic
decisions. The results could improve our understanding of how to encourage
Americans to plan for retirement and contribute to their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to test competing theories
of decision making under risk, theories that are alternatives to the standard
expected utility theory. The coPI plans to use an elicitation and testing
procedure to acquire choices from a convex lottery space. The design will allow
him to discriminate between competing theories. The design elicits the convex
lower contour set of indifference curves in the probability simplex. This works
because many properties of preferences over lotteries can be studied in the
probability simplex with "budget lines" in this space. The experiments will test
to see whether or not agents strictly prefer more prizes to fewer prizes, and
therefore they will provide new evidence on whether or not strict quasiconcavity
is a reasonable assumption on individual preferences over
lotteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.