* 1824379
* SpecEES: Spatio-Spectral Sensing with Wideband Feature Extraction Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alyssa Apsel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 641,999.00

SPASS: Spatio-Spectral Sensing with Wideband Feature Extraction
Arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-growing demand for higher data-rates
combined with the rapid increase in the number of wireless devices driven by the
Internet of Things (IoT), will inevitably cause congestions in the Radio-
Frequency (RF) spectrum. Since bandwidth is a scarce resource, spectrum sensing,
i.e., the identification of unused frequencies in order to opportunistically re-
use these resources, will be a critical component of future wireless systems.
While modern wireless systems already rely on antenna arrays to improve spectral
efficiency by re-using frequencies at different locations in space, only little
attention has been given to sensing and re-using unused spectrum in space. This
project builds upon recent advances in low-power wideband transceiver design,
wideband compressive sensing, and multi-antenna wireless communication in order
to perform SPAtio-Spectral Sensing (SPASS). SPASS enables the identification of
unused resources in both frequency and space, which can be used to optimize the
spectral- and energy-efficiency of wireless systems. This project pursues a
vertically-integrated research approach spanning circuit design, theory and
algorithms, and system design in order to demonstrate the efficacy and limits of
SPASS. Broader impacts resulting from this work include an extensive outreach
plan involving undergraduate students from Latin America in this research and
increasing participation of female high-school students with Cornell's CURIE
Academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-antenna spectrum sensing via NonUniform
Wavelet Sampling (NUWS), a recently introduced sampling paradigm specifically
designed for RF feature extraction, is the core concept of this project. The key
idea explored here is to use NUWS circuitry to extract spectral features at a
coherent antenna array. These features are then used to identify unused
resources in both frequency and space by means of specialized white-space
detection algorithms. The project focuses on a holistic and practical approach
to realizing a full and usable SPASS system; this is done by fusing the design
of algorithms with the design of mixed-signal circuits for multi-antenna NUWS
that extract wideband spectral features with high sensitivity directly from RF
signals in an energy-efficient manner. To identify unused resources, white-space
detection algorithms that exploit the sparse and low-rank structure of spectral
activity in both frequency and space will be developed. The circuit prototypes
and algorithms will be used to perform real-world RF measurements, which enable
(i) a fundamental analysis of the system-level tradeoffs of NUWS-based SPASS and
(ii) an investigation of the unused resources in realistic IoT communication
scenarios that reveal the potential of reorganizing the RF spectrum in frequency
and space. The circuits and algorithms to be developed find use in a broad range
of other applications that rely on the extraction of spectral features from
multi-channel time-domain signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.