* 1824330
* Laboratory Technician Support: Expanding Capabilities for  Experimental Hydrogeophysics Research and Outreach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kamini Singha, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 701,262.00

This award will fund an experimental hydrogeophysics technician to support a
number of current NSF-funded projects; help maintain a large field equipment
pool; build capacity in a tank and wind-tunnel facility at Colorado School of
Mines that is open to the community; and provide a number of outreach
opportunities, from high school students to professionals. By hiring a full-time
technician, equipment will be better maintained, data will be published in
consistent, quality formats; and will allow additional outreach opportunities in
geophysical methods that are currently not feasible. All of these tasks should
provide opportunities for more effective and efficient data collection, method
dissemination, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technician will support a
series of currently funded and pending NSF proposals, ranging in topic from
exploring connections between trees and groundwater fluxes to the impact of wood
on streamflow and ecosystem services to mapping subsurface flowpaths in a
variety of systems. In each of these projects, the research group provides the
primary geophysics support, making the intensity of data collection and
equipment management high. By applying geophysics to less commonly studied earth
systems for geophysical investigation, like trees and streams, the group has
been able to answer some fundamental questions about coupled processes in the
earth. Importantly, geophysical data production is large when considering time-
lapse processes common in hydrologic studies, which makes development of
thoughtful, efficient ways to manage and publish data imperative, something a
technician can help with. The role of the technician will be to: 1) maintain and
calibrate geophysical equipment; 2) develop best-practices protocol development
that will be available for dissemination; 3) organize data management and
publication; 4) support field geophysics outreach, and 5) support training and
mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students on advanced geophysical
methods. Expected technical capabilities of the selected technician include the
ability to operate and maintain a series of geophysical field equipment,
including electrical, electromagnetic, and seismic gear as well as downhole
wireline logging equipment, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.