* 1824500
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Work Practices on the Implementation of Science Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 02/29/2020
* USD 18,446.00

International agreements concerning science policy are bureaucratic
infrastructures that rely on international professional staff who provide
technical and organizational assistance to the national delegations. As the
parties to these agreements demand flexibility in how policies are to be carried
out in their countries, the international staff need to maintain a flexible
mindset, being open to different approaches for implementing international
agreements while at the same time providing impartial and politically neutral
service to the delegations. This research investigates the ways that
international civil servants establish and exercise this flexible mindset as
they mediate between science, science policy, and international politics. This
project is focused on the professional staff of the United Nations Secretariat
charged with supporting operation of the UNFCCC. The research will employ
ethnographic methods to uncover how the formal and informal work practices of
UNFCCC staff impact the institutional environment in which policy is formed. In
addition to its implications for the study of science policy, the results of
this project will advance understanding of the anthropology of policy, the
anthropology of bureaucratic cultures, and the role of international
institutions in global governance.

The doctoral student on this project, will intern and rotate among three UNFCCC
staff units over a 12-month period. UNFCCC staff facilitate information flow
from scientific bodies to diplomats, write technical reports on science and
policy, meet with parties to the climate agreement, coordinate communication,
oversee audit procedures, and provide procedural assistance to delegates during
negotiation meetings, among other duties. Qualitative data will be collected via
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and review of internal
documents, to understand and explain the ways that the UNFCCC staff work, their
understanding of that work, and the ways in which their work practices affect
the larger United Nations policy making and implementation processes.
Qualitative analysis techniques including text analysis, descriptive and
interpretational discourse analysis, and context analysis will be applied to the
data to uncover meaningful concepts, categories, and relationships. The results
of the study will provide conceptual frameworks and data with which to
understand the micro-dynamics of international policy making on mitigation and
sustainable development efforts. By illuminating the processes by which
international agreements are formed and implemented, the findings will be of
value to political actors, policy makers and their staffs, and policy
researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.