* 1824859
* Collaborative Research: Design and Development: NGSS-aligned Museum-based Engineering Education Program with Classroom Extensions
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ron Skinner, Children's Museum of Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2022
* USD 188,945.00

Engaging in solving problems through engineering design develops the critical
thinking and problem solving skills needed to address future societal and
environmental challenges. In order to develop such skills in all learners, the
new K-12 science standards and the Next Generation Science Standards include
engineering design as a significant focus across all grade levels - from
kindergarten through high school. However, integrating engineering design into
their curriculum will be a significant challenge for teachers nationwide, as
K-12 teachers are not prepared to facilitate high quality engineering design
activities and generally have little knowledge or experience related to
engineering. New models of instruction and teacher development are needed. This
design and development project will create an engineering education program that
links students' field trip experiences in an interactive science center directly
to classroom experiences while helping teachers learn about teaching engineering
design through working with their own students. The project will serve as a
sustainable model for helping teachers develop expertise and confidence in
facilitating engineering design curricula. Improving K-12 teachers' capacity to
engage students in authentic engineering design is a critical step towards
increasing the number of students pursuing an engineering
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will follow a design-based research
model focused on the design and testing of an intervention through multiple
iterations and will involve a collaborative partnership between a university and
an interactive science center. The intervention will consist of engineering
design field trip experiences and coordinated classroom lesson plans to be
conducted in K-12 classrooms before and after the field trips. Teachers will be
supported through an online guide and curricular supports within the lesson
plans. Qualitative and quantitative data collected will include observations,
video recordings, pre- and post-assessments, interviews of students and
teachers, surveys and examples of student work. Analysis will focus on two
primary areas: (1) Identifying the learning opportunities for students through
coordinated field trip and classroom extension programs that engage students in
engineering design and (2) Identifying the curricular features that support
teachers in effective engineering design instruction and lead to teacher
learning about facilitating engineering design curriculum. Research in these
areas will lead to best practices for developing engineering design curriculum
and facilitation that advance both student and teacher
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.