* 1824152
* Extending the vadose zone: characterizing the role of snow for liquid water storage and transmission in streamflow generation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Oliver Wigmore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 03/31/2019
* USD 142,329.00

For communities worldwide, valuable water resources originate from snow. Despite
its importance, understanding of how meltwater moves and is stored within snow
before it gets to streams and rivers is limited to knowledge gained from a few
small-scale snow studies. There are pressing needs to better understand how
these dynamics affect streamflow. Seasonal snow-cover is one of the fastest
changing water resources under current climate trends with important yet
uncertain implications on runoff production. While the concept of hydrologic
connection between soils and streams has received attention, the liquid water
storage and connectivity of flowpaths within a mountain snowpack at slope scales
relevant to runoff generation are less understood. This is a major gap in
knowledge of mountain streamflow production. Emerging capabilities in remote
sensing technology, ground-based observations, and physically-based hydrologic
modeling provide new opportunity to better understand snow water resources in
headwater catchments. Specifically, improved understanding of the distribution
of liquid water in a snowpack will transform the scientific community?s ability
to monitor and predict the physical hydrological processes that occur during
snowmelt. This project leverages state-of-the-science observation and numerical
modeling techniques to understand the storage and transport of liquid water
within a seasonal snowpack. Using newly developed in-snow liquid water mapping
techniques, together with airborne-based snow depth mapping, we will track the
storage and movement of meltwater across sloping terrain of a heavily monitored
alpine watershed. A flexible hydrologic model will be used to assess our ability
to simulate the observed processes. Results will improve scientific capabilities
to: a) conceptualize and model snowmelt processes, b) understand the importance
of the hydraulic properties of snow at the catchment scale, and c) constrain the
potential hydrologic impacts of climate and land-cover change. In broader
impacts, thos project will help students to understand fundamental concepts of
hydrology and understand the various methods of study of hydrology such as
modeling, field observations and remote sensing. The project will support one
graduate and two undergraduate students who will be involved in numerical
modeling and field work. The project will be carried out at the University of
Colorado and Mountain research Stations. The project will in many diverse group
of students who are first generation college students, students of color,
veterans and rural students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this
project is to characterize and constrain the physical mechanisms that control
snowmelt delivery to streams in headwater basins. This project leverages new
observation and modeling techniques to quantify and simulate the snow
distribution, snowpack water holding capacity, snowmelt production, and dynamic
in-snow flowpaths. This is achieved through state-of-the-science techniques
including ground penetrating radar (GPR), instrumented unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), global positioning system (GPS) instrumentation, and a network of
automated sensor nodes to intensively monitor soil moisture and snow depth, and
a weir to monitor streamflow. Finally, hydrologic modeling will be conducted
with the Structure for Unified Multiple Modeling Alternatives (SUMMA) model to
assess the impact of modeling decisions and the ability to simulate snowmelt
dynamics. The overarching research question of this project is: How do snowpack
liquid water storage and through-snow hydrologic flowpaths affect hillslope-
stream connectivity, and how do these processes evolve through the snowmelt
season? This work will observe and simulate the spatially and temporally
variable snowmelt season to complete the following project objectives: 1) Map
the seasonal dynamics of catchment snow water equivalent (SWE) using UAV
flights, GPR surveys, a network of sensor nodes, and manual observations. 2)
Monitor the spatial and temporal progression of snowpack liquid water content
and transport using combined UAV and GPR surveys, automated GPS signal
attenuation, soil moisture sensors, and catchment streamflow response. 3)
Evaluate the skill of hydrologic models to simulate the observed dynamics of the
snowpack, soil, and streamflow response by systematically analyzing multiple
model representations of hydrologic processes and scaling behavior. This
research question will be investigated in a snow-dominated headwater catchment
in the Rocky Mountains near Boulder, Colorado. Our work builds upon decades of
local research in hydrology, biogeochemistry, and ecological processes. The
Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) at the University of Colorado
Boulder benefits from partnerships with the strong local scientific communities
including LTER and CZO research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.