* 1824324
* Biased Beliefs and Social Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mira Frick, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 302,855.00

This award funds research in economic theory that examines the determinants and
implications of biased perceptions and beliefs. There are three components to
this proposal. The first two study biased perceptions in the context of social
interactions. The team is especially interested in understanding what kinds of
misperceptions about society are likely to arise when people interact with only
a non-representative sample of the population, and how such misperceptions
affect people's ability to learn from their social contacts. The third component
focuses on a type of bias that may affect individual decision making, called
belief distortion. The research will give us new tools to understand and predict
the outcomes of social interactions and decision-making under uncertainty. These
are key to understanding many economic decisions. As a result, the project may
eventually give us better ways to predict the effects of economic policies
designed to promote the national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
project in the proposal builds and analyzes a model of local interaction games
with coordination motives. The goal is to understand what forms of
misperceptions about population characteristics and social interaction patterns
can arise, and how these misperceptions affect behavior and economic welfare.
The second project studies how individuals' misperceptions about their societies
affect social learning about unknown fundamentals. One surprising prediction is
that even under arbitrarily small amounts of misperception, information
aggregation may break down completely. The third project develops an axiomatic
model of belief distortion. The aim is to provide a unified framework to
understand central examples of belief distortion, such as ambiguity aversion and
regret, that have been widely observed. The team also wants to use this new
framework to analyze the behavioral implications of additional phenomena such as
motivated cognition that thus far are not well understood in terms of choice
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.