* 1824137
* Advancing Methods for Analyzing Coordination: New Developments in Global Game Theory.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Stephen Morris, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 210,318.00

This award funds research in economic theory, with a focus on coordination
games. This theory can be used to analyze a wide variety of economic problems,
including financial crises and business cycles. While the standard coordination
game approach offers insight into these settings, it allows multiple equilibria
and thus does not offer a complete theory in the absence of a theory of
equilibrium selection. In response, a global games approach has been widely used
in applied economics. By assuming noisy information about payoffs, one can
remove the multiplicity of equilibria and develop a wide variety of predictions
that can then be tested against data. However, there are a number of important
limitations to the global games approach. The four components of this research
proposal address four different limitations. The components are relevant for all
global game applications, but are developed in the context of applications in
macroeconomics, political economy and finance. The project therefore contributes
to developing new theories and methods that can help individuals, businesses,
and policymakers at all levels of government make better decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global game analysis has made extreme informational
assumptions: there is common knowledge of payoffs and multiple equilibria, or
small noise and globally unique equilibria. The project has four components,
each designed to address one aspect of these assumptions. The first component
examines richer classes of information structures to develop novel predictions
about when global game predictions arise. Global game analysis has been
primarily static. The second component examines dynamic environments with
learning to develop predictions about when global game predictions occur. Global
game analysis has focused on binary action games. The third component analyzes a
political economy application where feasible set of available actions is itself
a choice variable, and characterizes when the action set is or is not binary.
Global game analysis has mostly relied on simple analytic solutions to deliver
qualitative insights. The fourth component develops a finance application with a
rich set of heterogeneous players in order to develop quantitative framework
that that can be used in empirical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.