* 1824660
* Data-based Iterative Control using Complex-Kernel Regression for Precision SEA Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Santosh Devasia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 454,580.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
increased automation in high-demand, low-volume manufacturing sectors, such as
aerospace. In contrast to full automation, there is a need for growing-
convergence research on semi-autonomous approaches for low-volume manufacturing,
which exploit the combination of human adaptability and machine precision and
speed, to be cost effective. Robots with series-elastic actuators (SEA) have
soft joints, which enables precision control over the forces applied to the
environment and are therefore, considered to be inherently safe for human-robot
collaboration. This inherent safety facilitates easy adoption by workers who can
directly program the robots by physical demonstrations, which in turn reduces
the amount of training needed for new workers. Nevertheless, this increased
control over forces comes at the cost of lower positioning precision, which
limits their use in manufacturing, where precision is important. The results
from this research will increase the precision of such inherently-safe robots,
and enable their use by relatively-novice workers. Moreover, the use of robotic
solutions for manufacturing in confined spaces, rather than a human crawling
inside, can lead to thinner, lighter and more efficient aircraft wings, with
lower operating costs. Thus, the work will directly impact US competitiveness in
the aerospace manufacturing sector with a substantial number of high-paying
jobs. This research involves the integration of control theory and advanced
robotics in manufacturing. Due to substantial and growing interest in
manufacturing and robotics, the efforts will help to increase participation by
underrepresented groups in research, and strengthen engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively-soft, series elastic actuators along
with low-impedance control improves control authority over the force exerted by
such robots on the environment, and has the potential to enable human-robot
collaboration in the manufacturing environment. Nevertheless, a central issue is
that the flexural systems in such robots result in non-minimum phase dynamics
and high gains (for improved precision) can lead to instability. Moreover,
accurate modeling for increased precision can be challenging due to substantial
friction nonlinearities, backlash, and contact-related effects in series elastic
actuators robots. This research will fill the knowledge-gap on data-based
iterative machine learning approaches to improve the precision of such systems.
The research will use uncertainty estimates from the kernel-based learning
approach to develop conditions on the size of the iteration gain for guaranteed
convergence. The approach will be experimentally evaluated with a confined-space
manufacturing testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.