* 1824414
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Planktonic Lower Trophic Levels in Carbon and Nitrogen Transformations in the Central Arctic, a MOSAiC Proposal
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Robert Campbell, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 899,732.00

The ecology of Central Arctic remains poorly described, especially the "who eats
who" world of the microscopic animals that spend their lives drifting in the
water, the zooplankton. Zooplankton are eaten by fish, seabirds, and baleen
whales, such as the bowhead whale, and are important members of the ocean food
chain. The MOSAiC (Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of
Arctic Climate) project is a unique chance to investigate these understudied
animals (zooplankton) over all four seasons of the year. Here is proposed to
participate in the MOSAiC expedition with an international science team to study
how the biology and environment of the Arctic affect the zooplankton, to
understand their role in the ecosystem (for example, who do they eat and how
much), and to describe how changes in the Arctic environment, such as loss of
sea ice, may affect their survival. Broader Impacts: This understanding is
needed to predict how environmental change might be changing the whole Arctic
ecosystem from plankton to fish to seals to humans and if the unique ice-
dependent ecosystem will still remain. There have been few year-long studies of
the biology of the Arctic Ocean because it is very difficult to get there during
the dark, long, cold winter. The PIs will reach out to some of our youngest
audiences, K-3 students at North Falmouth MA Elementary, to share our
fascination with the Arctic and to introduce the students to the planktonic
world and to life and work on board a ship frozen into the ice. Substantial
public outreach for the project will be led by the international MOSAiC team. A
postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate students will also participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on the planktonic lower
trophic levels and will quantify the role that the mesozooplankton play in
biological transformation and cycling of important elements (C, N) in the
central Arctic Ocean ecosystem. Working together with an international team of
scientists, the PIs will determine seasonal patterns in abundance, biomass,
vertical distribution, and life stage structure for the entire zooplankton
community using plankton nets and acoustic and optical methods. Key biological
rate processes of important species will be measured experimentally to determine
seasonal changes in food web dynamics and to better understand life cycle and
survival strategies and how they are linked to production cycle timing. Trophic
linkages will be determined using both isotopic ratios and molecular techniques.
These rate processes and linkages then will be interpreted in the context of the
abundance and distribution patterns, of the physical ocean environment, of sea
ice quality and extent, and of season. Greater temporal and spatial context will
be quantified through collaborations with MOSAiC modeling efforts. This study is
novel in that it would result in the first quantification of the planktonic food
web dynamics in the central Arctic through direct measurement of the important
biological rate processes and will utilize both traditional and modern
techniques to describe and quantify trophic linkages and carbon
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.