* 1824798
* Control and Stabilization of Mechanical Systems with Broken Symmetry via Symmetry Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Tomoki Ohsawa, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 240,574.00

Many mechanical or robotic systems are designed to operate in a specific
configuration or position. For example, an underwater vehicle must maintain a
certain attitude to carry out its missions such as underwater surveillance or an
offshore wind turbine must maintain its upright position under various
disturbances created by waves and gusts in the ocean. However, such a
configuration tends to be naturally unstable under external disturbances, and
hence must be controlled properly to stay in a desired configuration. The main
objective of this project is to innovate new control strategies to stabilize and
control such difficult-to-control systems, exploiting some inherent dynamic
characteristics of these systems. The new control strategies will be applicable
to a wide class of mechanical and robotic systems as opposed to ad-hoc
techniques that are currently used which are designed for a specific system. The
project involves a group of students from diverse backgrounds and academic
levels, and integrates research with outreach activities using a simple and easy
to understand robotic system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical and robotic
systems under the influence of gravity or buoyancy can be seen as systems with
broken symmetry: The presence of the external forces introduces a particular
direction along which the force applies to the system, thereby breaking the
symmetry that the system would otherwise possess. Balancing or stabilizing such
systems by applying controls to them has been one of the main challenges in
control theory. The project develops a new paradigm of control and stabilization
of mechanical systems with broken symmetry. Building on the differential-
geometric formulation of Lagrangian/Hamiltonian systems with broken symmetry,
the project aims to develop a general theory of stabilization that applies to
mechanical and robotic systems under the influence of gravity/buoyancy. The
project broadens the scope of applications of stabilization techniques developed
for mechanical systems by systematically extending the method of controlled
Lagrangians/Hamiltonians to systems with broken symmetry. The methods will also
be generalized to those mechanical systems under nonholonomic constraints as
well, further extending the scope of applications to those robotic systems with
rolling and sliding constraints as well as underwater vehicles with velocity
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.