* 1824365
* Collaborative Research: Deep Inference - Artificial Intelligence for Structural Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Guillaume Pouliot, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 82,384.00

In order to evaluate the effect of economic policies such as extended health
care coverage or changes in the minimum wage, economists use structural models
which powerfully describe the mechanism at work, but estimating structural
models is typically challenging. A main tool for estimating such structural
models is inference via simulation. For different parametrizations of the model,
synthetic data is generated via the model, and the parameters generating data
that most closely resembles observed data are used as estimates. Recent modern
artificial intelligence methods such as deep learning for image recognition are
based on this same principle. These methods have been achieving impressive
results over the past years. Therefore, this research takes advantage of such
powerful tools in modern pattern recognition for structural estimation in
economics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research considers a set-up where
individual outcomes are a known function of exogenous variables and an error
whose distribution is known up to a finite dimensional vector of parameters. The
goal is to estimate the finite dimensional parameter. The investigators adopt
the generative adversarial network approach (GANs) to find the parameter value
such that given a discriminator, a device that can accurately distinguish data
generated using the model from real data, is unable to do so when the data is
generated according to such parameter value. The method developed in this
research differs from other simulation-based minimum distance estimators in that
the distance is adaptive. That is, the discriminator learns the features of the
data that are best at distinguishing real from synthetic data as opposed to
hard-coding what features of the data to match. This adaptability property has
proven powerful in pattern recognition tasks. In structural estimation,
adaptability can translate into alleviating the curse of dimensionality, and
obtaining parameters that are able to more closely match entire distributions of
data, as opposed to a set of pre-specified moments. This estimation framework
should be useful in applications were distributional effects and heterogeneity
are first order to evaluate the effect of a particular
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.