* 1824571
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 471,556.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the R/V Roger
Revelle, a 273? general purpose, Global vessel. The vessel is operated by
Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) as part of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. R/V Roger Revelle is
owned by the Navy and supports multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all
of the world?s ocean basins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, REVELLE completed
282 days, 87 (31%) of which were for NSF. In 2018, she is currently scheduled
with 243 days, 146 (60%) of which are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
prioritized Instrumentation request includes the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Seismic Streamer System
$1,010,041&lt;br/&gt;2) REVELLE Networking Hardware $220,642&lt;br/&gt;3)
REVELLE Computer Racks $37,884&lt;br/&gt;4) Seismic Source Cabling
$35,544&lt;br/&gt;5) REVELLE -80 Freezers $15,420&lt;br/&gt;6) REVELLE/RIDE
Mooring Release/Modem $57,480&lt;br/&gt; $1,377,011&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.