* 1824716
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Local Topological Properties of Power Flow Networks, and Their Role in Power System Functionality
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yulia Gel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 154,105.00

Failures of power system infrastructure can result in unpredicted load
interruptions and severe implications for proper functioning of virtually every
aspect of our society, from water, food and fuel supply to transportation
control to law enforcement to healthcare, finance, and telecommunication
systems. Developing new methods for improving our understanding of hidden
mechanisms behind power system vulnerability is, hence, a critical step towards
protecting economic stability and human life and facilitating societal
resilience on a broad front. Complex networks offer a natural representation of
power systems, where generators and substations are specified as vertices and
electric lines are sketched as edges. There are generally two main approaches to
the analysis of power systems using complex networks. The first approach is
based on purely topological properties of a grid network, and the second hybrid
approach aims to incorporate electrical engineering concepts, e.g. impedance,
maximum power, etc., into the complex network analysis, which typically results
in a representation of a grid as a weighted directed graph. Both approaches
provide important complementary insights into hidden mechanisms behind
functionality of power systems, and neither approach can be viewed as a
universally preferred method. This project aims to introduce novel concepts of
topological data analysis into studies of power systems that will capitalize on
strengths of both complex network tools and electrical engineering concepts. The
project will facilitate our understanding of power-flow grids and, more
generally, of critical infrastructure functionality, reliability, and
robustness, at a local level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
novel procedures for more systematic, data-driven&lt;br/&gt;and geometrically
enhanced inference for power flow grids, while accounting both for dynamic
higher order topological structure and for electrical engineering
characteristics of a grid network, and to study the utility of persistent
homologies in amplifying our understanding of hidden mechanisms behind power
grid resilience in a broad range of real-world scenarios. Furthermore, the
project will examine horizons and limitations of topological data analysis for
modeling reliability of power-flow grids and more generally for characterizing
and monitoring resilience of critical energy infrastructures to a wide range of
risks, including cyber-attacks, natural hazards and random
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.