* 1824792
* Catch Bond Clusters in Cell Adhesion (using DNA Origami)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Wendy Thomas, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 462,779.00

Cells interact and respond to their surroundings, and the adhesion - or contact
force - between cells and their surroundings is an important feature of this
interaction. This adhesion is the result of surface receptors on the cells
called integrins. In tissues and organs, cellular adhesion plays a role in
normal and abnormal physiology. As a result, cell adhesion is likely to play a
role in disease processes such as cancer, infection, inflammation, and blood
clotting. If cell adhesion can be understood, and subsequently controlled, it
may lead to new insights into biotechnology or treatment strategies. While
previous research has focused on a single bond, or connection, between a cell
and its surrounding, it is known that it is actually a cluster of these bonds
that governs cellular adhesion. This project seeks to develop a fundamental
understanding of how the size and shape of clusters of bonds affect the strength
and behavior of the adhesion. A combination of experiments, using a novel
approach called DNA origami, and computational modeling will be used to address
these fundamental questions. In addition, the project seeks to expand interest
in STEM and an understanding of how engineers can support their communities
through a series of K12 outreach activities as well as by integrating the
research focus and outreach activities into undergraduate engineering
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the bond between platelet
glycoprotein Ib (GPIb) and the blood protein von Willebrand Factor (VWF), both
of which are involved in blood clotting, as a model system to study the behavior
of clusters of catch bonds. It is hypothesized that the strength of the bonds
between GPIb and a specific region of VWF will vary significantly based on the
size and geometry of the clusters, which allows a single molecular bond to
perform a range of functions based on these variations. DNA origami, which can
control the attachment of molecules in specific quantities and locations, will
be used to experimentally investigate this hypothesis. This novel method will be
combined with measurements of adhesion force using atomic force microscopy and
the development of computer simulations. Three aims have been established: 1) to
determine whether clusters of molecular bonds have catch, slip, or ideal
behavior; 2) to determine how clusters of these bonds contribute to shear-
enhanced rolling adhesion in VWF; and 3) to determine how clusters of these
bonds contribute to stable platelet adhesion. Thus, the integrated modeling and
experimental approach will provide key insights into both fundamental cellular
adhesion biomechanics along with these processes in a specific physiological
process, blood clotting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.