* 1824198
* Research Coordination Network: Cognitive Functions in the Learning of Symbolic Signals &amp; Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Shihab Shamma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 538,500.00

The objective of this Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to advance
understanding of how biological systems learn complex symbolic signals, and
create artificial systems with similar capabilities. By defining a common
framework to describe these signals, and their variability across space and
time, the RCN will develop methods and tools applicable to a wide range of
domains, including language, music, action, perception, and navigation. The RCN
will build upon research in Neuromorphic Engineering and its development of bio-
inspired, low-power computing platforms, sensors, and signal processing. Using
these tools, the RCN will focus on high-level cognitive functions, to create
complex, bio-inspired systems that learn through engagement in tasks. The
network will bring together neuroscience, cognitive science, applied
mathematics, computer science, and engineering, with emphasis on machine
learning and artificial intelligence. Network members will participate in a
yearly three-week, hands-on workshop, that will develop and test new tools and
ideas, stimulate new collaborations, and educate students on unique
interdisciplinary skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will facilitate
interactions and collaborative projects among participating researchers
employing a wide range of paradigms that specifically deal with three thrusts:
the role of neural plasticity for learning symbolic systems; the adaptive
mechanisms underlying the learning of sensory-motor tasks; and transitioning to
real-world applications such as automatic speech and dynamic scene
understanding, neuromorphic hardware implementations, cognitive computational
algorithms, and databases acquisition. Specific examples of such diverse
projects include brain process models that assess learning and expertise;
algorithms, based on physiological or abstract events, that process input from
neuromorphic hardware; and development of software and neuromorphic hardware for
signal interpretation and action execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.