* 1824854
* Synthesis and design workshop: Designing Scalable Advanced Learning Ecosystems
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Yakut Gazi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 93,953.00

The U.S. is currently at a crossroads in higher education where access to
quality post-secondary education is a prerequisite for entry into the middle
class but the ability to afford such an education is becoming increasingly
limited. Georgia Tech proposes the Scalable Advanced Learning Ecosystem to
address this mismatch. Building on successful online education programs that
have offered Master?s degrees in computer science and analytics, Georgia Tech
hosts a workshop for higher education administrators and researchers to
establish components of Scalable Advanced Learning Ecosystems that can be
applied across colleges and universities. The goal of Scalable Advanced Learning
Ecosystems is to create educational experiences that can be scaled to growing
populations of students while providing the personalized attention that has
typically been the domain of unscalable individual, face-to-face teaching and
advising.

Technical description

Georgia Tech hypothesizes that with growing demand for higher education, but
with a limited supply of professors, advisors, and budgets to meet such demand,
Scalable Advanced Learning Ecosystems can be used to provide personalization and
customization for large populations of students. Human activity and expertise
are used to guide the creation of this ecosystem's innovations, but day-to-day
operations are machine-driven. The innovations include: Personalized Learning
Systems that use artificial intelligence and machine learning to establish
customized educational plans for each student; Intelligent Tutoring Systems that
modify the presentation and sequence of materials in response to student
performance; Data Mining and Learning Analytics that extract useful and
actionable information to understand student uses of learning resources and
outcomes; Scalable Online Environments that deliver high-quality, high-
engagement learning experiences; and Immersive Learning Environments that
simulate a physical presence in real or imagined worlds, overlay content on
those worlds, and merge real and virtual worlds to produce new learning
opportunities. The workshop is held on November 29 and 30, 2018 at the Global
Learning Center on the Georgia Tech campus in Midtown Atlanta, and participating
institutions are selected by proposals submitted that describe each
institution?s interest in Scalable Advanced Learning Ecosystems and the
institution?s commitment to action to improve educational access.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.