* 1824492
* Monetary values of increasing life expectancy: sensitivity to shifts of the survival curve
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* James Hammitt, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 479,992.00

Individuals' risks of dying at different ages are affected by government
policies including health, safety, and environmental regulations. To help
evaluate whether new and existing regulations enhance national welfare,
government policies require comparing estimates of the monetary value of the
life-saving and other benefits with the costs of the regulations. The monetary
value of reductions in mortality risk is usually estimated using one of two
approaches. One approach, common in transportation and environmental regulation,
estimates the annual monetary benefits as the product of a "value per
statistical life" (VSL) and the expected number of "lives saved" per year. The
second approach, common in food-safety and drug regulation, estimates the
benefits as the product of a "value per statistical life year" (VSLY) and the
average increase in life expectancy. Because life expectancy depends on
mortality risk at all future ages, this second approach assumes that individuals
assign the same monetary value to any time path of risk reduction that produces
the same gain in life expectancy; e.g., a reduction in accident risk when young
or heart-attack risk when older. This assumption is challenged by recent
research that finds individuals have systematically different preferences over
time paths of mortality-risk reduction; some people prefer near-term risk
reductions, others prefer risk reductions at older ages. The goal of this
research is to estimate the monetary value of mortality-risk reduction in the
American population and to describe how it varies with the total gain in life
expectancy and the time path of annual risk reductions. This knowledge should
help in refining estimates of the monetary value of the benefits of certain
government policies for comparison with their costs, and contribute to decision
making in other domains such as health care where evaluation is less
formal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a stated-preference survey
instrument, administer the survey over the internet to a sample of 1000 or more
individuals representative of the adult US population, and analyze the results
to determine how the monetary value of mortality-risk reduction depends on the
gain in life expectancy and the time path of the risk reductions. The survey
will present to each respondent a description and graphic illustrating his or
her baseline annual chances of dying in or surviving each of the following
decades through age 100 (conditional on age and gender). It will also present
perturbations of this baseline hazard function, obtained by reducing mortality
risk for only the first decade, and by reducing mortality risk in all future
decades by subtracting a constant or multiplying by a constant. The three
perturbations will be calibrated to produce the same increase in life
expectancy. Respondents will be asked to report their preferences between each
pair of the three perturbations (to test for consistency) and separately to
report their willingness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.