* 1824011
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Improving Elicited Information
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jacqueline Evans, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 29,300.00

False confessions/admissions are problematic not only because of the conviction
of the innocent, but also because the guilty elude justice. Research has
traditionally tackled this issue by identifying methods that increase the risk
of false confession. However, there has recently been a shift towards using
psychological theory to enhance methods, with the goal of helping investigators
distinguish between guilty and innocent suspects. One such method is the
Strategic Use of Evidence (SUE), which involves strategic timing of evidence
disclosure (e.g., early vs. late disclosure) and strategic evidence-related
questioning to increase statement-evidence inconsistencies in guilty suspects'
statements. While SUE has been demonstrated to effectively enhance the
difference between liars and truth-tellers, it has yet to be tested using
experimental methods rich in psychological realism that better simulate real-
world situations (i.e., participants intentionally commit a transgression and
are subsequently questioned). In addition, contemporary variations of SUE have
yet to be tested with both innocent and guilty suspects. The present research
addresses these gaps, and in doing so will: (1) shed light on which SUE
variation results in the greatest amount of elicited information; (2) result in
findings that are highly applicable to practitioners, as the present
experimental methodology better mirrors real-world situations; and (3) offer
research experience to underrepresented minority researchers. Overall, the
present research will aid law enforcement in obtaining valuable information
pertinent to accurately identifying perpetrators and efficiently solving cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the present research will employ a
cheating paradigm variation in which a research assistant pretending to be a
participant prompts (or does not prompt) actual participants to cheat on a
supposed "government-issued" test. This enables questioner to accuse both
innocent and guilty participants of cheating, and to question them using one of
four evidence disclosure methods: Early (presenting evidence before
questioning), Late (basic SUE, with evidence presented after all questioning),
SUE-C (presenting evidence incrementally, with statement-evidence
inconsistencies being pointed out), and SUE-C/E (same as SUE-C, except suspects
are required to explain any inconsistencies). Except for the Early condition,
all conditions represent variations of the SUE technique. It is predicted that:
(1) of all evidence disclosure tactics, SUE-C/E will result in the most
diagnostic confessions; (2) all SUE variations will result in more lie
indicators (i.e., statement-evidence inconsistencies), as compared to early
evidence disclosure; and (3) guilty suspects will ultimately offer more
incriminating details when questioned with the SUE variations than with early
disclosure. Given that findings fall in line with these predictions, SUE can be
advocated to law enforcement investigators as a method to help them enhance
their investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.