* 1824123
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language, Interaction, and Adolescent Socialization.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Norma Mendoza-Denton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The research supported by this award will investigate how ordinary speech
interactions with peers and adults at school affect how young people learn to
form social alignments, distinguish groups, express emotion, and organize
action. The nature of linguistic interactions is known to vary in different
institutions of education in ways that reflect the backgrounds of students,
material resources, and ideologies of administrators. The researcher will
examine this process through an intensive comparative study of everyday language
practices in two contrasting institutions of education. The goal of the research
is to elucidate how the micro-practices of daily linguistic practice prepare
youth for diverse social roles in their post-high school trajectories. The
research is important because the linguistic and social competencies that youth
learn in school will carry them into adulthood. Findings will help theoreticians
better understand the mechanism behind the production of heterogeneous social
identities. The research also will support educators and other stakeholders who
are concerned to broaden young people's opportunities.

The research will be conducted by Tyanna Slobe, a linguistic anthropology
doctoral student under the supervision of Dr. Norma Mendoza-Denton at the
University of California Los Angeles. The researcher focus on adolescents in two
high schools in Santiago, Chile. One is a free public school and the other an
expensive private school. The researcher has chosen these research sites because
Chile has one of the most segregated systems of education of all developed
countries, which makes it feasible to isolate the effects of schooling in a way
that would not be possible in a system with more institutional crossover. The
researcher will use the intensive methods from linguistic anthropology to
collect data on voice and embodied gesture in naturally occurring interactions
during classroom and extracurricular activities. Data will be collected through
participant observation, interviews, and audiovisual recordings, identifying
students at different points in their school careers. She will construct visual
representations of pitch tracks, to accompany transcriptions of speech and
representations of embodied movement, using a method for visual and textual
representation of multimodal semiotic channels in interaction. By comparing
interactions in public and private school contexts until graduation, the
researcher will be able to explore relationships between small-scale language
variation, linguistic practice, institutional organization, and sociopolitical
structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.