* 1824708
* The Dynamic Topography of the Blood-Contacting Surface of Arteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 341,599.00

When segments of arteries are removed from the body, they have a distinct,
corrugated appearance on the inside. It has long been assumed that this is a
result of the artery deflating as the effect of blood pressure is removed. The
investigators in this project hypothesize that the corrugations actually play a
role in normal, physiological function and that they change significantly due to
normal changes in arterial pressure and diameter. This hypothesis will be
studied through a combination of experimental and modeling techniques. The
researchers will answer questions about the underlying biomechanics of these
corrugations as well as how they vary with normal physiological function and
along the length of the arterial structure within the body. The knowledge gained
will significantly impact fundamental understanding of arterial biomechanics and
their physiological function. It may also inform future development of improved
replacement arterial graft designs for treatment of injured or diseased
arteries. The research will be conducted by a unique research team that includes
medical residents as well as graduate and undergraduate students. This will
support the engineers ability to connect the engineering research to the actual
physiology and potential clinical impact. In addition, modules on arterial
mechanics and the underlying materials performance will be developed as part of
a series of lecture-demonstration activities that provide K12 students with a
visual understanding of the science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three aims have been
established to test the stated hypothesis. First, the team will investigate the
biomechanics of the luminal corrugations by treating the internal elastic lamina
(the inner surface) as a thin, nearly-inextensible membrane in contact with a
soft substrate. Second, the dynamic topography of the arteries will be
investigated to understand the state of the corrugations under normal
physiologic conditions. Finally, the variation in luminal structure and
corrugations will be investigated for arteries as they move distal to (away
from) the heart. This work will use a combination of imaging and biomechanical
testing strategies in both in vivo and excised arteries from porcine specimens,
and the biomechanical behavior will be related to the collagen and elastin
microstructure. The experiments will be partnered with finite element models
that will be used to understand the underlying mechanisms of the biomechanical
behavior as well as, once validated, investigate varying loads and boundary
conditions that cannot easily be studied experimentally. If the primary
hypothesis is supported, the investigators plan to link their findings to the
secondary hypothesis that the functional role of the corrugations is to protect
the endothelial layer of the artery by allowing it to accommodate the arterial
diameter changes without in-plane stretching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.