* 1824558
* SpecEES: Dynamic Space Frequency Multiplexing - A New Paradigm for Filterbank Multicarrier Spectrum Access
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Behrouz Farhang-Boroujeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 674,558.00

SpecEES: Dynamic Space Frequency Multiplexing - A New Paradigm for Filterbank
Multicarrier Spectrum Access&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exponential growth of
mobile data traffic has driven wireless communication technologies at an
unprecedented pace. However, the amount of available spectrum has not kept up.
As the use of spectrum becomes increasingly condensed, it is critical to develop
new technologies to improve the efficiency of spectrum utilization. Technologies
that can better utilize the limited resources of frequency, time, and energy are
needed to enable highly versatile and frequency-agile dynamic spectrum access.
The proposed project develops a unique approach termed Dynamic Space Frequency
Multiplexing (DSFM) for dynamic spectrum access by optimizing space and
frequency utilization in physical-layer and integrating with novel channel
coding, multiple access control (MAC) layer and coded caching designs to
maximize spectral and energy efficiency. Successful execution of this project
will improve spectral efficiency by at least an order of magnitude. The proposed
design is posed to meet future 5G challenges such as cell densification and
massive Internet-of-things (IoT) due to its great flexibility in supporting
multiuser asynchronous communication. This project will provide valuable
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Outcomes of this
project will also be tightly integrated into classroom teaching and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DSFM design builds upon two
complementary technologies -- filter bank multicarrier (FBMC) for frequency
multiplexing and massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) for spatial
multiplexing. FBMC has superior spectral property to that of orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) due to a flexible prototype filter whose
locality in both time and frequency can be controlled. The emerging technology
of massive MIMO offers complementary benefits to that of FBMC through spatial
multiplexing. It enables a crucial self-equalization property for FBMC systems
that allows for great flexibility in the allocation of subcarrier bandwidth in
accordance to dynamic spectrum availability. On the other hand, FBMC offers
effective frequency multiplexing needed for practical massive MIMO systems. The
proposed DSFM design will maximize mutual benefits of FBMC and massive MIMO and
thus is an exceptional candidate for both spectrum efficient and energy
efficient dynamic spectrum access. This project is highly innovative in that it
develops (1) novel adaptive prototype filter designs that enable self-
equalization of FBMC for massive MIMO networks; (2) hybrid beamforming
architectures to improve energy efficiency; (3) low complexity channel coding
and decoding algorithms for high spectral and energy efficiency communications;
(4) cache-aided DSFM carrier aggregation for improving spectral and energy
efficiency; (5) DSFM-enabled dynamic MAC layer schemes; (6) city-scale testbed
validation using the National Science Foundation (NSF) Platforms for Advanced
Wireless Research (PAWR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.