* 1824687
* NNA: Dynamic Vehicle-Terrain Modeling and Control of Lightweight Ground Robots in Snow and Sand
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Laura Ray, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 466,717.00

This research project seeks fundamental understanding of the dynamics of wheeled
vehicles moving through soft terrain such as snow and sand. The project will
derive models of movement that incorporate improved descriptions of interactions
between the wheels and the ground. These innovative models will allow the
treatment of, for example, lightweight vehicles and easily crumbled terrain.
These models will allow the robot to predict when it is in danger of getting
irrevocably stuck. New model-based control techniques will then allow the robot
to avoid this danger, for example, by repeated compaction of the terrain,
appropriate modulation of cable forces from a towed load, or simply revising the
planned route. The results will be deployed in mobile ground robot systems
capable of traversing Arctic regions untended, carrying or towing sensor
packages to provide "ground truth" data for comparison to satellite or aircraft
measurements. No lightweight autonomous mobile platform currently exists that
can roam Arctic terrain autonomously for long periods of time, without becoming
immobilized by pockets of low cohesion snow. This project builds upon the
Investigator's success with similar robots used in the more uniform and
predictable terrain of the Antarctic. This project advances the national health,
prosperity, and welfare by enabling long-range, long-duration scientific surveys
of the Arctic region, that will provide improved understanding of the response
of Arctic systems to natural and human activity. This project also supports the
NSF Big Idea on Navigating the New Arctic. Finally, the project will support new
content in the interdisciplinary engineering design experience for Dartmouth
undergraduates, and will provide new material to a hands-on Arctic science
outreach program for high school students from the US, Denmark, and
Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing vehicle-terrain models have been
derived and validated for heavy vehicles, and it has been shown that the
behavior of lightweight vehicles differs from what these models predict. As a
result, it is difficult to anticipate lightweight robot behavior in low mobility
conditions using current models. The goal of this project is to develop vehicle-
terrain models for lightweight ground robots that includes all the important
dynamics, and integrates those models with vehicle design and control to
maximize mobility. The project will develop estimation methods to detect
incipient immobilization and control methods to avoid immobilization by
reshaping the terrain?s shear stress capacity and modulating towed load. A
modular robotic platform will be developed to acquire data for deriving and
validating vehicle-terrain models and control approaches for lightweight robot
models. The platform will allow rapid modification of wheel/grouser geometry,
ground pressure, and drawbar load to obtain parametric data in situ. Higher
fidelity vehicle-terrain models enable control schemes comprised of model-based
prediction of incipient immobilization that trigger control modes to avoid
immobilization and enable a robot to make forward progress through soft
terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.