* 1824520
* Understanding Family Income and Consumption Dynamics in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Iourii Manovskii, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 216,998.00

This project examines a large and scientifically valuable data set to develop
new measures of how household income and consumption vary over years. The
principal investigator and his team will examine data from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID), a long term study that has gathered data on a sample of
U.S. families over several generations since 1968. He will compare households
formed by the daughters of the original participants with households formed by
sons, to determine whether or not these two groups differ in the dynamic
patterns of earnings and income. This is important research, because these
patterns are important for many research questions in macroeconomics and labor
economics. Measuring how American families have experienced changes in earnings
and income is important for understanding how income shocks like unemployment
will affect aggregate consumption. These measurements are also used by many
experts in government to evaluate how government policies can affect the overall
growth and competitiveness of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator will combine PSID data with administrative data records
to test possible explanations for observed differences between the two sets of
households. Standard measures of consumption insurance obtained using PSID data
imply excess insurance of permanent income shocks relative to the predictions of
a standard incomplete markets model. Preliminary results suggest that once these
measures are made conditional on the income dynamics of each group, the degree
of insurance in each subsample is consistent with the predictions of the
workhorse model. This has important implications for work that combines the two
samples to get aggregate measures of the amount of insurance available to U.S.
households. The project therefore contributes to labor economics and
macroeconomics and may uncover the need for new and better ways to measure
income and earning dynamics at the household level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.