* 1824341
* SpecEES: Spectrum and Energy Efficient Silicon Photonic Millimeter-wave Remote Antenna Units for Radio over Fiber Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Christi Madsen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

Radio-over-fiber (RoF) distributed antenna systems with frequency agile, energy
efficient mm-wave remote antenna units (RAUs) are essential for many
applications. They can cover dead zones of indoor wireless communications. They
can increase system capacity and throughput, and enhance spectral efficiency for
high data rate fifth-generation (5G) cellular communications. Silicon RF
photonics and Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) electronics
technologies will be explored to implement both spectral- and energy-efficient
mm-wave RAUs with small form factors. A successful demonstration of these chip-
scale silicon photonics wideband mm-wave RAUs for RoF distributed antenna
systems with simultaneous frequency agility and energy efficiency will
revolutionize the future of 5G wireless cellular communications and indoor
wireless communications (e.g., conference centers, airports, hotels, shopping
malls, offices, and homes), and provide further opportunities for the
semiconductor industry. Besides the aforementioned technical impacts, the
proposed project also promotes outreach activities to increase participation of
students from underrepresented groups in science and engineering, including
annual one-week summer camps for co-ed and female high school students. The
research and educational results of this work will be disseminated to the
academic, industrial, and government sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses spectral efficiency as its primary goal and energy efficiency as its
secondary goal. This project intends to develop novel chip-scale silicon
photonics wideband mm-wave front-end architectures as both spectral and energy
efficient RAUs for RoF distributed antenna systems using hybrid Silicon on
Insulator (SOI) photonics and CMOS chips, and transmit/receive (TX/RX) full-
duplex (FD) antenna units. Frequency agility, interference-resilience and
spectral efficiency are achieved by employing reconfigurable silicon RF
photonics filters and a FD front-end based on TX/RX antennas and CMOS mm-wave
integrated circuits. At the same time, energy efficiency is addressed by the
proper choice of silicon photonics technology, RF photonics filter topology, and
FD front-end architecture. The proposed research tasks are: 1) architecture
definition and performance analysis of a mm-wave silicon photonics-CMOS
frequency-agile, energy-efficient RAU, 2) development of novel silicon photonics
circuits capable of electrical reconfiguration, and relevant algorithms and
hardware to provide frequency agility and energy efficiency, 3) implementation
and testing of CMOS prototypes which include the necessary frequency-agile,
energy-efficient mm-wave integrated front-end along with the photonics circuit
tuning hardware, and 4) hybrid integration of silicon photonics, CMOS chips, and
TX/RX antennas and testing of the entire RAU. The emergence of silicon photonics
has enabled the potential of realizing integrated RF photonics bandpass and
notch filters with strong frequency agility and interference cancellation at mm-
wave and low power consumption for a small form factor
RAU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.