* 1824387
* 2018 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Yeast Chromosome Biology &amp; Cell Cycle; July 15-20, 2018; Steamboat Springs, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Jennifer Gerton, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 04/30/2019
* USD 7,000.00

This award will support graduate student and postdoctoral researcher attendance
at the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) meeting
at Steamboat Springs, CO on July 15 - 20, 2018. This meeting focuses on Yeast
Chromosome Biology and Cell Cycle and is co-organized by Jennifer Gerton
(Stowers Institute) and Mosur Raghuraman (University of Washington). The format
of the meeting is a combination of invited talks, talks selected from submitted
abstracts and poster sessions. A keynote lecture by a leading researcher in cell
cycle studies will begin the meeting. Cutting-edge research will also be
highlighted in short 15-minute talks chosen from the abstracts. Ten to twelve
graduate students and postdocs will also give 5-minute flash talks of their
work. There is also a dedicated 2-hour session for trainees to interact with all
the scientific speakers present at the meeting and three separate poster
sessions. The meeting affords many opportunities (both formal and informal) for
sharing recent research findings and exploring
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fields of chromosome biology and cell
cycle are quite diverse. This meeting is one of the few that focuses on fungal
model systems from which numerous fundamental discoveries on this topic have
emerged and continue to emerge. Recent advances in chromosome biology will be
highlighted in this conference, which will bring together diverse scientists
from across the country. The session topics include mitotic processes, meiosis,
recombination, DNA replication, telomere structure and replication, chromosome
structure, chromatin and nuclear organization, as well as kinetochore structure,
spindle dynamics and cell cycle progression. The conference primarily highlights
unpublished research findings and provides many experiences for young
researchers to learn about the field and devise future goals for research on
chromosome biology. The meeting will encourage career development of a new
generation of researchers, including those who are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.