* 1824737
* CompCog: A Machine Learning Approach to Human Perceptual Similarity
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Robert Jacobs, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Similarity is fundamental to nearly all aspects of human cognition. Perception
uses similarity: when viewing a person's face, we (unconsciously) calculate its
similarity to the faces of people we know in order to recognize who we are
looking at. Categorization uses similarity: when judging whether a building was
designed by the architect Frank Lloyd Wright, we calculate its similarity to
buildings known to have been designed by Wright in order to make our best
estimate. Reasoning and problem solving use similarity: when attempting to solve
a calculus problem, we calculate its similarity to previous problems that we
have encountered in order to determine a good solution strategy. However, how
people calculate the similarity of two items is not yet understood. Which
features of items do people use to calculate similarity? And how are the feature
values of items compared in order to calculate similarity? This research project
will use human experimentation and computational modeling to address these
questions when items are viewed or grasped. A long-term benefit of the project
is that a greater understanding of people's perceptual similarity judgments will
provide a foundation for understanding how people calculate and use similarity
in other areas of cognition. While conducting the research, undergraduate and
graduate students will be mentored in the cross-disciplinary approach embodied
in our investigation through participation in both experimental and
computational aspects of the research project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing a new empirical and theoretical foundation for
understanding people's notions of similarity, particularly in the domain of
perceptual similarity. The field of cognitive science is well aware that
understanding similarity is essential to understanding human cognition. Despite
this, the primary motivation for this project is the belief that, to date,
cognitive science's approach to the study of similarity judgments is much too
simple---the restricted class of similarity metrics considered by cognitive
scientists is unlikely to scale to large, realistic settings. The primary
hypothesis of this project is that the field of machine learning---especially
the study of metric learning---can supply cognitive science with a rich array of
complex and sophisticated models, models that will be necessary to accurately
characterize people's similarity notions in large, realistic domains. Machine
learning has pioneered the study of mathematically rigorous linear and nonlinear
similarity metrics. We believe that the time is ripe for the field of cognitive
science to make use of machine learning's recent advances. Machine learning's
metric learning framework extends and elaborates the cognitive science approach
in principled and innovative new directions. Indeed, this framework presents an
unparalleled opportunity for cognitive science with the potential for
transforming this field. Using the empirical and theoretical findings from
machine learning, cognitive scientists can now begin to explore human notions of
similarity in more complex and sophisticated ways---and in more realistic
domains---than has ever been possible. We regard the research project as an
early step for cognitive science towards a more sophisticated understanding of
people's notions of similarity. Because the project cannot study similarity in
all domains of human cognition, it concentrates on perception. Future work will
need to develop further the models proposed and evaluated here. If successful,
the program will establish an empirical and theoretical foundation that can
subsequently be extended to many other areas of human
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.