* 1824437
* Committee on Astronomy and Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2021
* USD 297,757.00

Driven by discoveries, and enabled by leaps in technology and imagination, our
understanding of the Universe has changed dramatically over the course of the
last few decades. The fields of astronomy and astrophysics continue to create
new connections to physics, chemistry, biology, and computer science. Realizing
these scientific opportunities is contingent upon maintaining and strengthening
the foundations of the research enterprise. Basing its deliberations on the
decadal survey of astronomy and astrophysics, "New Worlds, New Horizons in
Astronomy and Astrophysics", the Committee on Astronomy and Astrophysics (CAA)
identifies issues of concern to the astronomy and astrophysics community and
provides guidance to federal agencies regarding their astronomy and astrophysics
research programs in order to encourage the field's scientific progress. A
primary function during this award is to enable the next decadal survey. The CAA
is under the auspices of the Board on Physics and Astronomy and the Space
Studies Board of the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences at the
National Academy of Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Committee membership is drawn
from experts from across a diverse field, and the CAA is thus able to identify
and assess issues and trends that can lead to fresh insights and new
perspectives on key questions at the forefront of scientific research. The
activities of the CAA serve to disseminate information from the supporting
agencies into the broader community, as well as to provide the agency officials
with community-based input. The CAA routinely gathers input from the astronomy,
astrophysics, and physics communities, and members of the committee converse
with agency officials, the administration, congressional staff, and community
members. Most reports and analyses are available to the broader public. Staff
and committee members also participate in annual meetings of the American
Astronomical Society and, occasionally, the American Association for the
Advancement of Science and the American Physical Society. The CAA is supported
by NASA and NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.