* 1824165
* Collaborative Research: Relationship between plate boundary obliquity, strain accommodation, and fault zone geometry at oceanic-continental transforms: The Queen Charlotte Fault
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Emily Roland, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 277,118.00

Often called the "San Andreas of the North", the Queen Charlotte fault (QCF)
system is a strike-slip plate boundary that separates the Pacific and North
American tectonic plates offshore western Canada and Southeast Alaska. The QCF
is arguably the most active fault of its type in the world: the entire ~900 km
offshore length has ruptured in seven &gt;M7 earthquakes during the last century
and it sustains the highest known deformation rates (&gt;50 mm/yr). The fault
system represents the largest seismic hazard to southeastern Alaska and Canada
outside of Cascadia, and caused Canada?s largest recorded earthquake (M8.1) in
1949. Despite rapid response efforts following &gt;M7 earthquakes in 2012 and
2013, first-order questions regarding how the fault system deforms and the
processes controlling fault failure during earthquakes remain unanswered due to
the lack of modern geophysical imaging. This experiment will be the first
comprehensive attempt to characterize this plate boundary at depth on a regional
scale. Using seismic energy from marine acoustic and earthquake sources, the
project will measure the depth and extent of seismicity, image the fault zone at
depth, and determine velocity and thermal structure across the fault. All these
data will lead to an improved understanding of this, and other major strike-slip
fault systems, for better hazard assessment and earthquake forecasting. The
science team is a collaborative, international group of US and Canadian
researchers, led by three early-career women. Outreach to local communities will
be conducted through a residency at the Sitka Science Center in Alaska and
lectures at local high schools and community centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to convergent continental-oceanic plate
boundaries, the time-space evolution of continental-oceanic transform margins is
understudied, despite their important role in the planet?s plate tectonic
system. Continental-oceanic transform faults are potentially one of the most
favorable tectonic settings for subduction initiation due to the juxtaposition
of lithospheres of contrasting density and thermal structure -- small degrees of
convergence can lead to failure. The QCF system provides an ideal location to
investigate how a continental-oceanic transform fault responds to systematically
increasing degrees of convergence at the lithospheric scale. The study area
includes two potential fault segment boundaries that mark abrupt changes in
transpressive deformation mechanisms as suggested by changes in seafloor
morphology and shallow seismic reflection structure: strain partitioning and
underthrusting in the south transition to highly localized strike-slip
deformation in the north. Lack of information on microseismic depths and
locations, the deformation history and geometries of faults at depth, and
lithospheric velocity structure leave multiple fundamental questions unanswered:
Why has the QCF formed where it is, and what is its deformation history? What is
the history of PAC underthrusting along the margin and the fate of underthrust
material north of the area of maximum convergence? What are the primary physical
conditions controlling seismogenesis along oceanic-continental transforms? How
are strike-slip and compressive strain accommodated and partitioned over
geologic and seismogenic timescales? Using a combined active- and passive-source
marine seismic imaging strategy, this research will characterize crustal and
uppermost mantle velocity structure, fault zone architecture and rheology, and
seismicity. Data will be acquired using long-offset 2D seismic reflection and
wide-angle reflection-refraction capabilities of the R/V Marcus G. Langseth and
a combined US-Canadian broadband ocean bottom seismometer array of 64
instruments deployed for ~1 year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.