* 1824320
* Energy-Efficient Chip-Scale Sensing of CrowdedWide Spectrum
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Songbin Gong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 675,000.00

The ever-increasing demand for wireless applications has resulted in an
unprecedented radio frequency (RF) spectrum shortage, yet access to spectrum
will be an increasingly important foundation for our nation's economic growth
and technological leadership. A dynamically shared spectrum access scheme is
expected to significantly boost the spectrum efficiency. The key enabling
technology for the shared spectrum access is a real-time sensor that can monitor
a very wide and crowded spectrum. Unfortunately, real-time access to a wide and
crowded spectrum using existing technologies requires extremely power-hungry
high-speed analog-to-digital converters and hence is not practical for energy-
constrained mobile applications. This project will develop a new generation of
energy-efficient and low-cost spectrum sensing systems by fusing recent
innovations in RF acoustic-resonator-based devices, wireless circuits, and
sparse signal processing. If successful, this new chip-scale affordable system
will enable a transformative functionality -- energy-efficient sensing of
densely occupied wide spectrum in real time -- that allows us to substantially
enhance spectrum efficiency via dynamic spectrum access. In addition, activities
are planned to ensure that this project will have long-lasting effects in a
number of important dimensions, from education to industry, and from
electromagnetic spectrum policy to outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work
has demonstrated the possibility of acquiring GHz-wide signals with moderate-
speed analog-to-digital converters at a sub-Nyquist rate by leveraging
compressive sensing or sparse Fourier transform. However, all these systems
require the spectrum to be sparse and fall short when the spectrum is densely
occupied. In contrast to existing spectrum sensing approaches that digitize the
entire bandwidth of each channel, this project harnesses a new idea that
monitoring only a small fraction of the channel bandwidth is sufficient for
occupancy detection. Based on this concept, the project will leverage a novel
overtone micro-electro mechanical-system (MEMS) RF resonator to create many very
narrow, sharp, and equally spaced passbands across the GHz-wide spectrum. The
end result is that the overtone filter sparsifies the spectrum by suppressing,
within every channel, the redundant spectrum content for occupancy detection.
This filtering-created sparsity allows the utilization of sparse Fourier
transform algorithm and moderate-speed analog-to-digital converters to achieve
spectrum sensing with high energy efficiency. With a sufficient number of filter
passbands, the proposed energy-efficient spectrum sensor captures all channels
and does not miss any occupancy information. This project will also develop a
wide-tuning-range RF overtone filtering microsystem through a filter-circuit co-
design to support multi-band operations and sensing of multi-GHz wide spectrum
via scanning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.