* 1824486
* Collaborative Research:  Empirical Models of Supracompetitive Pricing in Differentiated Products Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Marc Remer, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 73,377.00

This research studies the magnitude and determinants of prices and price-cost
margins, with lessons for merger enforcement and the detection of cartels. Most
empirical research assumes prices are determined by firms' product portfolios,
the extent to which consumers view products as differentiated, and, importantly,
competition based solely on current market conditions. However, when firms
expect to compete in the future and have sufficiently low discount rates,
threats of future price wars can support higher prices than predicted by static
pricing models. This project explores this theory in two ways. First, the
investigators develop and estimate a repeated game model of oligopoly price
leadership. The assumptions in the model are motivated by an industry practice
where one firm proposes a markup to a coalition. The model is then used to
understand how mergers change pricing incentives. Second, the investigators
develop a test of static competition that is robust to how exactly firms set
prices under the alternative hypothesis. This research illustrates both
methodologies with empirical applications.

This research characterizes equilibrium in the price leadership model, state
conditions under which marginal costs can be recovered given data on prices,
quantities, and demand estimates, and characterize conditions under which firms'
implied time preferences can be identified. The investigators apply the model to
the U.S. brewing industry and study how the Miller/Coors joint venture changed
pricing incentives. The test for static Nash competition takes into account
product differentiation and multi-product ownership by individual firms. This
test is applied to the U.S. canned tuna market, where two of the three largest
firms recently plead guilty to price fixing. This research shows how the
framework can be used to i) date cartel operations, ii) distinguish cartel
participants from firms that are simply pricing optimally given its competitors
are colluding and iii) study the effectiveness of the cartel by comparing
observed prices and variable profits to those that arise in Nash-Bertrand
equilibrium and under joint profit maximization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.