* 1824770
* CNH-L: Volcanism, Hydrology and Social Conflict: Lessons from Hellenistic and Roman-Era Egypt and Mesopotamia
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Jennifer Marlon, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,301,722.00

This project examines the link between explosive volcanic eruptions and the
annual Nile river summer flooding in antiquity. Large volcanic eruptions can
reduce average global temperatures and suppress average global precipitation.
This is known to have had dramatic effects on annual rainfall on the Nile
watershed in historic times. The human response to this annual flooding, and to
its variability over the years, was the major driver of Egyptian history up to
the completion of the high dam at Aswan in 1970. This project, a collaboration
among historians, scientists, hydrologists, and statisticians, seeks to
understand the coupling between the hydrological cycle and human society in
Egypt during the Hellenistic era (305 BCE - 30 BCE), a well-documented period of
economic, technological and social change with often violent rivalries between
major regional powers. The results will also inform our understanding of best-
practice responses to the changing climate in the modern world. The project will
inform the broad public about human and natural systems and the complex
interactions between them at diverse scales, through a traveling exhibition
program developed at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will capitalize upon a rare confluence of
natural and human archives for Ancient Egypt and the Near East. By comparing
rich historical records (papyrus documents and inscriptions) with environmental
data and regional climate and hydrologic simulations for repeated abrupt climate
events, the research will determine whether and how social dynamics are climate-
driven, and whether and how human water management affects regional climate and
hydrology. Volcanic eruptions provide tests of human and natural system
sensitivity to abrupt shocks because their repeated occurrence allows the
identification of systematic relationships in the presence of random
variability. The project will make three important contributions: (1) integrate
historical data from a wealth of different archives to analyze the connections
between climate variability, social unrest, and institutional change during the
Hellenistic era; (2) improve knowledge of hydrological responses to volcanic
eruptions; (3) document the extent of human impacts on Mediterranean hydrology.
Simulations will be used to evaluate the climatic impact of large and sustained
volcanism and intensive regional water management. This historical analysis will
delineate the mechanisms through which environmental stress influenced state-
level behaviors, community responses (such as changes in land and water
management), and interstate conflict during the Hellenistic period, and how in
return human activities interactively affected soils, land cover, hydrology, and
regional climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.