* 1824681
* Participatory Statistical Inference of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure Recovery Times
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Youngjun Choe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 524,631.00

This research will develop new methods to estimate disaster recovery times of
interdependent critical infrastructures, such as electricity and water systems,
after damaging hazard events. Current recovery estimation is typically more ad
hoc than systematic and statistically rigorous. This project will address this
important challenge systematically and with rigor. It will lead to open-source
tools for developing disaster recovery time estimates and planning for hazard-
impacted critical infrastructure systems, with a focus on ensuring ease of use.
Project case studies of the framework will underpin development of the tools,
expand our understanding of infrastructure recovery after disasters, and help
establish best practices that can be emulated by other communities. To build
capacity of young researchers and future practitioners, the project team will
integrate undergraduate and graduate students throughout the project. To engage
traditionally underrepresented students in STEM education, the project team will
leverage two existing programs targeting high school and incoming college
students. This scientific research thus supports NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science and to advance our national welfare and prosperity with
benefits that will facilitate future planning initiatives to improve the
resilience of United States communities and their critical infrastructure
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a new methodological
framework, as well as software tools to support this framework, for estimating
post-event interdependent critical infrastructure recovery times. The core of
the framework is a participatory process for eliciting recovery estimates from
topical experts. The framework will include tablet-based and web-based software
tools to facilitate the elicitation. A human-centered approach will be used to
develop the software to maximize user experience and elicitation performance.
The methodological framework will use Bayesian inference to integrate available
empirical data with expert estimates. Experts will estimate recovery functions
or trends, rather than points or probability distributions. This will enable
calculation of common resilience metrics, such as the area under a recovery
curve. The framework and tools will be evaluated based on case studies in
Seattle, WA and Portland, OR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.