* 1824874
* Oceanographic Technical Services, University of Rhode Island, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* William Fanning, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 3,677,815.00

University of Rhode Island proposes to support technical services on R/V
Endeavor, a 184? general purpose research vessel operated as part of the
Academic Research Fleet. The fleet is scheduled and supported by the University-
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). R/V Endeavor is a well-
equipped, intermediate sized research vessel that is owned by NSF and operated
under a Charter Party Agreement by the University of Rhode Island. The vessel
was built in 1976 and refit in 1993. She can carry up to 17 scientists on
cruises up to 30 days in duration. The vessel supports projects from all
disciplines of oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal requests support for basic
services and utilization of the Tech Pool. They will provide one shipboard
technician on each cruise of R/V Endeavor to support seagoing research projects
and to maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users items from their pool
of shared-use research instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review
Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.