* 1824329
* Meeting: 13th International Congress of Neuroethology, Brisbane, Australia, July 15 through July 20, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Harold Zakon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award will provide support to US-based students and post-doctoral fellows
and junior scientists to attend the 2018 International Congress on
Neuroethology. This five-day conference is recognized as the major, mid-size
meeting in Neuroethology, bringing together outstanding senior and junior
scientists for discussions of the recent advances in the field. Invited speakers
across many areas of neuroethology, will present their findings on how the
activity of animal brains give rise to natural behaviors. The comparative
approach that is at the heart of neuroethology, facilitates the identification
of common principles of brain organization as well as detecting mechanisms that
enhance behavioral performance, which can then be implemented computationally or
technologically. The meeting features sessions that will showcase how biological
solutions inform new conceptual and technological advances in bio-inspired
robotics, smart machines and neural modeling. The results presented at the
meeting will have the potential to guide future developments in multiple areas,
including neurally inspired design of engineered systems that will have
considerable societal benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes interactions between
participants, and the assembly of many top scientists whose research spans
neurobiology, engineering and neuropathology. It spans a wide variety of
experimental systems and focuses on areas of exceptional activity or promise.
This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses, raises new questions
about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new collaborations. By maximizing
both formal discussion and informal interactions, the International Conference
on Neuroethology will highlight exciting new developments in neuroethology and
engineering approaches in neurobiology. With respect to broader impacts, this
meeting will benefit the larger community in multiple ways. First, it will help
train and inspire the next generation of scientists, by exposing students and
postdoctoral fellows to exciting science and scientists. Second, mentoring
sessions, both formal and informal, will be organized for the benefit of junior
researchers to help them make informed choices about scientific careers in
academia and beyond. Finally, a concerted effort will be made to recruit
scientists from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.