* 1824442
* SpecEES:Switched-Capacitor Radiofrequency Signal Processing for Spectrally-Agile Low-Energy Wireless Transceivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hossein Hashemi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

Over the past few decades, enabled by the advancements in computation and
communication, the continued ease of information processing and access has had
one of the most profound societal and global impacts. Starting around 1980s,
every decade has seen a major improvement in wireless standards (1G in 1980s, 2G
in 1990s, 3G in 2000s, and 4G in 2010s) each necessitating new infrastructure
and supporting devices. The fifth-generation of wireless standards with the
goals of improving the overall wireless capacity by 1000 times, improving the
coverage, and reducing the latency is envisioned to be deployed within the next
decade. On the other hand, the number of wirelessly connected devices is
increasing exponentially under the internet of things (IoT) vision. Spectrum
management, security assurance, and energy efficiency are key parameters to
realize future wireless networks. The proposed research is focused on the design
and experimental demonstrations of radio-frequency (RF) integrated circuits that
can be realized in commercial semiconductor fabrication processes and enable
energy-efficient spectrum-agile wireless communication transceivers. Energy-
efficient secure wireless access is at the core of several Grand Challenges for
Engineering that have been identified by the National Academy of Engineering
(NAE) such as Advance Health Informatics, Restore and Improve Urban
Infrastructure, Enhance Virtual Reality, and Advance Personalized Learning. This
project will enable training the next-generation engineers and encouraging
broader participation of young pre-college students to consider pursuing
engineering and technology. The research results are expected to be transitioned
to industry for commercialization and ultimately transform the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The energy efficiency of wireless transceivers,
when dominated by noise, is dictated by the energy efficiency of transmitter
(mainly power amplifier) and, when dominated by interferences, is dictated by
the energy efficiency of receiver (mainly filters and local oscillator). In the
conventional approach, the energy efficiency of the above circuits is directly
related to the quality factor (Q) of the resonators and inductors used in the
circuit. Spectrum agility requires RF transceiver circuits to be tunable across
a wide frequency range. Unfortunately, compact high-Q tunable resonators and
inductors do not exist in standard integrated circuit platforms. Consequently,
the power consumption, size, and cost of a spectrum-agile RF transceiver would
be increased by using the conventional approach. Recent research has
demonstrated frequency-agile discrete-time (sampled), or more generally,
periodic time varying, RF circuits, such as switched-capacitor filters and power
amplifiers, that do not require high-Q tunable inductors or resonators. This
project focuses on theory, design, and experimental verifications of discrete-
time, periodic or quasi-periodic time varying RF signal processors with emphasis
on spectrum agility and energy efficiency. Specific research directions include
the following: energy-efficient and frequency-agile RF transmitters leveraging
switched-capacitor power amplifiers with embedded filtering and driven by hybrid
delta-sigma modulator; multi-input multi-output (MIMO) discrete-time RF signal
processors; linear periodic or quasi-periodic time-varying network analysis with
applications in reconfigurable RF filters and multiplexers; and energy-
efficient, compact frequency synthesizers leveraging phase-noise and spur
cancellation techniques in ring oscillator-based digital phase locked
loops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.