* 1824440
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Study of the Tradeoff between Spectrum Allocation Efficiency and Operation Privacy in Dynamic Spectrum Access Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 377,998.00

Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) is a spectrum sharing method that allows secondary
users (SUs) to opportunistically access under-utilized spectrum bands that were
licensed to incumbent users (IUs). It has the potential to dramatically improve
the spectrum utilization efficiency and significantly boost the capacity of
wireless communications. However, DSA gives rise to many new operational privacy
issues because the existing designs require IUs and SUs to provide sensitive
operational data to untrusted third parties. As an example, the operational data
for many government IUs is classified. The SUs' operational data may also be a
commercial secret for their operators. While some existing research has
considered privacy protections, these works fail to consider the significant
negative impact of their schemes on the efficiency and capacity of DSA systems.
Thus, regulators and potential SU/IU operators often are unwilling to adopt DSA
before the spectrum efficiency, capacity and operation privacy issues can be
jointly addressed. The goal of this project is to solve the above challenges by
providing a joint study of efficiency, capacity and privacy for a comprehensive
range of possible DSA system designs. This project will provide solutions for
addressing operational privacy concerns of DSA systems without sacrificing
spectrum allocation efficiency and system capacity. This project can greatly
promote the adoption of DSA technologies and hence enhance the capacity of the
entire nation's wireless broadband networks. Supporting of underrepresented
groups is also integrated in this project effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has two thrusts. Thrust 1 studies the efficient and secure spectrum
allocation in centralized DSA designs, while thrust 2 studies the same issue for
distributed DSA. For centralized DSA, both the central entity and end users are
considered to be potentially compromised. With these assumptions, the privacy
and security threats in each types of centralized designs will be thoroughly
studied individually. New schemes will be designed to address these threats for
each type of centralized DSA designs with joint considerations on both spectrum
allocation efficiency and system capacity. For distributed DSA, the information
exchanged among the users may inadvertently reveal sensitive information of
these users to other (untrusted) users or expose the system to threats of
cheating where some users may lie during information exchange. This project will
explore approaches to solve these issues and focus on making sure that the
proposed solutions do not reduce the efficiency of the distributed system design
while protecting the privacy and trustworthiness of the information
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.