* 1824666
* I-Corps:  Customer Discovery for a Novel Performance-Enhancing Foot Orthoses
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Yucheng Liu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to address
the urgent need of highly durable and more comfortable foot orthoses to benefit
military service members and veterans, athletes, as well as other professionals
suffering from foot or ankle injuries. The team has developed a nitinol-based
foot orthoses. Compared to the current foot orthoses that are made of
nonmetallic materials, the nitinol-based foot orthoses can provide enhanced
functional capabilities including optimized energy dissipation capacity,
improved comfort, long functional life, and lightweight. The life expectancy of
the nitinol orthoses is twice as long as that of the plastic orthoses. The foot
orthotic insoles market is currently estimated to be worth $2.6B and will grow
to $3.7B by 2021. Thus, commercialization and application of the proposed foot
orthoses will greatly impact the footwear industry. This project is the
beginning of a new science and technology based company that will enhance the
technology infrastructure and upon completion provide jobs for the STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce of the state of
Mississippi.

This I-Corps project will explore the market potential of the novel foot
orthoses previously developed by the team. The foot orthoses are made of nitinol
using additive manufacturing methods. Their cellular structure generated during
the additive manufacturing process can absorb more shock energy from every step
a customer takes, therefore offering adjustable cushioning and comfort to the
customer. Due to the shape-memory property and superelasticity of nitinol, the
designed foot orthoses are easier to deflect under human body-support
interaction forces, and can withstand corrosive environments and fatigue loading
conditions. This I-Corps project aims to evaluate the market opportunities of
the developed foot orthoses to gain a clear identification of market of the
technology, as well as a deeper insight into the needs of potential customers.
Discoveries from this project will inform the decision of the next step towards
a startup and commercialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.