* 1824632
* Interplay of symmetry and topology in gapped phases of condensed matter systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Lukasz Fidkowski, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2019
* USD 196,716.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
identify and classify new phases of matter termed topological phases. The
concept of a phase of matter allows one to account for drastically different
physical properties in systems made out of the same underlying constituents,
e.g. the liquid and solid ice forms of water. Solid state materials can also
typically come in one of several phases - e.g. metal versus insulator, or
magnetic versus non-magnetic - and much of their usefulness derives from
exploiting the different physical properties characteristic of such phases. A
theoretical framework for understanding the organization of constituents of
materials into phases, "ordering" that materials undergo when they transform
into a phase, was established over 50 years ago and had proven extremely
successful until exotic new phases - called fractional quantum Hall effect
states - were discovered. These states, found when electrons are confined to two
dimensions and are placed in large perpendicular magnetic fields, did not fit
into the old theoretical framework and possess striking new physical properties
that currently go under the name of "topological order". This research is aimed
to advance fundamental understanding of topological phases and how the
classification of topologically ordered phases is enriched when additional
symmetries are present. For example: topological insulators, which differ from
ordinary insulators by the necessary existence of a metallic state at the
surface, can exist because reversing the direction of time leads to a state that
looks the same as the original one. This time reversal symmetry is not obeyed by
a simple ferromagnet for which time reversal flips the direction of magnetism.
The research will address important questions: What interesting properties can
arise with other symmetries present, or with combinations of such symmetries?
How robust are they? Are there any such phases that have no analogue in
conventional solid-state materials? Can the quantum mechanical connectedness of
spatially separated parts of such phases be exploited to store or manipulate
quantum information for future information technology? The PI will investigate
these questions using analytical techniques and novel mathematical methods.

This award also supports education and outreach activities including: the
development of a new one-semester course focused on topological order at the
advanced graduate students level; the PI will present lectures related to the
research area to high school students through a program organized at Stony Brook
university; the PI will organize a once-a-month physics lecture series aimed at
the broader community, which will bring in outside speakers to introduce the
audience to cutting-edge research in this and related fields.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education to
identify and classify new phases of matter, termed topological phases, with a
specific focus on how symmetries enrich possible topological phases. Although
topological order is robust and independent of any global symmetries, the
inclusion of symmetries can lead to additional phases, for example the recently
discovered topological insulators, which are robust only when time reversal
symmetry is present. The PI will use analytical techniques, including those from
algebraic topology, to pursue several research directions:

1) Classifying symmetry-enriched phases for physically realistic symmetry
groups, e.g. continuous, anti-unitary, and spatial symmetries, generalizing
results for finite discrete symmetry groups. 2) Classifying both symmetry-
enriched and symmetry-protected phases involving fundamental fermion degrees of
freedom. This research will focus on the stability of such phases accessible
through the band framework, as well as on the search for inherently strongly
interacting phases. 3) Constructing many-body invariants, which distinguish
among the states in such a classification. In particular, the PI will explore
the connection between non-trivial symmetry-protected phases and anomalies in
one lower dimension. 4) Constructing a unified mathematical framework, based on
topological quantum field theory, to tackle the above classification problems.

This award also supports education and outreach activities including: the
development of a new one-semester course focused on topological order at the
advanced graduate students level; the PI will present lectures related to the
research area to high school students through a program organized at Stony Brook
university; the PI will organize a once-a-month physics lecture series aimed at
the broader community, which will bring in outside speakers to introduce the
audience to cutting-edge research in this and related fields.