* 1824010
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethics, Sign Language, and the Development of Interpreting
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Sharon Marie Seegers, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 12,779.00

Linguistic anthropology and interpreting studies has long established that
effective interpreting depends not only on grammatical and lexicographic
accuracy, but also on the cultural aptitude and ethical behavior of the
interpreter. This project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, asks how the voice of a Deaf person is
represented when that voice must be mediated by an interpreter. Using
interpreters requires answering a host of ethical questions; how should
interpreters (re)present Deaf people's voices, both metaphorically and
literally? How involved should interpreters be in Deaf politics? Who advocates
for the growth of interpreting? This study empirically examines how Deaf people
and interpreters navigate such ethical questions, and how doing so shapes the
development of sign language interpreting, and the way Deaf people and
interpreters are perceived by the hearing public. As Deaf organizing and
interpreting are emerging simultaneously as fields in which actors engage and
position themselves in relation to each other, the question of how interpreters
use their physical voices to speak for Deaf people and for themselves has become
a source of tension, and the subject of ethical practice. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, this
project would broaden the participation of groups underrepresented in science,
build capacity and scientific infrastructure through international scientific
cooperation, and enhance public scientific understanding by broadly
disseminating findings to organizations outside
academe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sharon Seegers, under the supervision of Dr.
Michele Friedner of the University of Chicago will investigate the formation of
ethical practice in interactions among hearing people, sign language
interpreters, and signers. This study focuses on sign language interpreting Ha
Noi, Viet Nam, where over the past three decades, there has been a rise in Deaf
community organization, coupled with a growth in sign language interpreting. The
context thus provides a unifor examining how ethical decisions are made in real
time, and sign language interpreting protocols are formulated. Drawing from the
framework of everyday ethics and the anthropology of the voice, this project
examines how Deaf people and interpreters in Vi&amp;#7879;t Nam debate, imagine,
create, and inhabit new ethical norms around the complex process of voicing. In
particular, the project examines interpreted interactions as a site where Deaf
people and interpreters emerge as particular types of subjects. The student
researcher will conduct eight months of field work with Deaf people and
interpreters in Hanoi, Vietnam, combining ethnographic fieldwork, with semi-
structured interviews and conversational analysis of interpreted interactions.
She will observe Deaf people and interpreters, to see how they communicate in
their daily lives, and how Deaf people are portrayed to hearing people with and
without interpreters present. The researcher will also follow Deaf advocacy
organizations, to see how Deaf people's voices are portrayed through
interpreters, and how the ethics of interpreters' involvement in Deaf
organizations is negotiated. This project will advance theoretical debates in
anthropology, linguistic, deaf studies, and disability studies about ethics,
translation, and disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.