* 1824680
* 13th International Congress on the Biology of Fish - Student Travel Grants, Calgary, Canada, July 15-19, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Christopher Myrick, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Fishes, with over 33,000 known species, are a primary global food source and
serve as indicators of environmental quality. The Physiology Section of the
American Fisheries Society (AFS) is hosting the 13th International Congress on
the Biology of Fish in Calgary, Canada, in July 2018. This award provides
financial assistance for undergraduate and graduate students traveling to the
2018 Congress. The AFS Congress will be attended by high caliber fish biologists
from over 30 countries who will present in 18 symposia on topics ranging from
basic science (e.g., shark physiology) to applied science (e.g., sewage impacts
on fish), and serves as an incubator for collaboration and idea exchange. Of
greater importance is the opportunity the Congress provides to over 150 student
and post-doctoral researchers who will present their work and interact with a
large and diverse group of fish biology researchers. Congress organizers aim to
continue to foster success of young scientists from groups under-represented in
STEM and Fish Physiology. Students who receive travel support from this award
will be selected based on the scientific quality of their abstract, the
relevance of their subject matter to the symposia, and financial need. The
Congress more broadly promotes development of a strong scientific
infrastructure, by incorporating professional development activities for a
diverse group of junior scientists. In addition to research presentations, the
travel grant recipients will be able to attend student-oriented support sessions
held throughout the Congress, including specific mentoring and career events,
and socials aimed at helping students develop professional networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physiology Section of the American Fisheries Society
has hosted the biennial International Congress on the Biology of Fish since
1994, and is hosting the 13th International Congress on the Biology of Fish in
Calgary, Canada, on July 15-19, 2018. This award provides financial travel
assistance to undergraduate and graduate students who participate in the
Congress, based on the quality of their research and financial need. The
Congress is the premiere venue for fish physiology researchers and represents an
opportunity for the fish physiology community to learn about cutting-edge
research throughout the world. The 2018 Congress is organized into 18 Symposia,
hosted by subject matter experts, covering a wide array of topics and levels of
biological organization from the molecular to the ecosystem. The Congress
historically includes a strong student contingent whose members consistently
deliver excellent presentations. Additionally, the ethnically and culturally
diverse collection of fish biologists at the Congress affords students an
excellent opportunity to interact with subject matter experts and to identify
potential career mentors, which is of great importance for early career
scientists, especially those from under-represented groups. The Congress
includes student-targeted events for mentoring and career events focused on
helping foster the future success of students as they move into the next phase
of their careers. Free Congress proceedings will be available on the AFS
Physiology Section website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.