* 1824337
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Leveraging Randomization and Human Behavior for Efficient Large-Scale Distributed Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Atilla Eryilmaz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,034.00

An explosion of low-cost wireless devices promises new applications and services
in diverse domains, including health, transportation, energy, manufacturing, and
entertainment. This project focuses on developing energy and spectrum-efficient,
distributed multi-access strategies for dynamic and large-scale wireless
networks under the stringent energy and delay requirements that are expected in
emerging applications. This work will enable the development of a multitude of
technologies that can improve the life of society-at-large. For example, this
work can support the next generation of communication technologies for large-
scale Internet of Things (IoT) applications and autonomous vehicle applications.
Moreover, education is a core component of this project. New theories and
algorithms developed in this project are integrated into the graduate-level
courses at the three universities. Undergraduate and graduate students are
involved in the project through the undergrad capstone and masters graduation
projects at the Ohio State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the fundamental energy and spectrum-efficiency tradeoff of distributed
spectrum access methods, and develops adaptive and correlated strategies that
embrace and control randomness with efficiency guarantees for dynamic users with
delay-sensitive traffic. In addition, the design incorporates humans into the
loop by observing how humans react in simple multi-access games, providing
simple human behavior models and simple human-perceived quality metrics, and by
designing methods that can adapt to unexpected events or actions. A combined
analysis and implementation approach of this project exploits high-
dimensionality in the system while also overcoming difficulties for large-scale
implementation and testing. In particular, the project develops mean-field
techniques and analyses for large-scale spectrum access. Novel real-world
experimentation strategies developed in this project emulate large-scale system
operation in a small testbed by utilizing the simplification due to our
randomized solutions and the integration of the aforementioned mean-field
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.