* 1824630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: External and Internal Structure of Extant and Fossil Hominid Calcanei
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Adam Sylvester, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2020
* USD 32,742.00

Reconstructing the locomotor behaviors of early human ancestors remains a
central task in elucidating the origins of the hominin lineage. Because of its
role in weight-bearing the heel bone (calcaneus), which has been relatively
understudied, has great potential for illuminating the nature of both
terrestrial and arboreal locomotion. The goal of this dissertation project is to
determine how calcaneal external shape and internal structure vary with
locomotor behaviors within and among humans and non-human great apes. Project
findings will be used to provide context for interpreting fossil hominin
calcanei, thus strengthening reconstructions of early hominin locomotion. This
project will lead to a large database of surface and micro-CT scans that will be
made available to the scientific community. It will also support the training of
a female graduate student and undergraduates in quantitative techniques, and
engage public and K-12 audiences in science outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
calcaneus has a central role in weight bearing, foot inversion and contact with
the substrate. Although previous studies have found differences in specific
aspects of external shape and internal structure related to locomotor mode, this
project will examine the entire external and internal morphology. The project
will include quantification of calcaneal shape and trabecular structure in its
entirety through a 3D geometric morphometric sliding semilandmark analysis and
recently developed trabecular techniques. The student co-PI will analyze how
calcaneal morphology varies with locomotor behavior, body size, and phylogeny
and apply these findings to fossil hominins to increase our understanding of
hominin use of arboreal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.