* 1824491
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: A Spectrum-Efficient and Secure Communication Architecture for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ting Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 291,000.00

Internet-of-things (IoT)-based smart cities can have a profound impact on
transportation, healthcare, energy, education, social life, public safety, and
many other sectors. The future of smart cities depends on spectrum efficient and
secure communication techniques to interact with ubiquitous IoT devices. The
proposed research, if successful, can be a catalyst for developing and deploying
smart city applications, thus having potentially enormous impact on the U.S.
economy by fostering job growth related to IoT-based smart cities. The proposed
research will also enrich the scientific knowledge related to network and
distributed system security, wireless networking, and mobile computing. A
substantial portion of project deliverables will be made available publicly
online in the form of talks, publications, datasets, and open-source code. The
broader impact of this research will be further amplified by (i) improving
curriculum development with enhanced course projects; (ii) disseminating
research results through high-profile tutorials and open-source sites; and (iii)
raising interest in technology among K-12 students and under-represented
minority groups through open houses. In addition, the investigators aim to
enhance undergraduate research experience through senior design projects and
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
supplements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, two closely related research
thrusts will be pursued: (i) spectrum-efficient communications; and (ii) secure
and privacy-preserving communications. In the first research thrust, the project
will leverage the unique physical-layer features among heterogeneous wireless
communication technologies for concurrent communication to significantly improve
spectrum efficiency in the unlicensed ISM band. In the second research thrust,
the project will develop physical-layer authentication techniques, in which each
IoT device superimposes some cryptographic, unforgeable information onto
physical-layer signals for the IoT gateway to detect and verify before
demodulating and decoding the signals. Working for both uplink and downlink
transmissions, the proposed techniques can dramatically improve the resilience
of the IoT system to illegitimate traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.