* 1824089
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociolinguistic Analysis of Voice Translation in Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Paul Kroskrity, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 24,923.00

The manipulation of language and voice in constructing narratives is a well-
established media practice. Linguistic choices affect the experience of the
viewing audience and the sale of commercial media products. Attention to
language is especially crucial, commercially and politically, for transnational
companies that wish to localize their media products for wider distribution. The
research supported by this award asks how different agents involved in this
process negotiate their choices and what this can tell us about political
relationships that cannot be otherwise understood. Successful localization
requires collaboration between translators, voice actors, directors, sound
engineers, and distributors, all of whom possess their own beliefs about
language representation. How do these professionals negotiate their different
stances about language? What are the decision-making and interactional processes
behind the scenes? And what do these decision-making processes reveal about the
political contexts in which they take place? To answer these questions,
University of California, Los Angeles anthropology doctoral candidate Spencer C.
Chen, supervised by Dr. Paul V. Kroskrity, will conduct a close anthropological
and linguistic investigation of the role of media translation in localizing
imported cultural products. Attention to this highly-specialized industry
provides a unique research opportunity to understand how creators construct
media representations through language and voice, and the larger political and
economic effects of those constructions.

This research will be carried out in Taipei, Taiwan, one of the cultural
production centers for Chinese arts and Mandarin media in the Greater China
Region. This site is uniquely situated to provide a linguistic anthropological
understanding of how sound translation professionals make ideological moves with
language to navigate sociolinguistic boundaries, commercial markets, and
geopolitical uncertainties. The researcher will conduct a focal-following mobile
ethnography to closely track this process. He will record their behind-the-
scenes discussions and collect more in-depth information through semi-structured
interviews and sociolinguistic analysis of Mandarin-dubbed products. This
research design will allow the researcher to document "outspoken" linguistic
stereotypes but also reveal "unspoken" language ideologies. Findings from this
study will permit a new perspective on how politicized and socially-encoded
messages are crafted and transmitted across different media markets. Also, this
research will contribute to linguistic and media anthropological theories on how
lingua-cultural identities are created, maintained, and circulated in the mass
media in relation to cultural producers' political-economic interests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.