* 1824290
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Governance, Citizenship, and Accountability: Democracy and Health Care Provision
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Hoyt Bleakley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2020
* USD 18,870.00

This proposed research will use experimental methods to study how best to
improve government accountability as a way of improving the efficiency of
providing public goods. The focus is on health care services provision and it is
intended to find out whether the proposed approach to the research will work.
The project will implement two experiments. The first experiment will involve a
quarterly meeting in which local political leaders report on healthcare delivery
at local government healthcare facilities to the general population. This
experiment is designed as a test of how effectively local politicians are
playing their supervisory roles in the health sector. The second experiment
involves training of local political leaders on skills in monitoring local
government health centers. The results of this research will help to address
widespread management accountability failures that lead to inability to provide
public services in many parts of the world. The results could also help improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of US external assistance programs to low
income countries. It will also provide ways of improving the delivery of public
goods and democratic governance through sustained citizen engagement in many
parts of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a feasibility study
and pilot randomized controlled trial of two governance interventions designed
to address constraints on health service provision. The objective of the pilot
study is to evaluate the feasibility of the intervention and data collection
activities. Centering on the role of politicians' performance in delivering
healthcare, the study will implement wo interventions: (a) increased citizen
participation through quarterly reporting meetings with local politicians on the
quality of health service delivery and (b) local leader skills training in
monitoring local government health centers. Data collection will consist of pre-
and post-intervention household surveys and health facility audits, along with
observational surveys during the citizen-politician meetings. Despite the
attention given to the role of governance in service delivery and development,
relatively little rigorous evidence exists on interventions to strengthen local
institutions. In contrast to studies that focus on interventions in laboratory
settings, this study will evaluate a governance intervention targeting
inefficiencies in the political economy. It also investigates supply-side
barriers to healthcare delivery, which are likely another essential side of
health care issues in many countries. Altogether, the study will shed light on
institutional dynamics in low-resource health systems. The interventions
themselves may spur significant improvements in public services delivery in the
target communities. The project will also generate sustained citizen
participation in governance, shifting the nature of political engagement in the
involved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.