* 1824745
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dental Topography in Primate and Rodent Radiations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* John Fleagle, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 13,596.00

Understanding how patterns of primate adaptation relate to ecological
opportunity and competition is important for reconstructing primate and hominin
biodiversity through time. This doctoral dissertation project will advance
knowledge about primate adaptation using a quantitative and comparative
framework to examine ecological pressures on skeletal shape and diversity for
Eocene and Miocene fossil primates, with comparison to fossil rodent taxa. This
project involves training and mentoring of undergraduate students, including
from groups underrepresented in STEM research, outreach activities to high
school students, and public sharing of scanned data through
Morphosource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the adaptive
variability and morphological diversity of primate clades broadly (comparing
primates to rodents) and specifically (comparing different primate clades).
Disparity and morphotype will be quantified using dental topography of middle
Eocene - middle Miocene endemic primates and rodents from both continents.
Dental topography will be reconstructed through time and analyzed using
phylogenetic comparative methods, allowing for the statistical comparison of
disparity and morphotype between different clades and landmasses through time at
set intervals. Specifically, this project will 1) test whether the
diversification patterns of anthropoid primates differ significantly through
time between Afro-Arabia and South America, and compare these patterns to those
of hystricognath rodents on the same continents, and 2) identify shifts in
dental topographic morphotype throughout the primate and rodent lineages of both
continents and assess whether these shifts share similarities and/or differences
in timing, degree, and magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.