* 1824357
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Advancing the Wireless Spectral Frontier with Quantum-Enabled Computational Techniques (QENeTs)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kyle Jamieson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 372,667.00

In recent years, user demand for increasing amounts of wireless capacity
continues to outpace supply. To meet this demand, significant progress has been
made in designing new wireless technologies, but even higher-performance systems
remain impractical largely because their techniques are extremely
computationally demanding. For the best performance, these techniques generally
require an amount of computation that increases at an exponential rate both with
the number of users and with the data rate of each user. The base station's
computational capacity is becoming the limiting factor on wireless capacity.
Quantum-Enabled Computational Techniques (QENeTs) aims to transform the current
research landscape by leveraging quantum computation to overcome previous
computational limitations, enabling new levels of wireless network performance,
with the eventual outcome of incorporating quantum computation into tomorrow's
wireless cellular networking standards. In the context of advanced cellular
technologies, QENeTs will contribute techniques to both improve network
performance and enable co-existence of wireless local area networking
technologies such as Wi-Fi in dense deployments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will design a multitude of new communications receiver decoding
algorithms that are amenable to execution on today's and tomorrow's quantum
annealers, as well as the early prototypes of forthcoming quantum gate model
computers. The QENeTs maximum-likelihood decoder problems are the first
application of quantum computing to wireless networks, and the first time that
such real-world problems have been attempted in quantum computers in their full
complexity. These methods will be tested on real hardware and benchmarked
against the best known classical approaches. In addition to spectral efficiency,
the project will also consider how quantum-enabled techniques can improve the
energy efficiency of massive multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) algorithms,
both on the mobile handset where battery life is key, as well as on the
infrastructure side, where the ability to power-down base stations reaps
significant cost savings benefits for the network operator. The QENeTs project
will contribute to the governmental and industrial research environments, as the
Universities Space Research Association (USRA), one of the collaborating
institutions, has entered into a joint Space Act Agreement with the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and Google to conduct collaborative
research on the benefits of quantum computing for a range of challenging
applications. QENeTs will further support graduate student education through
summer internship experiences at USRA and the NASA Ames Research
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.