* 1824353
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Should I trust the Mechanic? An Experiment on Bayesian Persuasion
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Wenhao Wu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2019
* USD 6,079.00

Economic models assume that competition will encourage information transparency
which is essential for efficient decision making and functioning of markets.
However, information can be manipulated or concealed to change the receiver's
beliefs. This research project will use laboratory experiments to test whether
competition among economic agents encourage transparency. In these experiments,
agents send information to persuade or influence a decision maker. The study
proceeds in two steps. In the first experiment, only one person at a time,
without competition, sends information to the decision maker. In the second
experiment, two competing people send information to the decision maker. There
is no prediction of full information revelation in the first experiment, while
theory predicts full information revelation in the second. These design
differences allows the researchers to test whether competition leads to
information transparency. The results of this research project will provide a
test of one of the fundamental assumptions about competition which is the
foundation of most market economies. The results will also provide guidance on
designing mechanisms to elicit transparency in economic interactions, thus
improve the efficiency of the US economy, growth, and
income.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will build on
Bayesian persuasion and use laboratory experiments to test whether competition
leads to transparency in information transmission. Conventional wisdom suggests
that competition between agents will encourage transparency. The PIs will test
this in a lab experiment in which two agents individually provide information in
different ways, to influence a decision maker. The PIs develop a model in which
the two senders of information have zero sum utilities and expect the first
sender to reveal the truth. If s/he conceals the truth, competitive theory
predicts that the second agent will send the opposite signal and the receiver is
likely to follow the more precise information. The base model is one in which
only one agent at a time sends information to the decision maker. The
experiments will test these theoretical predictions and will serve to validate
the theory as well as provide guidance on behavioral factors that affect
transparency. Besides testing the theoretical assumption of information
transparency, this research will provide guidance on mechanism design to enhance
information transparency. This will help improve the functioning of the US
economy, hence economic growth and increased income.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.