* 1824361
* 2018 Biomedical Engineering Society Annual Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Lori Setton, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2019
* USD 35,175.00

The Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual Meeting will be held in
Atlanta, Georgia, on October 17-20, 2018. This award will fund several
competitive travel grant programs as well as professional development activities
targeted at underrepresented groups and those that may not otherwise be able to
participate in the conference. The competitive travel grant programs include:
students (12), career development awards for underrepresented post-doctoral
trainees and young professionals, including junior faculty (25); and National
Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) members interested in biomedical engineering
who have not previously been BMES members (30). In addition, funding is sought
for a High School Visitation program for students from Atlanta high schools that
do not have enhanced Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
programs and targeting underrepresented groups. The meeting will feature 19
Program Tracks with the theme "Celebrating 50 Years of Innovation: From
Discovery to Implementation." Approximately 800 oral presentations, 1600 poster
presentations and over 4,000 participants are anticipated. The BMES Annual
Meeting serves as a primary vehicle for scientific sharing and dissemination of
the latest advances in biomedical engineering, as well as a facilitator of
important cross-fertilizations between the life sciences and engineering
technologies, which foster a multi-disciplinary approach in the practice of
Biomedical Engineering. The travel awards will afford the opportunity for young
investigators and investigators from underrepresented groups to attend the
Annual Meeting, be informed on the latest scientific and technological advances
in Biomedical Engineering, and help support BMES members involved in research
and training focused on health disparities and minority health. The partnership
with NSBE is specifically targeted at supporting underrepresented engineers with
an interest in biomedical engineering.

The overall aims of this award are to support the professional development of
students and underrepresented groups. Through a series of travel awards, a high
school visitation program, and poster awards, this grant will provide
opportunities for increased diversity among the meeting attendees and
participation in the meeting's networking and diversity activities. BMES is the
premier biomedical engineering conference in the United States, covering all
areas within the broad discipline. It brings together researchers with
backgrounds in engineering and biomedical science to discuss the latest advances
in the field and support the professional development of the next generation of
biomedical engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.