* 1824872
* I-Corps: A chip-based nano-opto-fluidic biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Jianjun Wei, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to facilitate
the development of a versatile point-of-care (POC) biosensor for decentralized
laboratory testing, and to investigate the market potential for early detection
of protein biomarkers for diseases. The focus areas are in cardiovascular
disease, breast milk banks, and assisted living facilities. There is a need for
early diagnosis of heart failure, especially myocardial infarction, by
monitoring cardiac biomarkers. This is not only for the patient's survival, but
also reducing treatment costs. This biosensor technology will potentially be the
first product on the market for a portable, rapid and cost-effective diagnosis
of cardiovascular disease (CVD). This project may accelerate POC diagnostics
research and personalized medicine, including early detection and screening,
clinical diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control. Thus, it will permit a
more effective deployment of therapies. The developed product is expected to
find broader commercial applications including, but not limited to, preclinical
and clinical researchers, life science studies, hospital and healthcare
facilities, diagnostics and patient monitoring, home and remote use, as well as
drug discovery in pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry.

This I-Corps project will explore the market potential for the innovative
biosensor. The end product will be a lab-on-a-chip based POC technology for use
in complex biological media, like whole blood, which commonly requires sample
pretreatment and/or separation of the large blood cells. The POC device will
provide exclusive delivery of protein biomarkers (e.g. troponin) to the
detection area for highly sensitive and reliable detection from a drop of whole
blood. The uniqueness of the innovation lies in the nanoscale structures that
are fabricated into thin metal films and integrated with microfluidics for
direct optical measurement. The combination of on-chip/in-line sample
preparation and fluid handling integrated with a simple, label-free, optical
detection system enables a complete lab-on-chip system. This system may offer
several advantages over conventional biomarker detection methods for use in
complex samples. These include high throughput, high sensitivity, elimination of
interferences from large blood cells, lower cost, ease of operation and
simplified sample pretreatment. The I-Corps project attempts to explore
innovative applications of parallel, multiple biomarker analysis and determine
the readiness to transition the biosensor to a viable product.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.