* 1824106
* Collaborative Research: How Policy Affects Power Plants in an Age of Experimentalist Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Don Grant II, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 212,378.00

This project tests the effects of various policies on the emissions and water
usage of power plants. In addition, it investigates how the effectiveness of
these policies is affected by countries' income distribution, entrepreneurial
activity, government centralization, and concentration of utility assets. This
study uses data compiled by the IEA and the World Resources Institute. Findings
from this project promise to advance the field of policy research and especially
our understanding of consequences of the rapid diffusion of policy instruments
around the world. By determining how national conditions such as entrepreneurial
activity weaken or strengthen the potency of policies, results also can aid
government decisions about which evidence-based programs are best suited for
promoting a particular nation's health and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
for this project comes from merging the WRI's newly created Power Watch dataset
on the emissions and water usage of over 20,000 power plants in 190 countries
(2004 to 2014) with the IEA's database on domestic policies. The following
hypotheses are tested: 1) policies are more likely to decrease emissions in
countries with less inequality, 2) policies are more effective in settings that
strongly support entrepreneurial activity, 3) policies on use and policies on
effects work less well together within moderately centralized governance
systems, and 4) policies are more apt to increase the emissions and water
consumption of plants when the plants are owned by companies that dominate
domestic electricity markets. This project provides new evidence on the
effectiveness of individual policies, but also sheds light on their trade-offs
and the circumstances under which they are more and less
compatible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.