* 1824129
* Support for 8 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Julia Morgan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 32,125.00

The project provides for travel and registration costs for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers to attend the 2018 Gordon Research Conference Seminar
on Integrated Approaches to Rock Deformation. The conference will be held at
Proctor Academy in Andover, New Hampshire from August 19th to the 24th, 2018. In
additional to the conference itself, there will be a Research Seminar the
weekend prior (August 18th, 19th), which will focus on research contributions
from early career researchers. The activities supported by this proposal include
cutting-edge present cutting-edge research that spans a range of methodologies
and materials, over a variety of spatial and temporal scales, to develop an
integrated perspective on rock deformation. The program will showcase recent
advances and future trends in rock deformation and applications in structural
geology, seismology, geodesy, geodynamics, planetary geology, and energy &amp;
environmental engineering. The GRS provides a unique opportunity for early-
career scientists to come together in a highly stimulating and non-intimidating
environment to discuss current research and build networks that can lead to a
lifetime of collaboration and scientific achievement. In addition, the project
will contribute to broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, and mathematics (STEM) through recruitment of participants
from underrepresented groups. The Gordon Research Conference and associated
Gordon Research Seminar will foster development of new research directions in
rock mechanics and will contribute to the development of a diverse and globally
competitive STEM workforce. The conference program includes topics of societal
relevance that bear on the understanding of geologic hazards, which is of
benefit to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.