* 1824578
* Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology: Dynamic Plant Systems, Holderness, New Hampshire, June 10-15, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Gloria Coruzzi, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* R. Kelly Dawe
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The fifth Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology is entitled
Dynamic Plant Systems, scheduled for June 10-15, 2018 in Holderness, NH. This
meeting promotes the advancement of science by tackling an understudied
dimension of plant systems - time. To survive, plants must adapt to an ever-
changing environment in real-time, often maintaining those responses over a
prolonged time, yet current studies typically capture only a snapshot of a
response. This conference will highlight new methods and approaches to track and
analyze dynamic plant responses in real time, at different time-scales and at
different levels of inquiry. It brings together world experts in this emerging
field, from a variety of disciplines that include cell biology, development,
physiology, genomics, environmental biology and evolutionary biology, and puts
them in a small setting with young scientists to nucleate a new subdiscipline of
plant biology, Dynamic Plant Systems. Understanding these dynamics has practical
implications for national health, prosperity and welfare, and talks will address
how new approaches are able to capture real-time plant responses that have
economic importance. One example is a system developed to allow real-time
tracking of complex changes in root architecture, gene expression, and microbial
associations that both model and crop plant species have to changes in their
environment. Another example captures how the coordinate actions of light-
signaling pathways and the circadian clock enhance plant performance in natural
environments. The scientifically diverse slate of speakers is also diverse
ethnically and with respect to gender, and the organizers will have an outreach
consultant focusing on social media and underrepresented demographics to broaden
participation in this exciting new area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As dynamics
affects all parts of plant biology, the meeting will keep a breadth across
topics in plant biology, but with a unique focus on time across scales of
inquiry. These span a keynote which presents advances in genomics, epigenomics
and proteomics, coupled to novel modeling and statistical approaches, including
time-based studies that beginning to reveal previously unknown gene-network
interactions at a variety of levels that could not be identified using more
conventional means. Other time- based studies will reveal new experimental
methods to capture these cellular network connections in 3D at high resolution,
as well as methods to analyze and visualize these cell-cell networks over time.
In addition, presentations will introduce how light sheet microscopy has
uncovered a time-based, clock-like process responsible for the positioning of
lateral roots along the root primary axis. An important part of attracting
scientists to a new field of study is supporting career development, and the
meeting will include several activities including a Power Hour intended to
support the professional growth of young scientists, especially women in our
scientific communities and provide an open forum for discussion and mentoring.
An associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will take place over the course of
two-days leading up to the start of the conference. The GRS is a unique forum
for graduate students, post- docs to present and exchange new data and cutting-
edge ideas. One discussion section will focus on the transition from graduate
and post-doc studies to further careers in science, hosted by an early career
Assistant Professor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.