* 1824555
* Improving Probabilistic Record Linkage and Subsequent Inference
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Jared Murray, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2020
* USD 204,616.00

This research project will develop methods for linking records across databases
in the absence of unique identifiers such as Social Security numbers and for
making inference using the linked data files. Record linkage is a perennial and
challenging problem across the social sciences, with important applications in
areas such as demography, economics, public health, and official statistics.
Plummeting costs of new forms of data collection and storage and the
proliferation of "big data" have increased the need for merging such databases
as researchers and statistical agencies struggle to integrate carefully curated
datasets with messy and incomplete data from historical, administrative, and
commercial sources. The methods developed in this project will facilitate the
successful integration of different data sources, thus generating new resources
for future research. These combined data sources may also provide some
alternatives to expensive survey data collection in an era of declining response
rates. Freely available software will be developed and stored in a public
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing desire to deploy probabilistic
record linkage has spurred significant research into various components of the
process, such as how to compare records, how to reduce the number of record
comparisons to keep the problem computationally feasible, how to quantify the
weight of evidence for or against a link between records, and how to ultimately
generate a merged database. Often these components are studied in isolation from
each other and from the ultimate goal of making inferences using the merged
files. This research project will take a more holistic view of the record
linkage process in order to advance the state of the art. The project has two
primary goals. The first goal is to develop new models for record linkage that
incorporate the impact of preprocessing methods that reduce the total number of
record pairs to be evaluated. While widely deployed and well motivated, these
methods have effects on subsequent modeling that are not well understood. The
second goal is to enhance understanding of uncertainty and error throughout the
process and to develop imputation methods for propagating error due to uncertain
record links and other missing data, such as item nonresponse in a survey. These
methods will be designed with an eye toward large applications that require new
computational approaches. The project is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.