* 1824119
* I-Corps:  Machine Learning Approach for Microbial Process Control and Management
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Hong Liu, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will directly
affect the treatment and management of the over 80 km3 of wastewater and solid
wastes produced each year in the US. Waste treatment processes are directly tied
to environmental and human health in both developed and developing countries but
are subject to high costs due to significant energy and maintenance
requirements. Municipal wastewater treatment alone accounts for about 3% of
electrical energy consumed in the U.S and other developed countries. The
successful implementation of the proposed technology, which integrates
artificial intelligence (AI) into existing waste treatment infrastructure, has
the potential to greatly improve the management of microbial communities
associated with treatment processes thereby improving overall effectiveness and
sustainability. This solution represents a new way for customers to cut energy
and operational costs and improve effectiveness of their treatment processes
without large investments in infrastructure. Potential markets for this
technology include public, municipal facilities in addition to treatment
facilities in the industrial/agricultural sector. Development of the proposed
technology will likely spur additional applications of AI systems in other
fields centered around microbial community based engineered systems like
bioproduct production, biosensing, and bioremediation.

This I-Corps project is based on our recent development of a machine learning
based approach used to accurately predict microbial community structure, process
stability, and reactor performance for wastewater treatment. This novel
approach, which incorporates genomic data along with environmental and
operational parameters into data-mining datasets has demonstrated significant
increases in accurately predicting process stability and performance of small-
scale wastewater systems compared to models developed without consideration of
microbial community dynamics. The predictive models developed through the
construction of artificial neural networks have potential to inform engineering
decisions for optimized performance and stability of environmental
biotechnologies in full-scale systems. Development and implementation of this
approach will not only progress the understanding and control of microbial
communities that inhabit environmental biotechnologies but may be expanded to
other microbiomes such as those associated with human health and biogeochemical
cycles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.