* 1824422
* The Impact of Consumer Credit Access on Earnings Mobility, Entrepreneurship and Income Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Gordon Phillips, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,976.00

This research project will study the effects consumer credit access on many
family outcomes, including employment, student debt, income, and new business
formation. The research is part of a larger project that investigates the
effects of consumer credit access on several outcomes, including economic
growth, consumption and investment, income distribution, intergenerational
transmission of wealth and income, and innovation. The study will be based on an
innovative data linkage method that combines personal credit data and Census
longitudinal data over longer periods of time. The researchers will also use an
innovative approach to study the mechanisms through which credit access affect
several outcomes at the family level as well as the macro level. This research
project deals with a very important subject as credit access has become a very
important issue for poverty eradication in the US and the around the world. The
results of this research will provide inputs into policies to reduce poverty,
close the education gap, increase employment and productivity and economic
growth generally. This study will therefore have important effect on economic
growth in the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research will
use a mix of reduced form and structural estimation strategies to identify the
causal impact of family credit access on several outcomes. The first hypothesis
is that parental credit access improves child college attendance rates and
decreases the amount of debt incurred by the child. The identification strategy
is based on several events that generate exogenous variation in credit access.
This exogenous variation in credit access is then used to look at subsequent
student debt, labor market outcomes, and entrepreneurial outcomes of the
children (and parents). The project will also use variation across states income
cutoffs for bankruptcies, introduced by the 2005 bankruptcy-reform act as one of
the instruments for credit access. Parents just above the cutoff (who cannot
discharge debts) should have greater credit access, whereas parents just below
the cutoff (who can file for bankruptcy) should have lesser credit access. The
research will also estimate a structural model to obtain micro-elasticity
estimates from the reduced form estimates and then conduct counterfactuals to
measure the impact of broad economy-wide credit access on individual outcomes.
The results of this research project will provide valuable inputs into policies
to reduce poverty and the inter-generational transmission of poverty in the US
and globally. This will help establish the US as the global leader in poverty
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.