* 1824074
* I-Corps:  Reducing and Managing spring frost damage
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Roger West, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on
maximizing resources for frost defense, reducing yield loss, improving quality,
supporting decision-making, and reducing frost management cost for grapes and
stone fruits. Cold periods and frost episodes are still one of the worst enemies
of grape and stone fruit production worldwide. Grape and orchard production are
highly linked to climatic conditions, making sub-seasonal weather variability
and its connections to climate change a challenging issue for this economic
sector. Growers may presently deploy fossil fuel heaters, sprinkler systems, the
downward draft from helicopters and wind machines to fight spring frost damage.
These methods are usually costly, some create environmental concerns, and in
many cases they may be limited by water availability and area coverage. Altering
timing of bud break stages that are susceptible to frost injury appears to be a
viable alternative to cope with current and emerging challenges of climate
change. The proposed I-Corp program explores implementation and
commercialization opportunities of an end-to-end solution. The innovation
combines a bioactive, non-toxic biodegradable encapsulation technology (spray)
that alters internal grapevine physiology and promotes bud break delay. A
predictive analytic system provides recommendations to make informed decisions
about frost risk management. This I-Corps project is based on a series of
studies that have combined pruning management, biophysical and biochemical
factors influencing the endogenous regulation of bud break, and resistance to
cold injury. In addition, the project combines this knowledge with an analytic
data platform (software) that will analyze plant development as a function of
environmental temperature (phenology), topographic and soil data, at the farm
level. Combination with global and regional patterns of climate patterns will
aid understanding climate variability at high spatial and temporal scale. This
platform will allow better prediction for decision making at the vineyard and
orchard level to reduce some of the most significant challenges associated with
prediction reliability about bud break and risk of frost. Moreover, this
predictive analytic system will be the foundation for continued innovation in
tools and services to support decision-making to adapt growing practices, and to
preserve sustainability due to already observed and worsening climate change
impacts. The I-Corp process will also be used to refine our understanding of
customer value, willingness to pay and the cost of the best current
alternatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.