* 1824239
* Ship Operations- R/V Hugh R. Sharp CY 18-22
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Jon Swallow, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 04/30/2024
* USD 4,675,057.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal / annual report requests funding to support
the operation of the Research Vessel Hugh R.&lt;br/&gt;Sharp (Sharp) for
calendar year 2018 - 2022 on an annual basis.&lt;br/&gt;The Sharp is a state-of-
the-art, coastal research vessel that is owned and operated by the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Delaware. The vessel can carry fourteen scientists on cruises up to
eighteen days in duration and&lt;br/&gt;supports projects from all disciplines
of oceanography. The vessel is a regional asset, serving
researchers&lt;br/&gt;from many institutions throughout the United States. The
vessel typically operates in the coastal waters&lt;br/&gt;from Long Island, New
York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as well as the Delaware and
Chesapeake&lt;br/&gt;Bays. Projects occasionally require the vessel to work as
far north as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as&lt;br/&gt;Florida and the Gulf
of Mexico, and as far offshore as Bermuda.&lt;br/&gt;Operational funding for the
SHARP is provided primarily by the National Science Foundation (NSF),
the&lt;br/&gt;Office of Naval Research (ONR), the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as&lt;br/&gt;well as other scientific users.
In 2018, R/V Sharp is anticipating 120 days at sea. Projects funded by
the&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation account for 25 days (approximately
21%) of the total projected days in&lt;br/&gt;2018.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The SHARP provides direct field support to NSF and other Agency
funded science programs, the merit&lt;br/&gt;of these programs being determined
by the peer review process within the National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;or
other Agency. The Shapr follows all UNOLS requirements for safety and
operations, and&lt;br/&gt;participates in the NSF Ship Inspection program. The
University of Delaware has successfully supported&lt;br/&gt;ship operations for
NSF for decades, and has an excellent reputation in the Academic
Research&lt;br/&gt;Fleet.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The science
projects supported by R/V Sharp will directly improve scientific understanding
of the marine&lt;br/&gt;environment, which leads to improvements to the health
and wellbeing of people living in the mid-&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic region and beyond.
To provide exposure to this important role, the R/V SHARP is an
integral&lt;br/&gt;part of the public outreach program at the College of Earth,
Ocean, and Environment. The SHARP&lt;br/&gt;operations are a focal point on the
waterfront during the annual "Coast Day', and open house at
the&lt;br/&gt;College which typically draws several thousand
people.&lt;br/&gt;R/V Sharp is instrumental in supporting NSF and UNOLS Early
Career and STEM inititaitives. In&lt;br/&gt;2015 the University of Delaware and
the Sharp executed an NSF funded Early Career Chief Scientist&lt;br/&gt;Workshop
and Science Mission that received excellent reviews from the nine participants.
In 2017, the&lt;br/&gt;Sharp hosted seven STEMSEAS students and two instructors
during a seven day transit from a project&lt;br/&gt;in the Gulf of Mexico to the
ship's home port in Lewes, DE. The students gained significant
experience&lt;br/&gt;of what life at sea for a researcher is like, as well as
the operation of oceanographic equipment and
data&lt;br/&gt;analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Many cruises on the ship support
undergraduate and graduate students composing the science&lt;br/&gt;party. R/V
Sharp and crew have been available for tours of the ship by high school groups,
science&lt;br/&gt;classes and middle school groups from the local community as
well as from neighboring states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.