* 1824443
* The CryptoClub: Extending Learning with Student-Generated Tutorials
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Janet Beissinger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2019
* USD 344,848.00

In existing CryptoClub after school programs, middle school students use
mathematics to make and break secret codes. The CryptoClub website has tools for
encrypting, messages to crack, treasure hunts and other activities. In this
project, the learning in fifteen Crypto Clubs is extended by having the students
generate tutorials that explain how they solve mathematics and cryptographic
problems. The flexibility of the after school setting provides the opportunity
to experiment with content and technology. Student-friendly ways to create the
tutorials are developed and best practices for incorporating tutorial making in
CryptoClub programs are investigated. A collection of vetted online tutorials
about mathematics and cryptography created by students and teachers is to be
available to all on the CryptoClub website. At least 15 teachers are to be
trained to assist their students in developing tutorials. These teachers can
then use this learning technique as they teach other mathematics topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates the features of the tutorials
that students and teachers consider to be appealing and easy to learn from. The
kinds of mathematics problems that make helpful tutorials and promote
communications skills are studied. By focusing on specific topics and using
students within the same clubs as control, the project leadership can conduct a
controlled study of learning that occurs on those topics and thus investigate
whether the students learn mathematics from the experience of developing video
tutorials. The project also considers the technology and software that
facilitate the development of the tutorials and the system for online sharing,
rating and sorting of video tutorials that promote the development, submission
and use of the tutorials. Evaluation is done by an independent evaluator and an
advisory board. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will develop technical literacy
and skills in mathematics, computer technology and communications and become
aware of cryptography as a possible STEM career as well. The project deepens
students' understanding of mathematical reasoning, supports their development of
self-efficacy and increases their interest in STEM and STEM careers that use
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.