* 1824674
* The Impact of Mechanical Stress and Strains on Organic Semiconductor Thin Films for Flexible Electronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Yueh-Lin (Lynn) Loo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2021
* USD 430,722.00

Organic semiconductors are increasingly researched as active components in
biological and chemical sensors, and wearable electronics which will spur new
technologies essential for maintaining our prosperity and global technological
leadership. These applications demand robust and reliable performance of the
active components, often under mechanical deformation. The majority of previous
studies on organic semiconductors have focused their static electrical
properties. While such studies form the basis for the design and synthesis of
next-generation materials, understanding how such organic semiconductors perform
under mechanical stress and strain is critical to improving and controlling
their device-related performance during use. Several important application
areas, such as flexible, wearable sensors and electronics, require that the
devices perform under mechanical flexure and their component parts possess
mechanical compliance. This research assesses the effect of mechanical
deformation on the electrical properties of structurally heterogeneous organic
semiconductor thin films. This study will provide a better understanding of
failure modes in these electrically active thin films leading to methods to
overcome reduce or eliminate failure in flexible electronic devices that
consistently undergo mechanical deformation. The improved reliability of devices
under mechanical flexure and load can be achieved through a detailed analysis of
the film defect structure. Processing means studied here to control and improve
the defect structure will help pave the way for the rapid development and wide-
scale deployment of flexible organic electronic devices. This project sits at
the interface of chemistry, materials science and several engineering
disciplines and the need for an interdisciplinary team will bring together
participants of diverse background and expertise, and positively impact modern
engineering research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible organic
electronics often call for electrically-active components in thin-film formats.
These organic semiconductor thin films are hierarchically structured, with
features, like conformational and packing polymorphs, preferential molecular
orientation and the presence of boundary defects, that span nanometric to
millimetric length scales. Central to this work is the elucidation of how
mechanical stress and strains affect the electrical properties of such thin
films in the presence of such structural heterogeneities. Post-deposition
processing of amorphous organic semiconductor thin films will allow
specification and isolation of these structural features, which will enable
assessment of their contributions to the macroscopic mechanical properties, and
accordingly, their electrical properties in response to cyclic mechanical
deformation. Comparison with the electrochemical response of amorphous thin
films on the one extreme, and single-crystal counterparts on the other, will
shed light on the role boundary defects and other structural heterogeneities
play in impacting charge transport during mechanical deformation. Starting with
organic semiconductors that exhibit excellent static electrical properties, this
effort will provide design rules for processing so their thin-film formats can
be deformed without deleteriously impacting electrical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.