* 1824394
* WORKSHOP: The Nexus of Climate Data, Insurance, and Adaptive Capacity: November 2018 - Asheville, NC
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Robert Erhardt, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2020
* USD 44,190.00

Societies depend on insurance to help recover from natural disasters, and also
to help guide the development of resilient infrastructure and markets. However,
decision makers in the insurance industry are faced with rising climate risks,
which must be properly measured and managed. Changes in the frequency or
severity of hurricanes, floods, intense precipitation, droughts, wind storms,
and other rare but influential natural events can massively impact total insured
losses. Also, climate can lead to changes in human health through shifting
exposures to heat or drought, changing air quality, and shifts towards more
favorable conditions for disease. This workshop addresses how climate risks can
be better measured and managed by the insurance industry. Specifically, this
workshop facilitates a national, interdisciplinary scientific research
discussion on modeling and managing climate risks among three different but
related research communities: the climate modeling and data community,
statisticians, and researchers within the insurance and reinsurance industries.

This workshop aims at active scientific researchers in each community, with the
goals of: sharing perspectives, methods, and databases; defining gaps of
existing research; and forming actionable research paths which can only be
addressed by teams which are new, collaborative and interdisciplinary. Topics
discussed include: time scales for decision making and available data products;
sources of uncertainty in climate data products; statements of "ideal" climate
datasets and model projections from the perspectives of all research
communities; extreme events as both a statistical challenge and a primary driver
of losses in insurance and reinsurance; sub-grid cell phenomena such as
hurricanes; and data-fusion of historical weather data products, climate model
output, and insurance loss databases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.