* 1824243
* Laboratory and Modeling Studies of the Growth Efficiency of Vapor Grown Ice
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Jerry Harrington, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2022
* USD 762,139.00

Cirrus clouds exist in extremely cold conditions where there is very little
moisture. The pathways for the growth of ice particles that make up cirrus and
other cold clouds is complex, and there are gaps in the understanding of how
these crystals increase in size and mass. This award will focus on vapor growth,
which is the process in which water vapor is deposited onto ice crystals. The
research team runs a very specialized cloud chamber that allows for the testing
of the growth of individual crystals at extremely cold temperatures. The main
benefit of this research is to provide a check on numerical models that simulate
cold clouds and to provide input parameters to those models. This will have an
impact on societally-relevant weather forecasts and climate projections. The
project will also help to train the next generation of scientists and provide
interesting outreach opportunities to increase public science
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will continue their studies
into the growth of ice crystals in atmospheric cold clouds. The focus of the
work is on addressing a critical gap in the understanding of the deposition
coefficient at very cold temperatures. The work will make use of a levitation
diffusion chamber and vertical flow levitation chamber to grow ice crystals in
different conditions. The lab data will be used synergistically with existing
and new theoretical models to derive input parameters for cloud models. The
specific objectives of the work are to determine: 1) Whether it is a robust
result that the deposition coefficients cover a larger range for homogeneously
frozen drops than heterogeneously frozen drops, 2) Whether characteristic
supersaturations extracted from the levitation diffusion chamber follow the
values estimated from prior measurements at temperatures below -40C, 3) If
growth transitions are unique to homogeneously frozen drops and whether a model
of the process can be constructed, and 4) Whether a power law parameterization
of kinetics-diffusion limited growth can be constructed based on fits to
laboratory data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.