* 1824133
* Detection of dissolved pyrogenic carbon export following the Southern California fires of 2017
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Andrew Zimmerman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 01/31/2022
* USD 38,651.00

Water from stream samples draining watersheds burned in the Thomas fire of
December 2017 (Santa Barbara County, California) will be collected during the
first rains following the fire, which are likely to occur in January-March,
2018. Total organic carbon and pyrogenic carbon (i.e. derived from burned
biomass) will be measured in these samples and compared with quantities of these
components in water of these streams prior to the fire, and in streams of
adjoining watersheds not affected by the fire. The objective of these
measurements is to determine the influence of fire on the supply and composition
of dissolved organic matter to the ocean. In particular, the investigator wishes
to know whether dissolved pyrogenic carbon will be exported to the ocean as this
is a controversial scientific subject. If dissolved pyrogenic C is as abundant
and mobile as recent studies suggest, it may have a strong impact on marine
chemistry, long-term C cycling and associated climate changes and pollutant
transport. On the other hand, if pyrogenic C is not detected in the creeks
draining these burned watershed in amounts greater than that of the unburned
watersheds, biogeochemists will have to question the methods currently used as
markers for fire-produced organic matter. Another important impact of the
project will be to provide the opportunity for a graduate student to add a field
component to his dissertation research on dissolved pyrogenic
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While knowledge of the properties of pyrogenic
solids has increased in recent years, there has been relatively little study of
the properties and cycling of pyrogenic dissolved organic matter. The method
most commonly used for pyrogenic dissolved organic carbon (pyDOC) analysis
involves the oxidation of condensed aromatic constituents into smaller,
quantifiable monomers (i.e., benzenepolycarboxylic acids or BPCAs). Using this
method, it has been suggested that pyDOC represents a constant proportion of
riverine DOC globally (~10% pyDOC/DOC). This conclusion is problematic since one
would expect this ratio to vary with regional climate and burning regimes. It
may be that all these previous measurements were made in fairly large rivers,
i.e. large watersheds, so the effects of fire have been hidden by other
variations in biomass growth, precipitation etc. Also, pyC may be continually
released from charcoals made during past fires. The Thomas fire of December 2017
provides an ideal scenario for detecting and characterizing pyC export from
terrestrial to marine systems. There are several short-run creeks draining
coastal catchments along the Santa Barbara Channel that have small watershed
completely within the burned area, and similar creeks in several adjoining
watershed that saw no fire for the past 60 years due to fire suppression. The
investigator also has access to water samples that have been in storage from
these creeks taken prior to the Thomas fire. There is probably no better
scenario for detecting indisputable evidence for, or against, the claim of
significant export of pyrogenic C to the ocean, as well as quantifying that
export flux if it exists.