* 1824297
* An Integrated Experimental and Computational Platform for Discovery and Processing of Functional Nano-Emulsions
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* James Swan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2022
* USD 780,266.00

The ability to design new materials rationally and engineer their properties
through control of processing history will enable the synthesis of whole new
classes of materials with unique properties that are easily manufacturable. This
research looks to develop those techniques through the manipulation of a simple
system consisting of nanoparticles and polymer nano-emulsions into a wide
variety of structural forms with tuned mechanical and related properties. Soft
materials built from polymers, particles, emulsions, and surfactants are
employed in a broad array of emerging and societally relevant applications
including medical and energy technologies, and the interface between the human
body and the electronic domain. As such, this could open new manufacturing
paradigms assisting driving new areas in the economy and advancing our knowledge
in materials design. The discovery and processing of soft materials is
idiosyncratic. For each application, a set of material properties: elastic
modulus, yield stress, yield strain, permeability, conductivity, among others is
needed and the materials choices are vast. This research looks to reducing the
design space of possible materials through the combined design and fabrication
of structures utilizing external fields. The research will develop approaches to
generating the materials design space and the means to efficiently derive
structures from the generated data. The use of external fields which interact
intimately with the components of the polymer composite to arrange the
components at the microscale during fabrication to produce new mechanical
structures. This data-driven material design and processing is a new approach
and paradigm to materials choice and structure development. The research is
complemented by the development of a video game broadening the public
understanding of soft materials and their properties which will be made publicly
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new soft and biomaterials is
driven largely by trial and error facilitated by many empirical and a few
theoretical structure-property relations. When such relations are known,
materials with a desired functionality can be synthesized by targeting the
appropriate microstructure (e.g. crystalline, glassy, fractal, anisotropic).
Moreover, many soft matter materials are quenched to assemble into structures
which are not the lowest energy state and depend strongly on processing history.
Because soft materials are multifunctional and applied broadly: to biomedical
research and technologies, for oil and gas exploration and operations, in
consumer care products, and throughout agriculture and the food industry, highly
tailored materials are required to meet application specific needs. This
research will develop the experimental and computational tools needed for the
design multifunctional soft materials built from nano-emulsions, nano-scale
droplets composed of a diverse array of oils suspended in water. Through
variation of chemical composition of the droplets and the additives in the
suspending solvent, nano-emulsions with well defined inter-particle interactions
can be synthesized. By varying in time the temperature, salinity, applied
magnetic fields, and flow fields, the nano-emulsions can be induced to aggregate
into a gelled structure with a wide range of different morphological
characteristics. A specific aim of this work is to understand and control how
processing history can be used to exert fine control over this micro-structure
and resulting properties of these nano-composites. This will be achieved by
performing detailed simulations that explore the vast, experimentally accessible
parameter space, and then utilizing machine learning tools to select fruitful
nano-emulsions and processing methods to yield novel soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.