* 1824980
* Predicting the Benefits of Topology Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Krishnan Suresh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 262,942.00

One of the primary tasks of engineers is to optimize designs, i.e., improve the
performance of designs, through computer simulation. Since this can be time-
consuming and expensive, engineers are faced with the following set of tough
questions: Is it worth optimizing a given design? How much can the performance
be improved through computer simulation? Can one predict the benefits of design
optimization, without investing several days of computing? This project will
address these questions through fundamental research on predictive simulation
techniques. New algorithms will be established that will permit engineers to
rapidly predict the benefits of design optimization, prior to investing time and
effort into a detailed investigation. This has the potential to improve
industrial competitiveness significantly by allowing designers to focus their
limited resources on only the most promising optimization problems. The research
team will publish the findings in journals and conference proceedings; the team
will also release the resulting software to the scientific community. The team
will conduct engineering workshops for high-school students, including
underrepresented minority students, on engineering simulation and optimization.
Case-studies from local industries and student-car projects will be used as
design challenges. The broader impact of the industrial interaction is on
budding engineers who will be exposed to a unique blend of research, industrial
experience, and formal education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, the
concept of Pareto-optimal distances will be used as a metric for predicting the
benefits of design optimization. The Pareto-optimal distances, for a given
design, is a set of axis-aligned distances to the Pareto-optimal manifold; these
distances will be estimated via the topological sensitivity field. Preliminary
results indicate that these Pareto-optimal distances can indeed be used to
estimate the benefits of design optimization, i.e., greater the distance,
greater the benefit. Using this simple concept, designers can make rational
decisions on design optimization. The following questions will be addressed in
this project: (1) Can the Pareto-optimality concept be applied to problems
beyond the structural mechanics problems considered thus far? (2) Can this
concept be used to rank-order parts within an assembly for design optimization?
(3) How can these concepts be generalized to include constraints, multi-load
scenarios, and material design? (4) Can second-order and error-correction
strategies be developed to improve the efficacy of these predictive
methods?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.