* 1824463
* Fiduciary Duty, Financial Regulation, and the Market for Retirement Products
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vivek Bhattacharya, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 396,922.00

The total amount of assets in retirement accounts exceeds $25 trillion, and
there is rightly a large amount of policy discussion surrounding regulating the
market for retirement products. The primary goal of this research is to focus on
fiduciary duties -- regulations designed to ensure that agents act in their
clients' best interest -- imposed on various agents in the retirement system.
This research aims at (1) providing empirical evidence on the effects of the
efficacy of these regulations and (2) studying the effects of alternate
regulatory proposals on the structure of the retirement market. The
investigators first study the market of financial advice. The United States is
in the middle of a protracted debate over the merits of imposing fiduciary duty
on broker-dealers selling retirement products, which partially involves trading
off the potential for aligning incentives of the clients with those of the
adviser with the costs of an excessive regulatory burden. The investigators also
study the market of employer-provided defined contribution plans, like 401(k)
plans, when plan managers for certain plans are subject to fiduciary duties
imposed through the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). This
research studies how employer-trustee bargaining can influence the fees and plan
offerings and examines regulations to restrict either fees or plan offerings,
which can have important distributional consequences for a market in which
investment options and costs are directly tied to one's place of employment. The
investigators bring previously unexplored data to these questions and develop
new methods for studying choices in the presence of multiple decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three prongs. First, the
investigators leverage a transactions-level dataset from a major financial
services provider to study the effects of fiduciary duty on product choice. This
research utilizes a differences-in-differences approach, comparing across states
that impose differential fiduciary duties on broker-dealers and using investment
advisers regulated at the federal level as a control. The investigators then
supplement this reduced-form analysis with a model of selective entry into the
market for financial advice. Second, this project develops a structural model of
discrete choice in which choices are determined not just by consumer utility but
also by (possibly biased) advice. Estimates from this model will help decompose
the mechanisms through which fiduciary duty operates and also provide guidance
on alternate reforms; it will also provide a framework for analyzing advice in
other markets. Finally, the investigators use data on the fee structure and plan
offerings of the universe of ERISA-compliant defined contribution plans to
develop a model of bargaining between employers and plan providers to quantify
the level to which various parties internalize plan costs. The model also allows
for studying the effect of imposing most-favored-nation clauses on fees or plan
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.