* 1824257
* Learning Depends on Knowledge: Using Interaction Designs and Machine Learning to Contrast the Testing and Worked Example Effects
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2022
* USD 760,416.00

A distinctive characteristic of human learning is its capability to flexibly
acquire a wide range of rich and complex forms of knowledge (e.g., first and
second languages) and acquiring new and accumulated knowledge (e.g., learning
physics is easier after having learned algebra). An adequate explanation of
human learning must address how existing knowledge changes the way we learn so
that we achieve knowledge goals and in specific contexts. This project aims to
discover and specify how human learning processes operate differently under
different contexts, depending upon what content is being learned. This research
contributes to improved educational practices by specifying how learning
processes are influenced by knowledge acquisition in a systematic and replicable
way. This research will enhance our understanding of successful learning and
optimal performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores learning
processes by contrasting learning from retrieval practice and learning from
studying examples. The goal of this project is to resolve and clarify how these
processes compete for cognitive resources, including attention and working
memory, in ways that depend on the knowledge content to be learned. This
research examines (1) the learning processes involved in learning from retrieval
practice and from worked examples, (2) how these learning processes work
differently when applied to different knowledge content, and (3) the
computational mechanisms of learning that give rise to learning different
content. The researchers use a combination of experiments in which the learning
approach is varied along with the materials being studied and machine learning
models. It will demonstrate knowledge-learning dependence by showing that one
learning process (e.g., retrieval practice) produces better learning outcomes
than another (e.g., example encoding) in some knowledge contexts but the reverse
occurs in other knowledge contexts. By implementing the studies as part of a
machine learning architecture, this research will provide computational evidence
and theoretical insight into the hypothesized knowledge-learning dependence
framework. The machine learning architecture developed may be used as an
educational and research tool in learning sciences, and the project involves
training new learning scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.