* 1824852
* Examining temperatures and microgeochemical processes on fault slip surfaces with synchrotron methods
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* James Evans, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 187,363.00

Earthquakes result from slip along faults at depth in the Earth's crust, and
faults typically form in rocks at depth that are strong. Opportunities to
examine the effects of earthquakes in rocks are limited; sometimes the effects
of earthquakes can be observed in rocks that are exhumed from depth and these
exhumed faults can be used to learn about processes that occur at depth.
Earthquake rupture should leave evidence for high temperatures and the effects
of high heat in these faults. Because of the heat and the presence of fluids, a
range of rock transformations occur in and around faults, and fault slip
surfaces form. Some of these slip surfaces are very thin; determining the
temperatures of fault slip, and the processes that occur during slip, are
important for determining how earthquake fault slip works. Furthering this
understanding can lead to better understanding of the physics of earthquakes. In
order to determine the temperatures and processes of fault slip, this study uses
a range of methods to examine rocks at very small scales. These methods include
microscopic studies with standard microscopy methods (optical light and scanning
electron microscopy) and geochemical methods of study. In addition, high-energy
X-ray based methods will be used to look into fault-related rocks. These X-ray
methods show how elements are distributed in the fault zones, how some of the
elements might have been transformed by fault heating, and how minerals are
transformed in the fault zones. The applications of these X-ray methods are
novel in the study of deformed rocks. The project advances desired societal
outcomes through research training in analytical methods for graduate and
undergraduate students and development of short courses and teaching modules for
undergraduate students that use X-ray analyses applied to geological questions
and teach students a range of physics concepts. The aims are to provide
fundamental concepts to the students and to provide an introduction into
materials science analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic slip should produce
high temperatures in the focal region of earthquakes due to the high frictional
strength of rocks and the stresses required to overcome these strengths. For
some faults, seismic slip is focused on very narrow slip surfaces along which
high temperatures are localized. Thus, these narrow slip surfaces should exhibit
evidence for high temperatures that result from seismic slip. Yet, few methods
exist to determine the peak temperatures of fault slip developed at seismogenic
conditions in crystalline rocks. Estimating peak fault temperatures, documenting
the evidence for coseismic slip localization, and determining the temporal and
spatial distribution of high temperatures, deformation mechanisms, and fluid-
rock interactions in natural fault zones are critical for assessing fault slip
mechanics and energy distribution during earthquakes. The objectives of this
project are to: 1) test the hypothesis that high slip temperatures are generated
and preserved on slip surfaces, 2) develop methods of determining fault
temperatures with transition element thermometry, 3) determine the physics and
chemistry of the conditions of deformation that result in slip-localization and
weakening, and 4) examine fluid-rock interactions in and near slip surfaces.
Peak fault slip temperatures will be estimated using transition element
thermometry, a new and novel method of investigating fault temperatures and
fault-related deformation. Transition element thermometry is based on X-ray
Absorption Near Edge Spectroscopy of transition elements (Fe, Mn, V) along
faults that experience temperature-induced reduction. Synchrotron-based X-ray
fluorescence mapping and spectroscopy will be integrated with scanning-electron
and whole-rock geochemical analyses of fault slip surfaces from exhumed and
cored parts of the San Andreas, Wasatch, Hurricane, and the West Salton
detachment faults, and the Paris thrust fault. Peak slip-related temperatures
will be determined and evidence of high-temperature fluid-rock interactions that
lead to slip localization and fault evolution will be sought. The transformative
nature of this work lies in the efforts to determine peak slip temperatures on
slip surfaces, to decipher the possible temperature distribution in faults, and
to identify slip localization and weakening mechanisms. These efforts require
examination of complexly deformed rocks at scales typically below most optical
resolution techniques. High-resolution, synchrotron-based high-energy X-ray
fluorescence mapping and spectroscopy will be used to examine micrometer- to
millimeter-thick slip surfaces within exhumed faults and from cored faults at
depths ranging from 150 meters to 4 kilometers. Thin 'mirrored' or polished
transition element-coated slip surfaces from exhumed normal faults to evaluate
thermally activated processes responsible for these narrow slip surfaces. The
use of highly focused short-wavelength X-ray fluorescent mapping and
spectroscopy introduces an innovative approach of examining extremely narrow
slip surfaces where geochemistry and textures cannot be discerned through
conventional forms of microscopy. The results of the study will enable
determination of the conditions of fault slip and examination of the
manifestation of co- and post-seismic slip related deformation in these faults,
providing benchmarks of deformation mechanisms and textures against which
experimental rock deformation results can be compared, helping constrain
theoretical models of fault zone heating and slip
localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.