* 1824354
* Social Mobility and the Origins of American Science
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Petra Moser, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 281,520.00

Advances in science and innovation are the number one source of sustained
improvements in individual well-being and economic growth. This project examines
the origins of American leadership in science and innovation in the 20th
century, starting with three major questions: 1) How has socioeconomic
inequality influenced participation in American science? 2) What are the
benefits of public investments in education, reaching from pre-K to the
university level? 3) How has social mobility influenced science and innovation
in the United States? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge for empirical
analyses of science lies in the absence of systematic long-rung data on
successful scientists, including their socioeconomic background, education, work
histories, inventions, and publications. This research constructs such data for
more than 100,000 American scientists who were born between 1817 and 1933.
Machine-learning algorithms link each scientist with their census records,
patents, and publications. Empirical analyses examine the effects of ethnicity-
based restrictions on immigration in the 1920s to investigate the effects of
such policies on US science and innovation. Tests for inequality examine the
changing influence of a person's socioeconomic background on their success as a
scientist. Analyses of education investigate the effects of expansions in public
education on participation in STEM by people who were disadvantaged based on
their socioeconomic status, as well as by women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.