* 1824242
* Genomics of Diseases in Wildlife Workshop; Colorado State University; June 3-9, 2018
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Sue VandeWoude, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2019
* USD 7,200.00

The award provides funding for graduate students to participate in a Genomics of
Diseases in Wildlife workshop. The workshop represents an important training and
collaborative research experience focused on developing tools for the analysis
of genetic sequence data to address problems in wildlife disease ecology and
evolution. This experience provides hands on training to students and scientists
through hands on exercises focused around a collaborative project in infectious
wildlife disease. The tools participants learn will enable future research that
capitalizes on the growing availability of genetic data. The workshop targets
early and mid-career professionals with expertise in four major scientific
disciplines to examine host-pathogen interactions in wildlife: genome sciences;
wildlife biology; veterinary sciences; and wildlife management and conservation.
Workshop organizers are focusing particular attention on assembling a diverse
set of participants, with approximately equal gender balance, and attention to
ethnic as well as regional diversity.

Participants in this Genomics of Diseases in Wildlife will be taken from start
to finish in the process of using next generation genomic sequence data to
address questions in the ecology and evolution of infectious diseases of
wildlife. The workshop will address which sequence data are appropriate to
address what questions in the area of ecology and evolution of infectious
disease. Participants will learn to assess sequence read quality and coverage,
map reads to a reference genome, perform de novo assembly of host and pathogen
genomes, and annotate assembled genomes. From there, they will assess read
quality, create alignments for comparative analyses within and among hosts and
pathogens. Several forms of analysis will be included with a focus on
comparative genomics across space and time, including the patterns of evolution
associated with disease outbreaks. All of these activities will focus on
recently available sequence related to a current problem in wildlife disease
ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.