* 1824015
* Overcoming Immunity to Change (ITC): ADVANCE IT VCU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Barbara Boyan, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,676.00

The ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in areas such as policy,
practice, culture, and organizational climate. The ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation (ADVANCE-IT) track supports the development of innovative
organizational change strategies within an institution of higher education to
enhance gender equity in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
academic workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Virginia Commonwealth University
(VCU) ADVANCE-IT project will implement institutional transformation through two
objectives: decreasing the barriers that prevent faculty diversity; and
improving the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women and
underrepresented minority (URM) STEM faculty. Much of the work of decreasing
barriers will be accomplished through the recruitment, training, and resulting
efforts of "Immunity to Change" (ITC) facilitators. The ITC facilitators will
lead ITC workshops, work directly with departments and other stakeholder groups,
and provide support for the second set of initiatives designed to promote
recruitment, retention, and advancement. The second set of initiatives include
ITC-focused efforts targeting STEM search committees; a cluster hire initiative;
promotion and tenure policies and practices; and workshops for administrators on
career-life integration policy and cultural competency in leadership. Other
proposed efforts include innovative workshops and mentoring programs for STEM
faculty to facilitate professional development and advancement across career
stages. This work is important because it is attempting to address the factors
that compete and complicate the process of making changes that are otherwise
widely accepted and valued within an institution. There is potential for this
project to result in a new model that can be adapted by other organizations and
institutions interesting in improving their organization's culture and climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Immunity to Change framework suggests that
institutional transformation based on identifying and removing barriers to
equity may fall short of achieving broad institutional change. This project will
develop new strategies to identify and mitigate competing and contradictory
commitments that undermine change goals and weaken commitments to those goals.
The VCU ADVANCE-IT project evaluation and research will further understanding of
how ITC can be used for institutional transformation and equity goals. The
research project is a mixed-method study that frames academic departments as
"complex adaptive systems" and the role the department has in the management of
immunities to change within the department. Given the centrality of the academic
department to institutional change, this focus is especially
promising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.