* 1824840
* NNA: Bridging the Atomistic Deformation Mechanisms to the Microscopic Adhesive-to-Cohesive Fracture at Ice-Metal Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/29/2024
* USD 591,000.00

Ice accretion over cold surfaces is a topic of great concern for numerous
engineering applications, including airplanes, wind turbines, and marine vessels
sailing near polar seas. However, a strategy of de-icing (detaching ice from
cold surfaces) with minimal power input is not well-established yet due to the
lack of answers to many fundamental questions, such as how does the ice shed
from a metallic surface and what controls the conversion of fracture type from
adhesive (fracture at an ice-metal interface) to cohesive (fracture within ice
itself) cracking? This research project will advance the science of interfacial
mechanics by identifying the fundamental mechanisms for the adhesive-to-cohesive
fracture in an ice-metal material system; correlate an ice-metal interface
structure with its ice adhesion strength; and support the search of de-icing
strategies that consume far less power than existing approaches. The project
would also advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by enabling a
rational design of materials that either inhibit or enhance ice adhesion, with
implications for a wide range of safety-critical infrastructures operating in
arctic and cold weathers, including telecommunication equipment, power lines,
automotive vehicles, marine vessels, and offshore oil platforms, along with the
food and transport sectors in everyday environment. With these advancements,
this project will support the NSF Big Idea on Navigating the New Arctic (NNA)
through impact on the design and engineering of civil infrastructure for an
increasing marine commerce in the Arctic. As part of project, education and
outreach activities will focus on hiring undergraduate students for the summer,
performing outreach to women and minority students through university-based
programs, and dissemination of software from a web-
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine multi-physics, multi-
scale simulation and experimentation, i.e., coarse-grained modeling of water,
novel concurrent atomistic-continuum modeling of metallic materials, and
experiments in a unique Icing Research Tunnel facility, to elucidate the
underlying physics pertinent to adhesive-to-cohesive interface fracture in ice-
metal material systems. The computer models will be integrated to enable
multiscale simulation of solid-liquid interaction from the atomistic to the
microscale, while accounting for the realistic microstructure of ice-metal
material specimens fabricated in the experimental facility. The research will
determine the role of dislocation-mediated plasticity in an adhesive-to-cohesive
interface fracture, and quantify the ice-metal adhesion strength and its
sensitivity to metal surface topology, chemistry, and ice microstructure. The
models will be calibrated and validated with experimental measurements at
relevant scales. This project will also provide participating students a broad
range of knowledge and skills in icing physics, anti-/de-icing technology,
mechanics, supercomputing, material processing and characterization, and icing
tunnel testing. Several kits of ice-metal material systems will be designed,
fabricated and distributed in local middle and high schools for illustrating how
slight changes of a metal surface can significantly change its ice adhesion
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.