* 1824871
* CNH-L: The Influence of Conflicting Policies and Supply-Chain Pressures on Farmers' Decisions and Tradeoffs with Respect to Biodiversity, Profitability, and Sustainability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Alastair Iles, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,301,737.00

A grand challenge of the 21st century is to increase food production to meet the
needs of the world's people while ensuring long-term economic and ecological
sustainability. Farming methods that focus on supporting biodiversity to produce
essential ecosystem services may play an important role in addressing this
challenge while lessening the harmful effects of intensive farming methods that
rely heavily on non-renewable inputs. The investigators will focus their
research on lettuce farmers who vary in their use of practices that support
biodiversity along the central coast of California, one of the nation's most
productive agricultural regions. The researchers will employ in-depth interviews
and focus groups with these farmers to discover how and why they do or do not
adopt diversification practices. Ecological studies of their farms will assess
bird and soil microbial biodiversity and will quantify key ecosystem services
provided by these organisms including the maintenance of soil fertility,
enhancement of water conservation, and reduction of the spread of foodborne
pathogens. A range of socioeconomic methods including a quantitative survey and
a farm-level cost-and-return study will examine how biodiversity and ecosystem
services affect farm profits, regulatory compliance, and decisions about whether
to use diversification practices in the future. These data will be integrated to
construct a Markov decision-process model of the coupled natural-human system
and to assess policy scenarios that may influence adoption rates of specific
farming practices. Although focused on the central coast of California, where
the ecological and social costs of historically intensive agricultural
production can be readily observed, findings and insights obtained through this
research will have important implications in the U.S. and other nations for
regions facing similar challenges related to intensive agricultural production.
This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems (CNH) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research
project will study the influence of policies and markets on farmers' management
decisions, the effects of these decisions on farmland biodiversity and the
ecosystem services it provides, and how these ecosystem services affect farm
productivity, profitability, and sustainability. This project will provide new
information and insights regarding how agricultural conservation incentive
programs and supply chains jointly affect the ability and willingness of farmers
to use farming practices that can increase biodiversity. The project will
identify how such farming practices affect birds, soil microbes, and the vital
services they provide. Findings based on socioeconomic and ecological approaches
will be integrated to model how farmers navigate conflicting requirements and to
identify the consequences of their choices. The project will provide education
and training opportunities to engage in scientific research for post-doctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students, many of whom are
members of groups underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. The project also will develop infographics and fact sheets as well
as conduct community events, workshops, and other forms of outreach for farmers,
consumers, policy makers, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.