* 1824367
* Collaborative Research: Cognitively Costly Decision Making by Economic Agents: Micro and Macro Implications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Cosmin Ilut, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 245,922.00

This award funds research in macroeconomics. The team starts with the
observation that many and possibly most economic decisions require time,
attention, and careful reasoning. In other words, economic decisions require a
specific kind of work called cognitive effort. However, most standard approaches
used in macroeconomics assume that people can make their economic decisions
instantaneously, with no effort. The research team will develop and analyze a
new and tractable model of an entire economy where people, firms, and
institutions find that reasoning requires costly cognitive effort. The model
allows for the possibility that individuals, businesses, and policymakers may
make economic decisions that are not in their long-run best interest simply
because determining the best action takes too much time and effort. This is
consistent with results from behavioral science. The new model may give us new
tools to predict the effects of economic policies, and therefore could
contribute to U.S. economic growth as well as advancing fundamental knowledge in
economic science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cognitive limitations studied in this
project are not about agents imperfectly observing the relevant state variables
such as interest rates, prices, and tax rates. Instead, the focus here is on
agents imperfectly computing actions such as hours worked and how much to spend
and save. The standard approach in macroeconomics focuses on issues created by
imperfect observation and assumes a mapping derived under full rationality. The
approach taken in this research is consistent with experimental evidence.
Formally, the research starts with the assumption that agents observe the
objective states but do not know their optimal policy function. They therefore
make rational decisions about how to expend costly cognitive resources to learn
about the policy function. The team will first develop a tractable static
framework of individual behavior. The key emerging property is that as
information accumulates about the unknown policy function, the optimal reasoning
choice makes agents' effective actions state and history dependent, leading to
non-linearity, endogenous persistence, and volatility clustering. The non-
linearity generates both inertia to small shocks, and a salience like effect for
large shocks. The second project extends the theoretical analysis to a dynamic
setting where agents fully anticipate how current reasoning choices impact
future utility and choices. The third project sets the mechanism in a
representative agent macro model and studies its aggregate implications, where
the non-linear features of the micro behavior are likely to re-surface in
aggregate outcomes. There the cognitive limitations that affect individual
decision rules as well as the preception of general equilibrium effects are
jointly analyzed. The fourth project introduces heterogeneity and incomplete
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.