* 1824090
* ADVANCE IT - Collaboration and Equity: The Resources, Relationships, and Recognition (R3) Model for Advancing Women and Underrepresented Faculty in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Normanly, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,119,268.00

The ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in areas such as policy,
practice, culture, and organizational climate. The ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation (ADVANCE-IT) track supports the development of innovative
organizational change strategies within an institution of higher education to
enhance gender equity in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
academic workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Massachusetts Amherst
(UMass Amherst) will implement an ADVANCE-IT project that will further our
understanding of institutional practices and equity issues related to
collaborative work by STEM faculty. Although collaborative work is crucial to
solving current scientific and engineering challenges, which often require
inter- and cross- disciplinary approaches, this type of work is not recognized
professionally in the same way as individual work. In fact, universities
historically reward individual success more than collaborative success. This
project will attempt to mitigate this issue by developing and implementing
strategies to recognize, reward, and encourage collaborative work by STEM
faculty at UMass Amherst. Collaboration is considered an important issue for
equity and inclusion of diverse STEM faculty as many women and underrepresented
minority faculty are involved in collaborative work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project model for change focuses on ensuring equitable access via three
important components: resources, relationships, and recognition. Equity is
stronger where resources, relationships, and recognition intersect (R3), having
multiplicative rather than additive effects. The project tests hypotheses on how
to foster collaboration in research, inclusive community, and shared decision-
making. Interventions will create more equitable research collaboration, by
using resources, relationships and recognition to develop collaborative research
opportunities for all faculty. Interventions will aim for a more inclusive
faculty community with both formal and informal mentoring and open communication
for all faculty. Departments will have access to resources, recognition, and
relationships for supporting shared decision-making structures. The project
includes closely related social science research studies: analyses of
experiences with collaborations for white, Asian, and underrepresented minority
men and women; controlled experiments to determine whether implicit biases about
gender and race and their intersection affect how university committees credit
collaborations; and a comparative ethnography of departments with more and less
collaborative decision-making structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.