* 1824518
* SpecEES: Efficient Monitoring and Spectrum Utilization in Multi-Layer Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Wenye Wang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

With the proliferation of wireless applications and devices, the demand for
wireless data, and hence for wireless bandwidth, is growing exponentially.
Unfortunately, these growing demands need to be met via the available radio
spectrum, which is limited and therefore has to be efficiently shared among
various wireless systems and devices. Effective spectrum sharing demands
enhanced capability and increased intelligence at the wireless devices, capable
of operating over multiple frequency bands through multiple radio access
technologies (RATs); this is becoming a reality thanks to the continuous
advances in the industrial sector. Therefore, the globally interconnected
wireless networks are evolving into a large-scale system that simultaneously
supports billions of user and trillions of devices and exhibits huge
heterogeneity in all aspects. The goal of this proposal is to realize efficient
spectrum and energy utilization in this huge, dynamic and heterogeneous system.
In contrast to existing approaches, a new angle is taken in this project that
exploits the richness and complexity of the multi-RAT, multi-band environments
to our advantage, in a multi-layer fashion, so as to achieve dramatic
improvement in resource utilization and system performance. The expected outcome
will be valuable to all players in the wireless industry, as well as to all
sectors of the national economy that benefit from wireless innovation. The
inter-disciplinary nature of the proposed research will naturally help promote
cross-disciplinary education and well-rounded training of the future information
technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is comprised of
four thrusts: (i) acquisition and analytics of real-time spectrum activities to
build multi-layer spectrum snapshots, which we call SpecSnap, (ii) building a
fundamental framework to construct distributed and time/energy-efficient
spectrum allocation algorithms under heterogeneous environments with multi-RAT
in a principled manner, both for single-hop access to infrastructure and
multihop access for device-to-device (D2D) communications, (iii) studying how to
achieve fast rendezvous in multi-layer spectrum environments, and (iv) exploring
abundant opportunities in multi-layer networks for efficient pairwise and
broadcast communications via intra- and inter-layer topology design. The main
challenge lies in the extreme heterogeneity of spectrum band occupancy and
quality-of-service requirement of devices operating on diverse frequency bands
with different channel characteristics over a wide range of spatio-temporal
scales. The proposed research will be evaluated through theoretical analysis,
numerical and network simulation, prototype implementation, and experimentation
on real testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.