* 1824193
* Using metacognitive biases to induce curiosity and improve learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Janet Metcalfe, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 551,582.00

Learners are more engaged when curious. They are less likely to mind wander; and
they are more likely to seek answers, to be attentive and ready to learn, and
they actually learn better as evidenced through both brain and behavioral
outcomes. However, little is known about either the neural basis of curiosity,
or ways to induce it. This project proposes that curiosity is a metacognitive
state consisting of feelings that people almost know the answer to the object of
curiosity. This project proposes a series of experiments that investigate both
cognitive/behavioral and brain responses. It tests the novel hypothesis that
curiosity can be induced by manipulations that alter metacognitive processes,
with favorable consequences for learning. Understanding the scientific basis of
curiosity will have broad practical and educational implications for increasing
students' learning and their desire to learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past work on
curiosity is largely correlational, and often confounds a priori knowledge with
feelings of curiosity. In contrast, the experiments in this project induce
curiosity via manipulations that alter metacognitive states. Behavioral and
electrophysiological experiments, will investigate the impact of curiosity on
attention and learning. In these experiments, participants will be exposed to
computer-controlled learning scenarios where curiosity is manipulated via
priming, fluency, multitasking, divided attention or inhibitory retrieval cuing.
Dependent variables include reaction and study times, recall scores, and event-
related potentials, as well as ratings of curiosity, confidence, and mind
wandering. Curiosity will be manipulated using methods known to influence
metacognitive processes. The electrophysiological studies investigating neural
processes will allow use of mediational models to evaluate the role of distinct
behavioral and brain components related to curiosity. These experiments will
disentangle learning attributable to a priori knowledge versus those
attributable to curiosity states. This project will help us to understand
foundational neural and behavioral processes underlying curiosity-related
learning and reward in learning, and the role of metacognition. There is
potential to develop practical methods for systematically inducing curiosity
which can be applied to classroom and other settings to enhance
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.