* 1824182
* Cultivating Knowledge of Mathematical Equivalence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Martha Alibali, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 670,986.00

This project will develop and test the effectiveness of a semester-long
conceptually-based instruction for promoting understanding of mathematical
equivalence and associated gains in algebraic thinking. Participants in the
research will be elementary- and middle- school students. Although many brief,
single-session laboratory studies have suggested effective ways to promote equal
sign knowledge in the short term, these studies have generally failed to produce
practical guidelines for use by regular classroom teachers. This project will
apply findings from laboratory studies over a longer time period with the goal
of packaging a practical approach to developing students' knowledge of the equal
sign for classroom teachers. The hypothesis is that improved equal sign
knowledge will lead to improved access to algebra, an important pathway into
higher mathematics and science that provides access to Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields that help power modern
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the effectiveness of
spaced, conceptually-based instruction for promoting understanding of
mathematical equivalence and associated gains in algebraic thinking. Multiple
experimental studies have shown that brief, conceptually-based instructional
interventions can lead to improvements in children's equal sign knowledge. The
proposed research will test whether spacing such interventions over time can
lead to more substantial and long-term gains in equal sign knowledge, and
whether such knowledge, in turn, fosters algebraic reasoning. One component of
the research will aim to optimize the conceptually based intervention. The other
component will be a study that investigates the effects of the intervention over
time, using a crossover design. The research will employ a measure of equal sign
knowledge that is more sensitive than most commonly used measures, allowing for
detection of relatively fine-grained gains in response to the instructional
intervention. In total, the work will contribute to the field's understanding of
how to improve equal sign knowledge and understanding of the causal impact of
equal sign instruction on student competence in
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.