* 1824122
* Assessing the Role of Familiarity in Eyewitness Memory and Suggestibility
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Gail Goodman, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,210.00

Title: Assessing the Role of Familiarity in Eyewitness Memory and
Suggestibility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In legal
cases involving child victims of abuse or maltreatment, the person under
suspicion often is someone with whom the child is familiar. Yet, most scientific
studies on child eyewitness memory examine accuracy and suggestibility
concerning briefly-seen strangers. There are important theoretical reasons to
indicate that familiarity and relationship factors affect young children's
memory and suggestibility. This project will investigate children's abilities to
recount accurately their experiences and their willingness to reveal
transgressions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the effects of
first-hand person knowledge and socioemotional influences on young children's
eye witness reports. Employing an experimental approach, the first study
concerns children's memory and suggestibility for an event involving a familiar
person versus a stranger. The second study will investigate individual
predictors of children's eyewitness memory for a moderately stressful event
experienced with their father. For both experiments, assessments of
intelligence, mental health, family conflict, and personality will be included
to pinpoint significant relations. This research will provide new theoretically
driven scientific knowledge about children's eyewitness memory, which in turn
will inform the legal system how best to balance protecting children from
victimization and protecting adults from false
accusations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.