* 1824601
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect Of Diversity On Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Jason Yaeger, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 25,027.00

Researchers have aimed to understand the social and ecological variables that
influence the development and decline of complex societies. Archaeology is well-
positioned to provide insight regarding this topic due to its focus on extended
periods of time and changes throughout these periods. Within this broader
context, this project takes a long-term perspective on human-environment
relationships to understand how humans have impacted their environment and the
ways these interactions helped shape past societal development and collapse.
This contribution is salient because it advances the scientific knowledge of the
complex relationships between the development and collapse of society and a
changing environment. The use of a resilience framework to understand the
ecological dimensions of social transformations makes this research applicable
across many scientific topics. Additionally, understanding past socioecological
dynamics is relevant to modern issues of land-use and management, particularly
those concerning biodiversity. Thus, studying the role of diversity in past
tropical societies informs modern policy. This project involves collaboration
with many entities including national and international academic professionals,
undergraduate students from the United States, and individuals from Belize.
Furthermore, results from this project will be used to inform community outreach
efforts that focus on improving education and literacy in Belize and more
broadly.

Dr. Jason Yaeger and Ms. Rebecca Friedel, of The University of Texas at San
Antonio (UTSA), will investigate the variables that influence the development
and decline of complex societies using a diachronic examination of the
intersection of human action with the biophysical world, or human-environment
relationships. Using a resilience framework, this project focuses on a case
study of societal development and decline in the Mopan River valley, Belize, to
test the hypothesis that: the maintenance of high diversity is critical to the
resilience of societies in the face of disruptions (e.g., climatic shifts). This
hypothesis will be supported if this project finds that: 1) plant diversity is
high before and during early climatic disruptions that did not cause a collapse
and 2) plant diversity decreases leading up to a later societal collapse that
correlates with a climatic disruption. In order to examine the nuances of this
hypothesis, this project will study plant diversity dynamics and the human
behaviors driving those dynamics using long-term datasets at both landscape and
localized scales. Together, these paleoecological and archaeobotanical data will
allow for a detailed understanding of human-environment relationships and their
role in the resilience of complex social and ecological systems. By integrating
these multiple datasets, the researchers will be able to evaluate the main
hypothesis that the maintenance of high diversity is critical to the resilience
of socioecological systems in the face of perturbations by answering our two
research questions: how do the dynamics of plant diversity relate to known
sociopolitical and climatic histories of the Mopan valley, and what human
behaviors were driving those plant diversity dynamics?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.