* 1824540
* Synthesis and design workshop: Designing STEM learning environments for individuals with disabilities
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 99,948.00

This workshop is funded through the "Dear Colleague Letter: Principles for the
Design of Digital Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Learning Environments (NSF 18-017)." This workshop is led by the DO-IT
(Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology) Center at the
University of Washington and will inform the design of the next generation of
digital learning environments for STEM through addressing issues relevant for
individuals with disabilities. This project will advance knowledge relevant to
improving the success of individuals with disabilities in digital learning
environments and foster synergistic and lasting relationships among participants
that will result in systemic changes toward more inclusive digital learning.
These efforts will serve to broaden participation in STEM by improving learning
environment design based on the unique expertise and perspectives of individuals
with disabilities, making online opportunities more welcoming and accessible to
everyone.

The workshop is grounded on four research questions: (1) What challenges do
learners with different types of disabilities face in using current and emerging
digital learning tools and engaging in online learning activities? (2) How do
current digital learning research and practices contribute to the
marginalization of individuals with disabilities? (3) What advances in digital
learning design are required to support multi-modal learning and engagement that
is fully accessible to and usable by students with disabilities? (4) What
specific actions can digital learning researchers, funding agencies, educators,
and other stakeholders take to systematically address issues with respect to
disabilities? To address these questions, an interdisciplinary team will create
an online community of practice and a synthesis and design workshop to
synthesize and integrate existing research related to the accessibility of
digital learning to students with a variety of disabilities. Outcomes of the
workshop include a white paper that contributes to the development of forward-
looking, highly adaptable, distributed, collaborative digital environments that
can personalize learning for diverse learners that include individuals with
disabilities with potential applications across multiple and varying (a) domains
of knowledge, (b) learning contexts, and (c) time spans. The project will also
develop guidelines for how researchers can address disability/accessibility-
related issues with respect to (a) designing and testing new technologies, (b)
analyzing and reporting outcomes, and (c) designing project activities and
resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.