* 1824826
* Investigating modern human population history and dynamics: A genomic analysis of Georgian populations of the South Caucasus
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Theodore Schurr, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 467,096.00

This project will combine genomic, historical, archaeological and linguistic
data to advance our understanding of modern human population history with
respect to the expansion of agriculture, cultures, and populations in Eurasia.
The project will generate new data about Georgian populations that can be
utilized by scientific researchers and the general public, thereby expanding the
collective knowledge of anthropology, genetics and human history. The project
will strengthen substantive international research collaborations with Georgian
scholars, provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, contribute to course content for biological anthropology and
population genetics courses, and promote public dissemination of the scientific
results through publications and lectures in both the United States and Georgia.
The results of the study will also be shared with participants by the
international research team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this interdisciplinary
study, developed in collaboration with scholars from the Ivane Javakhishvili
Institute of History and Ethnology and the Tbilisi State Medical University, the
investigators will conduct a survey of genomic diversity in modern Georgian
populations, which will reveal new details about human phylogeography, sex-
biased contributions to genetic diversity, patterns of admixture and migration,
and the modern human settlement of Eurasia. Through fieldwork in the region, the
investigators will obtain genealogical data and DNA samples from ~1250
individuals living there. For these newly collected samples, and for ~700
previously collected samples from the Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti region, they will
analyze mtDNA, Y-chromosome and autosomal variation, including through whole
genome sequencing. These data will be analyzed in conjunction with
archeological, ethnological and linguistic evidence. Using this approach, a
number of questions will be addressed, including: (a) the Paleolithic settlement
of the Caucasus by modern humans; (b) the nature and extent of Neanderthal
admixture in Georgian populations; (c) the degree to which local Caucasus
populations have genetically influenced Eurasian populations; (d) the biological
and cultural impact of the Neolithic spread of agriculture into the Caucasus;
and (e) the interactions between Anatolian and Georgian populations over the
past ten millennia. This project will generate some of the highest resolution
mtDNA, Y-chromosome and autosomal data currently available for Caucasus
populations. Finally, these studies of contemporary Caucasus populations will
lay the foundation for future ancient DNA analyses of past human populations
from various locations and temporal contexts within the region, ones that will
provide a clearer diachronic perspective on genetic variation in the Caucasus
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.