* 1824821
* Collaborative Research: X-rays, 3D animation and human locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stephen Gatesy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 151,000.00

Walking efficiently on two legs (bipedalism) is considered a defining
characteristic of modern humans, and researchers have long strived to understand
how, when, and why human bipedalism evolved. The discoveries of fossilized
footprints made by living, moving individuals offer a promising source of data
on hominin locomotion to complement what can be learned from fossilized skeletal
remains. In this study, X-ray imaging, 3D animation, and computer simulation
methods are developed and applied to understand formation of this bipedal
record. Such foundational research is required to reconstruct foot anatomy and
motion from fossil footprints, and to evaluate competing evolutionary hypotheses
about bipedalism. The project represents an interdisciplinary collaboration
between primarily undergraduate and major research institutions, with
substantial training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.
Student recruitment will focus on groups historically underrepresented in STEM
fields. Results will be translated into pedagogical materials focused on the
intersection of science and visual art, and the public will be engaged through
museum and media science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have
developed methods for interpreting aspects of foot anatomy and motion from human
footprints, but none have approached the problem mechanistically to understand
the complex foot-substrate interactions through which footprints are formed.
Direct observation of these interactions has not been possible because human
feet and deformable substrates are both opaque, and contact areas are therefore
hidden when a foot sinks to form a footprint. Here, biplanar X-ray, 3D
animation, and computer simulation methods will be developed to visualize and
analyze movement as individuals walk through substrates to create footprints.
Direct mechanistic knowledge of foot-substrate interactions is potentially
transformative for paleoanthropologists to extract anatomical and functional
inferences from fossil human footprints and use these to test evolutionary
hypotheses. Further, new imaging and analysis techniques are readily
transferrable to other organisms, and may transform other approaches across
animal biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.