* 1824566
* Enhancing Participation and Diversity at the National Conference for Advanced POGIL Practitioners
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Richard Moog, The POGIL Project
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 11/30/2020
* USD 41,377.00

Teaching methods that actively engage students are more effective for learning
about science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) than traditional
teaching methods such as lecturing. One specific active learning method that has
been broadly implemented in STEM fields at both the high school and college
levels is Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL). Professional
development experiences that enable STEM teachers to interact with others who
use similar active learning methods help them become even more effective in
their classrooms. One objective of the POGIL Project's strategic plan is to
increase the diversity of the POGIL faculty community and the students it
serves. This includes supporting the participation of faculty members of diverse
backgrounds and from a full range of high schools, colleges, and universities
across the United States. The second National Conference for Advanced POGIL
Practitioners will bring teachers who use POGIL together to network, discuss
common concerns, and share accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) project will provide support
for about 30 faculty members and a plenary speaker from targeted groups to
attend the second National Conference for Advanced POGIL Practitioners (NCAPP).
The targeted college and university faculty members to be supported are from
groups underrepresented in STEM fields, two-year colleges, minority-serving
institutions, or other institutions with limited financial resources for faculty
professional development. The award also provides support for facilitating a
conference workshop on "Inclusive Excellence in the POGIL Classroom", which is
expected to promote increased awareness and understanding of diversity and
equity issues in the classroom, as well as the use of thoughtful and inclusive
classroom practices by conference attendees. Overall, the second NCAPP will
provide a forum for faculty members to share expertise and accomplishments; work
with others to design new POGIL activities and strategies for implementation;
and discuss challenges related to using POGIL in their STEM classrooms. The
impact of the conference on participants' teaching practices, as well as
opportunities for new professional interactions and contacts, will be evaluated
via surveys and interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.