* 1824373
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Female Underemployment - Job Attributes and Labor Supply Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Nivedhitha Subramanian, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2020
* USD 21,105.00

This research project will study how gender-related workplace attributes and
family pressures affect labor supply decisions of recent high school and college
women graduates. Despite increasing female educational attainment, female labor
force participation (FLFP) remains low and lags that of men in many parts of the
world. This research involves an information experiment on a labor market
platform in which individual job-seekers are randomly selected to receive
information about the gender composition of the firm and/or gender of the
supervisor at positions they are matched with. The jobseeker is also asked about
how her family feels about the job match. The researchers are interested in
whether the job-seeker chooses to apply to the positions for which she is
matched with. The results of this experiment are matched with a series of
questions that measure differences between the jobseeker's preferences and her
perceptions of her family's preferences regarding her job search to shed light
on how family concerns and job place characteristics jointly affect female labor
supply decisions. The results of this research project will provide inputs into
policies to increase female labor supply and in the process, enhance economic
growth and reduce gender income inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will use field experiments to investigate the effects of gender-related
job and firm characteristics and family and social perceptions on female labor
supply. The PIs will provide information about work place and firm
characteristics, such as the gender composition of workers, supervisor's gender,
and hours of work, to randomly selected individual prospective job-seekers as
well as elicit information about familial consent of the job and firm
characteristics to see how these affect the jobseeker's labor supply decisions.
In a cross-randomization, individuals are primed to think about their family's
job search advice. The outcome of interest is whether the job-seeker chooses to
apply to each of the positions for which she is matched and meets the basic
qualifications. The results of this experiment are matched with a series of
willingness-to-pay vignettes that measure differences between her own
preferences and her perceptions of her family's preferences regarding her job
search, to shed light on household constraints on female labor supply decisions.
The results of this research will shed light on why female labor force
participation in many parts of the world has not kept pace with increased female
education. The results will also provide inputs into policies to employ
increasing female human capital, hence lead to faster economic growth, increased
income, and possibly gender equity in incomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.