* 1824508
* Oceanographic Technical Services, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2018,12/31/2023
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 12/31/2023
* USD 12,114,566.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) proposes to support technical
services on R/V Atlantis, a 274? general purpose research vessel and R/V
Armstrong, a new 238? multidisciplinary vessel. Both vessels are owned by the
Navy and are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic Fleet which is
scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of their basic operations WHOI will provide two
technicians on each seagoing research project, and will maintain, calibrate and
provide for qualified users items from their pool of shared-use research
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WHOI also proposes to provide several
elements of specialized support for investigators, with separate charges.
Specialized support requested for 2018 includes:&lt;br/&gt;1) Support for Sea
Education Association (SEA) &lt;br/&gt;2) SATNAG &lt;br/&gt;3) MISO&lt;br/&gt;4)
PFPE/Gravimeter&lt;br/&gt;5) Sensor Calibration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.