* 1824238
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Attention, Working Memory, and Visual Perception To Reduce Risk of Injuries in the Construction Industry
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Behzad Esmaeili, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 310,456.00

Human error (e.g., poor decisions or unsafe actions) are a main casual factor in
up to 80% of all workplace accidents across a breadth of industries. To the
extent our limited capacity for information processing capacity is a major
source of such errors, better understanding of cognitive processes will yield
more effective methods for predicting and reducing the poor decisions that put
workers at risk. Accordingly, this study will complete a series of eye-tracking
experiments to build an error-detection framework - the Human-Error Detection
Framework - that computes the likelihood of human error in occupational settings
to enable proactive countermeasures to keep workers safe. Subsequently, to
extend the value of this framework, this project will enrich and expand
research-based educational materials, outreach, and engagement activities to
spread awareness about this framework to communities and workers. To achieve
these goals, this multidisciplinary project blends research linking eye
movements and workers' attention with research focused on working-memory load
and decision making in order to discover how and why workers in dynamic work
environments fail to detect, comprehend, and/or respond to physical risks. Using
the dynamic and high-risk environment of construction as a testbed, the proposed
framework will connect eye movements and cognitive manipulations in laboratory
and field experiments with worker demographics to identify precursors that
predict accident-causing human errors in dynamic worksites. In all, this project
will demonstrate the value and effectiveness of synthesizing cognitive
psychology, engineering, and advanced computation to improve decision making and
occupational safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Human-Error Detection
Framework will harness real-time eye-movement patterns to identify human errors
and thereby lay the foundation for synthesizing technology with data analysis to
automatically identify and interrupt human decision-making errors before
injuries occur. Using the predictive models resulting from this study will not
only contribute to significant accident reduction but will also provide a
critical validation measure to confirm the effectiveness of training programs in
enhancing workers' risk-analysis skills. Furthermore, since this project
provides tools and insights for researchers, students, and workers to use to
enhance occupational safety and multidisciplinary research, this project will
evolve the broader pedagogical landscape of the decision, risk, and management
sector. As this innovative research challenges the conventional, reactionary
paradigm of safety-risk management by enabling the identification of at-risk
workers using a measurable indicator of their cognitive processes, i.e., their
eye movements, the proposed proactive approach to occupational safety has the
potential for averting occupational accidents across industries and thereby will
foreseeably prevent the injuries that undermine the well-being of millions of
American workers and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.