* 1824882
* Natural Curvature and Soft Shells: Shape Shifting through Mechanical Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2022
* USD 550,711.00

Nature uses internal stimuli to locally and globally change the curvature of
thin and soft materials in a variety of ways. Natural curvatures occur in many
biological and engineered structures through differential swelling, heating, or
growth. They are: induced by proteins along a cell membrane, critical to the
eversion of a developing Volvox embryo, and incurred in residually stressed
composite plates and shells. Since natural curvature can drastically affect the
morphology of thin bodies and induce mechanical instabilities, this provides a
means for creating adaptive, shape-shifting structures capable of growing,
morphing, and transitioning between complex shapes. This award supports
fundamental research on the mechanics of instabilities induced by a natural
curvature within thin shells. Harnessing these concepts for technological
applications may enable the design of adaptive metamaterials, soft robotic
actuators, and structural materials capable of programmatically controlled
shape-shifting. Thus, this project will advance the science associated with
mechanical instability; and advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare. This award also supports the further development of the digital
inspiration, communication, and education (DICE) program. By placing an emphasis
on visual, verbal, and written communication, this program will continue to
enhance both the scientific communication of the next generation of scholars and
broaden the participation of the general public through the creation and
curation of open, online mechanics content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will establish a fundamental understanding of how natural and spontaneous
curvatures deform slender structures and soft materials. Its results will help
engineer shells that are more robust against buckling, and facilitate the design
of shells capable of changing between target shapes on command. The research
will establish how natural curvature can provide shells with a knock-up factor
against pressure buckling. The research team will utilize experiments that
control curvature in soft materials through residual swelling in conjunction
with a novel computational model based on a large deformation, rotation-free
shell formulation. A fully nonlinear forward and inverse computational shell
model to analyze shells with an evolving natural curvature will be developed and
validated with experiments. Finally, an understanding of how locally applied
natural curvatures deform soft shells will be established, enabling targeted
shape-shifting that utilizes the computational modeling to inform the
experimental design. This understanding may transform key technologies where
shape-shifting materials are being intensely pursued for technological
insertion, like soft robotics, deployable structures, and biomimetic
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.