* 1824553
* SpecEES: Towards Secure Decision Making in Spectrum and Energy Efficient IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The Internet-of-Things (IoT) has recently emerged as a powerful new paradigm for
future generations of wireless networks. In IoT, a wide variety of devices, such
as body sensors, implants, animal biochip transponders, electric clams in
coastal waters, vehicular sensors, sensors for environmental/food/pathogen
monitoring, and devices in disaster relief operations, are connected to the
Internet via wireless interfaces. Connecting this myriad of mobile devices to
the Internet could potentially lead to a broad range of innovative network
applications. However, unique technical challenges for IoT, such as massive
connectivity, security vulnerability and energy sustainability, among others,
need to be addressed before such potentials can be fully fulfilled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a robust and secure framework
for wireless function computing to specifically address challenges in IoT
applications. The enabling characteristic of this framework is that in many IoT
applications, instead of recovering the full data collected by various devices
and transmitted over the network, the goal of the networked functional computing
is to assist certain decision making, for which the decision makers only need to
compute a function of these distributed data. The main idea of this project is
to develop secure and spectrum/energy efficient protocols that enable the
decision maker to compute functions of interest without first recovering the
full data from sensing devices. Thus, instead of acting as mere data pipes,
wireless links become an integral part of the smart decision process in IoT
applications. Successful execution of this project will make substantial
contributions to both practical applications and theory development. On the
application level, this project has the potential to substantially improve the
spectrum efficiency, energy efficiency and robustness to active attacks for
future IoT networks. On the theory side, this project will develop low-
complexity efficient and robust function computing algorithms that enable IoT
applications to make timely and accurate decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.