* 1824344
* Collaborative Research: Robust Inference and Computational Methods for Optimal Values of Nonlinear Programs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Hiroaki Kaido, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,473.00

Empirical research in the social sciences often entails estimating and drawing
robust inference about optimal values of nonlinear programs. Examples include,
but are not limited to, the analysis of causal effects of economic policies;
features of the distribution of counterfactual outcomes (e.g. optimal reserve
prices and optimal revenues) under weak assumptions; counterfactual vote shares
and seats assignments; welfare effects of policy interventions; demand
extrapolation and welfare analysis subject to rationality constraints; maximum
and minimum responses to monetary policies. This research aims at establishing a
general, formal framework and providing a methodology for estimation and robust
inference on optimal values of nonlinear programs under weak restrictions on the
underlying process that has generated the observable data. Recognizing that the
computational feasibility of the method is crucial for its applicability and
usefulness for empirical researchers and society more broadly, the investigators
deliver algorithms for computation of the proposed estimators and robust
confidence intervals. This research also delivers a collection of portable
computer programs implementing the methodology that will be shared with the
community openly and free of charges or restrictions.

This research aims at developing robust inference procedures and computational
methods for parameters in econometric models that are characterized as optimal
values of nonlinear programs. Making inference on such functionals is nontrivial
because subtle features of the underlying optimization problem may affect
inference. For example, the optimal solution may not be unique, may be unique
but only weakly identified, or may be characterized by intricate constraints.
Due to these challenging features, existing methods often impose assumptions
such as constraint qualifications on the underlying optimization problem. These
are hard to verify in practice. This research aims at developing inference
methods that place very little structure on the optimization problem. Further,
the project aims at developing and investigating the convergence properties of a
computational method that can be used to implement the procedure. Nonlinear
programs often involve black-box functions that are computed by simulation or by
solving a complex structural model. The algorithm developed in this project,
which is based on the response surface method, mitigates the computational cost
by constructing flexible approximations to such functions and adaptively drawing
evaluation points to regions that are highly relevant for finding the optimal
value.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.