* 1824641
* Summer Institute of Museum Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Joshua Bell, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 403,254.00

Museum collections of anthropological material are an American treasure. They
engage and inspire millions of Americans through exhibits and programs, serving
as an important educational resource for communicating knowledge to a wide
audience. The objects: artifacts, art work, film and photography - that museums
preserve also constitute an invaluable scientific record of cultural practices,
past and present. They are a databank of physical and visual material that can
be examined, analyzed, and reassessed again and again as questions and methods
change over time. Objects document dynamic aspects of cultural behavior that are
not recorded in written sources; they are one of the few ways to gain
information directly from past societies that did not have writing. However,
these collections are not being used to their full potential. Many interested
researchers cannot effectively utilize museum collections because they lack the
skills and methods to approach or evaluate this type of data, which presents
distinct challenges. There are few graduate-level courses in museum-based
research in the United States. Few of these programs can offer the hands-on
learning that is essential for the study of collections. Students wishing to tap
into the research potential of American museums either have had to study abroad
or to train themselves. The result is that we are not fully capitalizing on the
investment the nation has made in the assembly and maintenance of museum
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summer Institute in Museum Anthropology
(SIMA) was created in response to this need. Based in the Smithsonian
Institution's Department of Anthropology, it is an intensive four-week
residential program providing training in museum research methods. Each year it
accepts 12 graduate students from across the country who show promise to
contribute to development of the field of cultural anthropology through object
research. It also accepts two faculty fellows who come to learn how to teach
with collections at their home institution. SIMA is a rigorous program that
includes a mix of formal class time, individual research work, and extensive
mentoring. Support from the National Science Foundation covers student and
faculty fellows participant costs and the bringing together of a specialized
faculty of visiting experts with Smithsonian scholars whose time is contributed
to SIMA. The Smithsonian offers its extensive collections as a laboratory for
learning, giving students an opportunity for in-depth work with one of the
greatest anthropological research collections in the world. Over the period of
2009 to 2017, SIMA has provided training for 103 students, 34 collection interns
and 7 university professors, and engaged 18 academics as guest faculty from 66
universities and 22 states. SIMA has a solid model in place for training, and
former student participants are gaining university positions where they are
using SIMA as a model for their own teaching. This grant will broaden the scope
of the SIMA model by (1) expanding the type of collections examined with a
particular focus on film and photography, (2) expanding the methods taught to
understand the range of materials encountered in collections (Ancient DNA, flora
and fauna), and (3) by recruiting and training a more diverse set of students
and faculty. The goal of all these activities is to create a new generation of
American scholars who are able to use anthropological collections effectively in
their research. These new scholars will revitalize museums as sites where
knowledge is produced as well as disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.