* 1824796
* CNH-L:  Revealing the Hidden Ecoclimate Teleconnections Between Forest and Agriculture in the U.S. Enables Novel Governance Strategies for a Telecoupled World
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jose Soto, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,450,000.00

This award will provide decision-makers with the knowledge and tools to better
understand and respond to the hidden connections, called teleconnections,
between forest conditions in one part of the US and agricultural production
elsewhere. Recent scientific studies show that changes in forests-such as the
widespread die-off in the West related to drought, beetle infestations, and
wildfires-affect patterns of temperature and precipitation, which in turn
"connect" through atmospheric processes to agricultural production in other
parts of the country. This research will determine the economic impacts of
forest die-off across the US on agricultural yields and crop values and will
develop a blueprint to manage the challenges of such outcomes. This award will
provide decision-makers with the knowledge and tools to better manage natural-
human systems in a telecoupled world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge of
the coming century is not only to understand the ecological connections between
natural and human systems, but also to understand how and when changing
ecological conditions can prompt effective governance feedback responses. This
research contributes to the body of literature on telecoupled natural-human
systems, focusing on the hidden linkages between forests and agriculture in the
US. The long-term goal of the award is to provide decision-makers with the
knowledge and tools to better manage natural-human systems in a telecoupled
world. Changes in vegetation in one location can drive changes in temperature,
precipitation, and, subsequently, gross primary productivity in distant
locations-a process referred to as an ecoclimate teleconnection. For example, in
recent years, California has seen a historic 129 million trees killed across 8.9
million acres, a result of drought, beetle infestation, and wildfire. Via
ecoclimatic teleconnections, such large-scale forest die-off may result in
telecoupled changes in human systems in distant locations, such as in
agricultural yields in the Midwest and related market changes. Specifically,
this research will: (1) determine the ecoclimate teleconnections of forest die-
off across the US; (2) quantify economic impacts of such changes on US
agricultural yield and crop values in key bioclimatic regions; (3) determine the
political, institutional, and behavioral factors that may influence decision-
makers' ability to respond adaptively to telecoupled forest-agricultural
systems; and (4) convene an interactive workshop with decision-makers to present
the research findings and to co-produce a blueprint for addressing the
governance challenges of such telecoupling. The award will utilize the National
Ecological Observatory Network to evaluate the effects of teleconnections
between forests and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.