* 1824511
* Parenting, Preschool, and the Production of School Readiness and Later Academic Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Chloe Gibbs, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,985.00

This research project will combine large data sets from Head Start and other
publicly provided pre-kindergarten programs, parental involvement and
experiments to test the effects of parenting education and length of day care on
long-term child educational outcomes. The project will study how extra time in
summer school just before kindergarten affect student outcome; the effects of
parenting education using video interactions on parenting skills and subsequent
effects on child educational outcomes; whether extending Head-Start classes from
half day to full day improves child academic outcome, and the use of a different
methodology to study the effects of extending the Head-Start program to a full
day rather than to a half day. This research project is one of the first to
study Head Start in a very comprehensive way. Given the resources spent on Head
Start and other pre-school programs as well as the effects these programs could
have on human capital development, this research deals with a very important
subject. The results of the research project will provide important inputs into
the formulation of education and human capital policies in the US. This will
help establish the US as the global leader in early childhood
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will combine
large administrative data sets on Head Start, parental involvement, and rigorous
methodologies, including field experiments and regression discontinuity (RD) to
investigate the effects of parenting education on parental skills and subsequent
long-term educational outcomes of young children. The research is made up of
four projects that includes the study of the effects of extra pre-K summer
school on children?s readiness for kindergarten, the effects of parenting
education using video interaction with children on parental skills and the last
two projects will use multi-site experimental methods and RD to study the
effects of expanding Head Start to full day programming using variation in the
timing of the roll out of the program across counties as an instrument. This
project leverages rigorous methods and innovative programmatic approaches to add
additional insights into the literature on early childhood education as well as
provide important inputs into policy making. Understanding whether and how early
childhood educational interventions work is important for economic science as
well as educational and human capital policy. The results of this research
project will help to establish the U.S. as the global leader in early childhood
education research and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.