* 1824577
* Collaborative Research: Defense against Measurement Attacks on the Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/10/2018,06/30/2021
* Chen-Ching Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

As the power grid becomes increasingly dependent on connectivity through
information and communications technology, this critical infrastructure faces
significant threats from cyber attacks. Among various cyber attacks, measurement
attacks achieve goals by falsifying measurements to manipulate control commands.
Four cohesive research thrusts are proposed to develop: (i) a unified analytical
framework to characterize the impact conditions of measurement attacks on the
large-scale, dynamic power grid. (ii) methods to identify coordinated
measurement attacks that are launched from non-collusive groups, (iii) fast and
accurate detection algorithms considering critical response time of the grid,
and (iv) defense strategies at multiple levels of the grid to deter repetitive
attacks at critical targets. The research results will be validated on a cyber-
physical power grid test bed in realistic settings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project is among the first aiming to develop
an analytical framework for diverse coordinated measurement attacks on the
dynamic power grid. It will address important challenges of identifying attack
goals and intercepting potential threats in realistic settings. This framework
will not only enable us to develop more effective defense mechanisms for the
power grid, but also bring important insights of cyber-physical causal chains in
dynamic systems to other research communities. This project is also among the
few that unify the cyber-protection capabilities and grid context information
with system-theoretic approaches. It will result in algorithmic tools that
integrate the defense efforts on multiple levels of the grid, vertically
enhancing grid security while reducing the overall defense
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will entailer
transformative impact through real-world applications in the power industry and
extensive educational initiatives at Ohio State University (OSU) and Washington
State University (WSU). Both PIs have strong collaborations with power
utilities, power technology companies, and national laboratories, which will
facilitate the dissemination of research outcomes into security solutions based
on real-world requirements. Education is emphasized by leveraging multiple
outreach activities at OSU and WSU. This project will also result in one
graduate level course, and several online education modules to be made available
to institutions nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.