* 1824568
* SpecEES: A spectrally-dense 650-GHz photonic wireless backhaul via secure network coding
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 683,000.00

Wireless communications and networks have experienced exponential growth in data
rates and traffic over the past decade, driven by the ever-increasing density of
mobile devices, multimedia services and data requirements. The resulting
electromagnetic spectrum below 60-GHz has become extremely overcrowded, even
with advanced spectrum-efficient modulation formats and spatially diverse
multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) techniques. At present, the sub-
millimeter-wave (sub-mm-Wave) electromagnetic spectrum between 300 GHz and 850
GHz is largely unassigned and provides a unique opportunity for more efficient
utilization. This will avoid further crowding the currently heavily used
spectrum and significantly enhance data rates to tens of Gb/s. This project
seeks to demonstrate such a fundamentally new platform towards spectral-
efficient and energy-efficient wireless communications with embedded security.
Due to the inherent atmospheric attenuation, the sub-mm-Wave communication
distance has been limited to within 50 m. Thus, this project proposes network
configurations of sub-mm-Wave point-to-point links to enable secured spatial
coverage over longer distances and larger areas. There are two distinct
differences of the sub-mm-Wave links compared to traditional wireless networks:
the directivity of the sub-mm-Wave links and the possibility for a transmitter
to connect to multiple receivers through adaptive electronic beam-steering and
beam-forming. The beam-forming with narrow beam-width removes broadcasting and
avoids interference, enabling much simpler network operation to approach the
theoretical upper limits of network information capacity. The project seeks to
demonstrate the modular sub-mm-Wave link hardware to achieve the above goal. The
proposed research will be complemented with an integrated education and outreach
program. This includes diversity recruitment, mentoring and retention, hands-on
curriculum development, minority high-school and undergraduate training, and
public outreach. The cross-layer scientific and education provides a new
platform at the interface of hardware, software, and networks in next-generation
wireless communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
a spectrally dense, high-data-rate, 650-GHz photonic wireless communications
platform in a diamond mesh network, while explicitly addressing network security
and energy efficiency in the architecture. The collaborative research spans
across the physical layer, the network layer, and the software layer, addressing
cross-layer issues in the fundamental architecture. The proposed research
consists of three thrust areas. In Thrust I, the project will examine a modular
photonic sub-mm-Wave link, based on a chip-scale photomixer driven by an optical
frequency comb recently developed by the team. This enables high-power
spectrally dense, 80 Gb/s sub-mm-Wave transmission. In Thrust II, the project
will examine a photonic sub-mm-Wave 80 Gb/s testbed, implemented with an
adaptive smart antenna array. Beam-steering and beam-forming will enable
simultaneously a directional line-of-sight (LoS) link and a non-line-of-sight
(NLoS) link, with the former establishing a spectrally efficient channel with
less inter-symbol and inter-channel interference. The latter mitigates medium
non-idealities such as interference, shadowing, and multi-path effects. In
Thrust III, the project will study the capacity of sub-mm-Wave communication
networks and explore the design of near-optimal efficient and secure algorithms.
Enabled by the intrinsic directivity and beam-forming capabilities of our sub-
mm-Wave link, the project will advance the possibility of unconditional security
in the wireless backhaul network through physical layer security
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.