* 1824212
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Harnessing Anger to Promote Activism: Exploring the Efficacy and Emotional Flow of Persuasive Anger Appeals
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Jeffrey Niederdeppe, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2019
* USD 27,054.00

Strategic communicators are increasingly interested in ways to galvanize the
public and policymakers to take action to offset clear threats to human and
planetary health. To motivate civic engagement with health and environmental
issues, communicators would benefit from exploring messaging strategies that go
beyond informational portrayals of an issue to engage audiences on an emotional
level. To this end, this research explores the viability of persuasive anger
appeals. According to persuasion theory, anger-arousing messages must not only
evoke anger in order to change attitudes and behaviors; they must also instill
beliefs about the efficacy of taking action. The theory, however, has been
imprecise about what those efficacy beliefs entail. Because anger tends to
motivate a desire to retaliate against a perceived wrongdoer, it follows that
anger may have the strongest effects on persuasive outcomes when the audience
believes that a particular action will punish the wrongdoer, a new concept the
researchers call retributive efficacy. As such, we expect an anger appeal to be
most effective when it evokes anger toward culprits of these harms and then
communicates how a recommended response will effectively punish the offender.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In examining persuasive anger appeals, the researchers use
two issues for which there is scientific consensus about the magnitude of the
problem and the need for collective solutions. Three studies examine how to
design messages that harness anger about perceived injustices (referred to as
moral anger) and how to translate that emotion into activism. Study 1 uses a
cross-sectional survey design to validate a proposed measure of retributive
efficacy. Studies 2 and 3 build on the first study by experimentally testing
messages that instill moral anger and retributive efficacy. Additionally, study
3 explores the extent to which evoked anger temporally evolves during exposure
to such messages -- a phenomenon called emotional flow. Study findings offer
risk communicators direct, theory-informed guidance on how to craft maximally
effective persuasive appeals to anger. The research also contribute to our
theoretical understanding of anger appeals, which have received far less
scholarly attention than appeals to other emotions like fear or
humor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.