* 1824659
* NSF Student Travel Support for 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Alexandros Labrinidis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/2019
* USD 31,168.00

This award provides support for about 20 U.S.-based students to participate in
the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2018). The
primary goal of the conference is the sharing of scientific information and
knowledge among participants. The supported students will have the opportunity
to present their research, interact with other members of the international
community, and start building their professional networks. Emphasis will be
given to support a diverse group of students (research specialization, gender,
ethnicity, undergraduates or graduates, etc.). Students' horizons will be
broadened at a critical stage in their professional development. Supporting
participation of U.S. students in the ICDE 2018 is important for the development
of future researchers, practitioners and educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ICDE conference will have a a multi-faceted program to include multiple keynote
addresses, technical paper presentations, application track sessions, industry
track sessions, demonstrations, a Ph.D. symposium, six workshops, tutorials,
panels and poster sessions. All these activities will be opportunities for
students to share their research work and knowledge with researchers from both
academia and industry. New research topics will include AI interaction with
database technology, Data Science, High-Performance Transaction Management, and
Scalable Analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.