* 1824755
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant- Historical Ecology at Alluitsoq Fjord: Inuit Negotiations of World Systems Changes in Colonial-Era Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2023
* USD 54,998.00

Food is a key element in human social identities and reconstructing how foodways
(i.e., the cultural, social, and economic practices related to food production
and consumption) have changed or persisted offers insight into how people remake
themselves in times of intensive cross-cultural interaction and access to new,
imported goods. Through investigations of Inuit foodways at the former Moravian
mission of Lichtenau (1774-1974, now Alluitsoq), this project moves
archaeological and anthropological studies in southernmost Greenland in a new
direction by focusing on the emergence of new ethnic identities (i.e.,
ethnogenesis) and the sociopolitical dimensions of food during the colonial era.
This project will integrate analysis of artifacts, animal bones, fat residue
from foods, historic records, and local resident participation to better
understand these interactions. The project was designed and will be carried out
in conjunction with local Greenlandic communities, the Greenland National Museum
and Archives, the University of Greenland, the University of Stirling
(Scotland), and the Danish National Museum. Further, project data will be made
available to other researchers working in diverse fields ranging from ancient
DNA studies to environmental restoration and have applicability to Inuit
societies across North America. Finally, the Alluitsoq project builds local
capacity to mitigate loss of coastal heritage and takes part in world-wide
efforts to save coastal archaeological sites in the Arctic, with implications
for Alaskan coastal communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced, well-
established archaeological and ethnographic methods are integrated with the
theoretical perspective of Historical Ecology to answer two research questions:
1) Do foodways exhibit statistically significant changes during the late 18th to
early 20th century occupation of Alluitsoq; and 2) are foodways used to generate
and perform an emergent ethnic and national Inuit identity in Colonial
Greenland's Reconstructing past foodway change and persistence is achieved
through an analysis of durable faunal remains that considers represented
species, minimum numbers of individuals of different taxa, and processing
evidence. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of lipids preserved on
artifacts and in sediment deposits reveals the contribution of non-durable or
completely consumed foods (e.g., dried peas or wheat flour) to the diet of
Alluitsoq residents. Ethnohistoric data from descendant interviews and historic
documents build an interpretive framework to assess whether the observed foodway
patterns are the result of reconfigured Inuit ethnic identities. To articulate
these ethnohistoric data with archaeological results, the researchers use the
methods of Grounded Theory to code interviews and documents, identify conceptual
categories, and assess the salience of ethnic taxa to the historic and present-
day Greenlandic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.