* 1824114
* The earthquake cycle and the evolution of fault friction at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* James Foster, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,439.00

Every year a number of earthquakes cause devastation, much of it due to
collapsing buildings, with economic impacts in the United States alone adding up
to about $4.4 billion dollars a year. Earthquake cycle monitoring and earthquake
forecasting is an active topic of geological research, and is crucial to guide
our efforts to both prepare society and its infrastructure for earthquakes, and
to also mitigate the impacts. It is not currently possible to make deterministic
predictions of when and where earthquakes will happen. It is however, possible
to make probabilistic forecasts about the likelihood of earthquakes happening in
a specified area over a specified period. The accuracy of these statistical
estimates is strongly dependent on our understanding of the history of a
particular fault system, its current state, and its likely evolution. This
picture is generated through historical records, current observations of the
accumulation of stresses in the crust, and models that guide our understanding
of where stresses are being stored and how a fault is likely to respond to them.
Although each major fault has its own unique context, what we learn from
studying one fault in detail moves our understanding of the broader processes
forward. The frictional properties of a fault, and how these vary spatially and
temporally throughout the earthquake cycle, are key parameters for understanding
its likely behavior. The researchers will leverage the wealth of modern and
historical geodetic data from the south flank of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii,
covering 100+ years, and use both analytical and numerical models to investigate
the temporal evolution of the frictional properties of the underlying
decollement and its relationship to the earthquake cycle. The Broader Impacts of
this project span hazards, collaborations with the USGS and support for
undergraduate and graduate students. Kilauea's decollement is a major source of
natural hazards to the state, as it generates major earthquakes, like the May 4,
2018 Mw6.9 Leilani Estates earthquake, and also fatal tsunamis. Understanding
its evolution and relationship to the catastrophic landslide features found
throughout the islands is of great societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current interpretation of geological and
geophysical observations from Kilauea's south flank suggests that continuous
creep, slow slip events (SSEs), and major earthquakes are all occurring on the
same fault plane, with combinations of at least two of these processes operating
simultaneously. How these processes are connected and interact, and the
implications for the mechanics and evolution of the wedge and its earthquake
cycle, are fundamental questions that must be answered to improve our
understanding of these processes. The physical conditions at the shallow depths
of the decollement make Kilauea an extremely unusual outlier compared to most
other convergent margin sources of slow slip events. In addition, the SSEs here
appear to occur up-dip of the locked zone, a region largely inaccessible to
geodetic measurements in subduction zones. This study, therefore, offers an
opportunity to gain new insights through comparing and contrasting fault
processes with those elsewhere. Preliminary modeling of the current secular
surface displacements suggests that the patches of the decollement creeping in
these motions outline the zones that currently exhibit SSEs. This implies the
currently active portion of the decollement can be mapped into four distinct
zones with frictional properties that span velocity-weakening to velocity-
strengthening behavior and include the transitional zone(s) that are thought to
support SSEs. This project suggests that friction on the decollement can be
described using a rate-and-state formalism. They will model geodetic data from
different eras within the earthquake cycle to test this hypothesis and answer
the following questions: 1) What ranges of parameters for the fault plane
rheology adequately predict the observed secular creep rates, SSEs, and
microseismicity? 2) How have these parameters evolved from the locked state
prior to 1975 through to current? 3) What magmatic overpressures in the lower
rift zone are compatible with flank deformation rates?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.