* 1824949
* CNH-S: Socio-Economic Factors, Land and Water Quality, and the Dynamics Between Rural and Urban Zones of Food Production and Consumption.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Lyubov Kurkalova, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 749,989.00

This project will model linkages between biophysical processes and socio-
economic factors and how these impact regional agricultural production and food
consumption patterns that contribute to regional food security. The model will
simulate the dynamic relationships and interactions between agricultural
producer's decisions, food consumer's decisions, and the processes that
influence land and water quality, and how these interact, resulting in areas
with low food accessibility. The research will be conducted in geographically
varied settings in North Carolina with changing demographic profiles. The
project will be conducted by investigators at two Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and will help develop scientific research capacity. The project
will include research and educational experiences for underrepresented
undergraduate as well as graduate students, and will also provide research
training for a post-doctoral fellow, further building research capacity. The
project will also include stakeholder (local and state planning agencies,
extension agents, agricultural producers, and food retailers) engagement and
contribute to facilitating the design, development, and delivery of policy-
relevant information, specifically identifying policies that either support or
hinder food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of areas with low
accessibility to healthy foods, often referred to as food deserts, have been
identified as a serious issue contributing to food insecurity in both urban and
rural areas in the U.S, especially in areas where minority populations reside.
More integrated and interdisciplinary research is needed to examine and
understand the multi-dimensional and complex problems that lead to this
condition, and ways to mitigate it. The goal of this project is to better
understand the factors that contribute to improving food accessibility, while
maximizing agricultural production and minimizing negative environmental impacts
on the land and water used in food production. Specifically, the objectives of
the project are to (1) build an integrated modeling framework that includes
natural system models (biophysical model, GIS land use model), human system
models (production model, consumption model), and integrated procedures (multi-
agent simulation) to link human systems to natural systems; (2) to validate the
reliability and the robustness of the database and the integrated modeling
framework in selected study areas; and (3) to create a geo-coded spatial-
temporal database for both human factors and natural
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.