* 1824816
* In-situ Atomic-Scale Observation on Interface Formation and Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Guofeng Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 429,947.00

Friction between two solid surfaces in contact with relative lateral motion is
an important consideration in mechanical machine processes. The ongoing
miniaturization of micro electro-mechanical systems and magnetic storage devices
has elevated the importance of friction, because it plays an outsized role in
reduction of the lifetime and stability of the micro electro-mechanical system
and increases its energy-consumption and emissions. The conventional friction
laws based on continuum mechanic models are no longer adequate to describe the
frictional behaviors of nanometer-sized contacts in which the position and
dynamics of discrete atoms play important roles in determining local sliding
process. This research will develop a new methodology for studying atomic
friction by in situ high resolution transmission electron microscopy to observe
the atomic-scale frictional processes between metallic contacts. The research
findings will provide new insights to the origin of atomic friction between
metallic contacts, and provide knowledge that can be applied for improving the
design and reliability of micro electro-mechanical devices, benefiting U.S.
industries and the economy. The PI will integrate research and education,
training graduate and undergraduate students with diverse demographic
backgrounds, particularly female and other members of underrepresented groups,
and providing opportunities for them to gain experience in national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotribology studies can lead to insights
that directly impact the performance and reliability of microelectro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) and magnetic storage devices. The rapid miniaturization of these
devices raises an increasing demand to understand and control atomic friction.
Atomic friction has mainly been studied by atomic-force microscopy (AFM) and
computer-based simulations, where counter motion between the AFM tip and the
substrate surface is generally found to proceed in a "stick-slip" manner
accompanied by sawtooth-like friction forces commensurate with the period of
substrate lattice. Such a classic ?stick-slip? friction behavior has been
observed on various surfaces. By contrast, super-lubricity featured by
continuous sliding and constantly trivial friction forces has occasionally been
found between atomically incommensurate surfaces. Yet, the atomistic mechanisms
giving rise to this very low friction are still under extensive debate. A
critical characteristic impeding understanding of the underlying mechanisms
governing friction is the complex nature of the atomically rough contacting
interface that mostly consists of nanoscopic asperities. Achieving a mechanistic
understanding of atomic friction thus requires information on real-time
interfacial structure of single-asperity sliding contacts, which is
unfortunately beyond the capability of most existing experimental methods,
including AFM-based techniques which is the most widely applied experimental
method for studying nano-/atomic-scale friction. This research is to perform
concurrent in-situ atomic-scale observation and friction force measurements
during countermotion between nanosized single-asperity contacts and reveal the
significant impact of the interfacial structure on frictional performances. The
research is expected to significantly advance the fundamental understanding of
atomic frictional behaviors, and provide important guidelines for improving the
design and reliability of MEMS devices. The novel experiments on in-situ
transmission electron microscope is expected to open a new avenue for direct
observation of atomistic friction processes, and also will enrich tribology and
friction theories at atomic scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.