* 1824413
* Job Search, Hiring, and Matching With Two-Sided Limited Information About Workseekers' Skills
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Robert Garlick, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

This project uses a series of experimental methods to study the role of
inefficient information flows in explaining poor labor market outcomes.
Specifically, the research conducts a series of experiments in the field and
longitudinal surveys to understand how labor market outcomes change when
jobseekers and firms have better information about jobseekers' skills and
potential productivity. The experimental interventions involve measuring
jobseekers' skills using standardized assessments and publicizing the results of
these assessments in different ways to employers and jobseekers alike. Varying
the information provided allows the researchers to assess the effects of
information flows on labor market outcomes. By providing information to both
jobseekers and employers, this research is one of the first to study both the
supply and demand side effects information flows on job matches. The results of
the research project therefore provide important inputs into the formulation of
labor market policies that helps both employers and jobseekers alike. The
results of this research will therefore improve the efficiency of labor markets,
increase employment and therefore spur economic growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses model-guided randomized
experiments with firms and jobseekers to quantify the effect of better
information about jobseekers' skills on labor market outcomes. The starting
point is a model of job search and job posting where jobseekers have
heterogenous skills and both jobseekers and firms observe these skills with
error. Limited information on either side of the market can distort both
jobseekers' and firms' decisions over job search, job posting, offers, and
acceptances. These distortions can reduce total employment, earnings, and
productivity. The experiments test this model by randomizing the information
firms and jobseekers observe about jobseekers' skills in multiple dimensions
(e.g. numeracy, fluid intelligence, grit). Supply-side surveys measure
jobseekers' beliefs, job search, employment, and earnings. Demand-side surveys
measure firms' beliefs, hiring, wage bills, productivity, and profits. Unlike
existing research on information frictions in the labor market, this project
studies both the supply and demand sides of the market, embeds the experiments
in a model of supply and demand, and attempts to separate employment creation
from employment displacement effects. The results of this research will provide
guidance on policies to improve efficiency of the labor market, increase
employment, and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.