* 1824761
* Collaborative Research: Structural Fault Diagnosis and Prognosis Utilizing a Physics-guided Data Analytics Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shiyu Zhou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2021
* USD 244,932.00

The timely and accurate diagnosis and prognosis of fault conditions in
mechanical structures and civil infrastructure using real-time measurements can
play a critical role in ensuring the safe and sustainable operation of these
structures. This, however, is inherently difficult because structural
degradations and faults usually have very subtle characteristic signature with
infinitely many possible patterns and profiles, which is further compounded by
various uncertainties. The existing techniques fall short in addressing these
challenges. The overarching goal of this research is to create a new framework
of fault diagnosis and prognosis enabled by physics-guided data. This framework
is built upon the integration of computational intelligence with high-fidelity
modeling and analysis and the adaptation of a highly promising, non-contact
sensor-structure interaction mechanism. The new modeling framework will lead to
useful diagnostic and prognostic tools in many areas such as aerospace, marine,
transportation, infrastructure, energy and power. This project will contribute
significantly to the workforce training by promoting the interdisciplinary
research of computing, sensing, and statistical analysis, and by promoting the
concepts of resilient and sustainable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
encompasses a series of inter-related components. High-fidelity multi-scale
physical models capable of characterizing high-frequency dynamic responses of
complex structural systems with high efficiency will be created. Data-driven
calibration of the physic-guided model to address the model inadequacy and bias
issues will be formulated and established. Fault diagnosis algorithm through
compressed sensing technique based on the calibrated physics-guided model will
be developed. Fault prognosis through statistically rigorous mixed effects
models and multivariate Gaussian process models will be synthesized. Combined
with the adaptive sensor-structure integration mechanism, collectively these
contributions form a new framework that can lead to orders-of-magnitude
enhancement in sensitivity and robustness of structural fault diagnosis and
prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.