* 1824649
* Collaborative Research: Targeted Observation by Radars and UAS (Unmanned Aircraft Systems) of Supercells (TORUS)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Adam Houston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 939,784.00

Storm-generated boundaries are the focal point for tornadogenesis. As such, a
more complete understanding of boundary and gust front structure in supercells
is required to advance understanding of the processes responsible for supporting
or obstructing the concentration of near-surface rotation. Targeted Observation
by Radars and UAS of Supercells (TORUS) aims to improve the conceptual model of
supercells by explicating the relationship of storm-generated boundaries and
coherent structures within storm outflow to the generation/amplification of
near-surface rotation. New insight will be enabled through coordinated and
tightly-focused deployments of new and established remote-sensing and in-situ
instruments tasked to collect thermodynamic and kinematic observations both
aloft and at the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Hypothesized mechanisms for tornadogenesis move beyond a focus
on just the canonical rear-flank and forward-flank gust fronts and also address
the role of boundaries and coherent structures recently revealed in
observational and numerical analyses of supercell tornadoes. Accurate
identification of these roles will advance the frontiers of knowledge and
transform the conceptual model of supercells. Overarching objectives are to 1)
expose the 4D character of these boundaries and coherent structures, 2) relate
the 4D character of these boundaries and coherent structures to the
thermodynamics and kinematics of supercell outflow, 3) associate boundary and
coherent structure characteristics to ensuing contraction or failed contraction
of near-surface vertical vorticity beneath low-level mesocyclones, and 4) and
relate these characteristics to the ambient conditions within which storms
reside. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TORUS field campaign will be executed across
42 days of deployments spanning two spring seasons (May-June 2019 and 2020) over
an operations domain covering ~1,300,000 km2 of the central US. Observing
platforms involved in TORUS include four unmanned aircraft systems, two mobile
Ka-band radars, seven mobile mesonets, one mobile X-band radar, and one mobile
sounding systems. Assets will be deployed to focus data collection in different
parts of storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;TORUS will
promote teaching, training, and learning by involving ~40 students in the
project's field deployments. At least three graduate students will use the data
collected during the TORUS field deployments for their thesis research.
Undergraduate students will also have opportunities to use TORUS data for
mentored research projects. TORUS data will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate courses taught by the PIs. TORUS research will also provide students
the opportunity to attend and present at national conferences in atmospheric
science and aerospace engineering. TORUS will enhance infrastructure for
research and education by codifying collaborations between the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Texas Tech University, the National Severe Storms Laboratory,
and the University of Colorado-Boulder and by supporting the refinement of
cutting-edge instrumentation. Results from TORUS will be broadly disseminated in
an effort to enhance scientific and technological understanding. This will
include publication in peer-reviewed journals, presentations to local and
regional groups (e.g., K-12 schools, museums, etc.), and seminars at
participating institutions and elsewhere. Direct interaction with the
operational forecasting community will also be sought (e.g., via local National
Weather Service Forecast Offices) so that these results can be expediently and
effectively disseminated to operational forecasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.