* 1824983
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Independent Adaptation Of Subsistence Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Matthew Liebmann, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 25,194.00

Directed by Mr. Wade Campbell (Harvard University), the Early Navajo Pastoral
Landscape Project (ENPLP) examines how indigenous communities in the American
Southwest negotiated the introduction of foreign animal species and new economic
practices during the Spanish colonial period. While previous archaeological
studies have explored this phenomenon in the context of subjugated Native
populations, few have considered how the independent development of
"pericolonial" pastoral traditions spurred societal changes among unconquered
indigenous groups. The non-coerced adoption of sheep by Navajo frontier
communities in 17th and 18th century New Mexico and the subsequent evolution of
an intensely pastoral lifeway that continues to this day stand out as unique
sociocultural developments in the Southwest. The ENPLP will investigate the
mechanisms by which early Navajos successfully negotiated the entry of Old World
domesticates and their attendant social and landscape impacts while remaining
free from Spanish hegemony. This work will allow the researchers to examine the
complexity of Navajo societal responses to more than four centuries of Euro-
American colonialism in the Southwest, as well as contribute an important long-
term perspective to ongoing efforts to preserve and sustain traditional Navajo
culture. Such work has the potential to prove significant for researchers
outside the American Southwest exploring an array of anthropological topics
including pastoralism, colonialism, and indigenous identity
politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ENPLP will examine the pericolonial impacts
of incipient pastoralism on the social organization and settlement patterns of
early Navajo communities in the Dinétah region of northwest New Mexico. The
oldest known center of Navajo settlement in the Southwest, Dinétah was the
center of a number of sociocultural shifts in Navajo society during the
Gobernador Phase (c. AD 1626-1775), including population growth, fortress
construction, and migration away from the region. Although previous researchers
have suggested these changes are related to the rise of Navajo sheepherding
practices following Spanish colonization circa AD 1600, this relationship
remains poorly understood. The ENPLP will employ a collaborative three-phase
research program involving both Native and non-Native archaeologists to address
these questions. In Phase One, the participant-observation of modern
sheepherding practices on the Navajo Nation will be used to identify
interpretive analogs for early Navajo pastoral land use. Phase Two will build on
the ethnoarchaeology to create a geospatial model for early Navajo pastoral site
location and land use. Phase Three will employ intensive site mapping and
geoarchaeological testing to distinguish potential Navajo pastoral sites by
identifying nearby corral-related dung deposits in the Dinétah region. These
data will be combined with archival data from previous Cultural Resource
Management projects in order to determine the spatial and material correlates of
Gobernador Phase Navajo pastoral sites. Together this information will be used
to assess the extent, intensity, and type of herding strategies employed by
Gobernador Phase Navajo groups in Dinétah, as well as evidence for social
differentiation based on access to livestock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.