* 1824820
* Groundwater discharge of legacy nitrogen at the scale of river networks: Where are stream interface sediments conduits or filters?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Starn, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 07/31/2023
* USD 696,729.00

Reactive nitrogen (N) applied to land surfaces infiltrates with precipitation
and accumulates in groundwater aquifers, creating a source of legacy N that is
later discharged from groundwater to surface waters. Groundwater transport times
can be months, decades, or even centuries longer than surface water transport
times, which causes substantial lags between when N is applied to land surfaces
and when it actually enters surface waters. These focused groundwater discharges
can obstruct water quality management strategies that are based on reducing
present-day N applications. Yet, not all N that enters the groundwater system is
delivered to surface waters. Some fraction of N is removed by microbial
processes during transport along regional groundwater flow paths. At the end of
long groundwater flow paths, streambank and streambed sediments can remove N at
relatively high rates, further reducing N delivery to surface waters. This
project integrates extensive field measurements across a river network with
groundwater models to 1) characterize the spatial patterns of groundwater
discharge and legacy N delivery to streams and 2) quantify and predict the role
of stream interface sediments in removing legacy N. Results will be shared with
practitioners to help with issues surrounding N pollution management in the Long
Island Sound. The project provides training for a diverse set of participants,
including high school students, community college students, undergraduate and
graduate students, and citizen scientists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to 1) characterize the spatial patterns of focused
groundwater discharge at the river network scale, 2) quantify patterns and
drivers of legacy N transport through and removal within stream interface
(streambed and streambank) sediments, 3) scale legacy N cycling to the river
channel network. The focal watershed for this project is the Farmington River
watershed which drains to the Connecticut River and the Long Island Sound. The
Long Island Sound experiences seasonal dead zones caused by excess N pollution.
This project includes expansive thermal infrared (TIR) surveys with handheld
cameras and unmanned aerial systems (drones) across approximately 95 kilometers
of stream and river length to measure the spatial distribution of groundwater
discharge to the river network. TIR technology allows the geolocation of
preferential discharge zones more comparable to coarser model grid sizes used in
regional groundwater modeling. Thus, this project also evaluates and refines
spatial predictions from numerical groundwater (MODFLOW) models against metrics
(e.g., frequency of seeps, spatial extent of seeps) derived from TIR survey
datasets. The project utilizes both field and modeled estimates of the spatial
patterns of groundwater discharge and basin-scale transport time lags to
characterize and ultimately predict the role of stream interface sediments in N
cycling. At discharge locations identified during TIR surveys, denitrification
rates, N concentrations and fluxes, groundwater age, and a suite of sediment
physical and chemical properties will be measured. These datasets will be used
develop spatial predictions of legacy N loading to and processing within stream
interface sediments. Spatial predictions of groundwater discharge and N fluxes
will be used as additional inputs to a river network model implemented for the
Farmington River network to quantify legacy N cycling as it is transported from
seepage locations through the river channel network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.