* 1824623
* Effective Risk-Based Monitoring Strategies for Depression
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Shuai Huang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 463,229.00

This award will advance the national health and prosperity by enabling effective
monitoring strategies for chronic depression and suicide ideation. Mitigating
depression has become a national health priority, as it affects 1 out of 10
American adults. Depression related mortality and morbidity result in
significantly degraded emotional and physical well-being as well as loss of
productivity. This project addresses two interwoven challenges to effective
depression monitoring: modeling the complex dynamics of a depression trajectory,
and understanding the heterogeneity of the population susceptible to depression
as a whole. By analyzing population-level electronic health records, the project
will lead to a data-driven decision framework to enable adaptive care strategies
for treatment of chronic depression and prevention of depression-related
suicide. It will improve the quality of life of American adults who are living
with chronic depression. The project represents an interdisciplinary
collaborations among researchers in engineering, psychiatry, and health
services. The accompanying educational plan aims to broaden STEM interest in
high-impact public health problems, and to provide opportunities for women and
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a
decision framework and associated computational platform to design adaptive
depression and suicide monitoring strategies, informed by knowledge learned from
data regarding depression trajectories and suicide ideation patterns. This
research will also develop a scientific foundation to evaluate the cost-
effective monitoring strategies to provide population-level policy
recommendations. Methods include statistical modeling, optimization, and
decision analysis to improve mental health services. The framework will be able
to 1) effectively analyze the collected heterogeneous depression trajectories of
a patient population and proactively probe new trajectories, 2) adequately
characterize the disease dynamic process that govern these trajectories and
design adaptive monitoring schedules, and 3) adopt rigorous cost-effectiveness
analysis to evaluate how effectively the monitoring strategies can detect
adverse depression outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.