* 1824349
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  An Economic History of Hispanic Migration and Assimilation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Carol Shiue, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This research studies the migration of Puerto Ricans to the mainland United
States in the decades following World War II. As a result of migration in this
period, Puerto Ricans are currently the largest Hispanic population in cities of
the Eastern seaboard and overall the second largest Hispanic group in the US.
Although Puerto Ricans have been US citizens since 1917, they share many
cultural and economic characteristics with the rest of Latin America. Thus, a
better understanding of this historical period provides a window into migrant
networks and future trends in migration from Latin America, the largest source
of immigrants in the postwar era. The investigator uses data from employment
applications submitted between 1948 and 1991 to a Puerto Rican public employment
agency in the mainland US to better understand the skill level of those who
chose to migrate, measure changes in the economic status of migrants, and
analyze migrants' process of English acquisition and educational attainment
after arrival. The dataset constructed will help to fill in gaps in historical
knowledge, and the results of this research will have broad impacts on the study
of migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research targets the exceptional data
collections from the Offices of the Government of Puerto Rico in the United
States. With the newly created dataset, this research tracks migrant outcomes
and uses information on the migrants' municipality of origin in Puerto Rico,
date(s) of arrival in the US, and retrospective employment history for work both
in Puerto Rico and the US. The analysis is divided into three sections. First,
information on migrants' origin, arrival, and destination allows for assessment
of the relationship between network size and migrant self-selection as networks
evolve over time. Second, the short-run return to migration is measured by
comparing the first wage of a migrant in the US to his/her last wage in Puerto
Rico, while subsequent wages are used to assess convergence to natives and
identify determinants of wage growth in the US. Third, the ostensible slow
assimilation of Puerto Rican migrants is reexamined using new information on
English acquisition and educational attainment after arrival in the US and by
exploiting the longitudinal dimension of the data, which reduces the bias
introduced by selective return migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.