* 1824839
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Signatures of past selection for identification of pathogen-related loci
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Abigail Bigham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2021
* USD 31,200.00

Human population history has been shaped by many factors, including pathogen
experience. This doctoral dissertation project investigates genomic signatures
of past natural selection events to identify potential genetic factors
contributing to current susceptibility and resistance to a mosquito-borne
pathogen. The project's anthropological genetics and evolutionary medicine
approaches will advance knowledge about human population history,
paleopathology, and paleoepidemiology, and inform clinical research and policy
on mosquito-borne pathogens that increasingly threaten regions including the
United States. The project will also support training and mentoring of students
from groups underrepresented in STEM fields, international research
collaborations, and public science and health education and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dengue virus is a mosquito-borne RNA pathogen related to
yellow-fever and West Nile virus. It is widespread in sub-tropic and tropic
environments, with estimates as high as 390 million infections annually,
resulting in 25,000 deaths. The investigators aim to identify host genetic
factors contributing to dengue virus susceptibility and resistance in a
Maya/Ladino population, by investigating past evolutionary events that left
signatures of natural selection in the genomes of Mesoamericans (n=360). The
project goals are to identify: 1) host genetic risk factors for dengue
infection; 2) host genetic risk factors for disease progression; and 3) genetic
variants contributing to immune response measured via two molecules, cytokines
and growth factors. For genetic analysis, 384 genetic variants will be tested
for associations with infection status, disease progression, and immune
response. The results from this study will provide a framework for other
researchers interested in studying modern infectious diseases using evolutionary
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.