* 1825174
* Investigating the Biophysics of Giant Polyploidal Cancer Cells in an Aging Tumor Stroma
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Michelle Dawson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2022
* USD 457,259.00

Generally it is assumed that senescence, or cell aging and death, is a good
thing when it comes to tumor growth -- as cells that are deteriorating and die
will not continue to grow and proliferate. However, it has been found that if
senescent connective tissue cells (stromal cells) accumulate in premalignant
tissue, they can actually alter the tissue microenvironment and promote cancer
development. This project will investigate how breast cancer cells react to the
changes in the extracellular mechanical environment that occurs with the
accumulation of senescent stromal cells. In particular, giant polyploidal cancer
cells, which have been observed to develop more frequently in the presence of
senescent stromal cells and are highly invasive and resistant to chemo therapy,
will be studied to determine how this environmental change influences their
development. In addition to the impact that improved understanding of how these
invasive, treatment-resistant cells develop will have, the research team will
organize outreach activities that include presentations at local schools,
development of course materials for the Brown Science Prep program, and the
development of an animated, science-based cartoon that describes cancer
biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the single cell
biophysical profile of breast cancer cells before and after exposure to
conditioned media from senescent stromal cells. In particular, a high-content
mechanomic screening approach will be used to profile: the forces exerted by
cells on the extracellular matrix; cytoskeletal and nuclear mechanics;
morphology, motility, and adhesion. This will be done for treated and untreated
breast cancer cells as well as giant polyploidal cancer cells. By looking at
changes in intracellular mechanics, cell and nuclear morphology, traction force
generation, and motility, it may be possible to develop new strategies to target
giant polyploidal cancer cells. In addition, as it is hypothesized that solid
stress from the surrounding tissue contributes to a-mitotic budding seen in
giant polyploidal cancer cells, a model will be developed to test the
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.