* 1825626
* Programming Ink Deposition Dynamically: The New Science of Direct Ink Writing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yayue Pan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 495,858.00

Direct Ink Writing (DIW) is a class of three-dimensional (3D) printing that
builds a 3D object by depositing functional and/or structural liquid materials
(ink) onto a substrate in a layer-by-layer approach. This award supports
fundamental research to provide new knowledge for control of ink deposition on
substrates or previously printed layers. The research will advance DIW
technology toward a higher achievable resolution, more flexible ink design,
higher print quality, and a much wider choice of substrates. DIW has
applications in a number of industries, including health care, electronics,
automotive, aerospace and defense, and therefore this research directly impacts
economic welfare and national security. Furthermore, the developed knowledge of
ink deposition control could be applied to almost any droplet- or liquid
filament-based process. 45.6 percent of undergraduate students in the UIC
College of Engineering are from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM.
The PIs will work actively to involve underrepresented minority students in
workshops, seminars, and mini-symposiums that are created from this project.
Research outcomes will be incorporated into three engineering courses at UIC,
the Engineering Summer Camp at UIC, and the 3D printing learning modules for
Women In Engineering (WIEP) K-12 outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic and localized control of ink wettability on
substrates or previously printed layers is pivotal for addressing current
tolerance and repeatability challenges and advancing DIW technologies. The
objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that wetting properties of
leaky dielectric liquid droplets/filaments on substrates change dynamically when
an electric field is applied, thus enabling accurate direct writing of inks on a
wide range of substrates. The applied electric field is programmed in a pixel-
by-pixel and layer-by-layer way, so that it manipulates ink deposition at any
location, in any layer, and on any substrate. The research team will perform
multiphysics modeling and experiments to understand the ink electrowetting
dynamics, design and construct electric mask (e-Mask) generation systems,
establish a novel e-Mask assisted DIW system and process, and assess the new DIW
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.