* 1825560
* Collaborative Research: Accurate Prediction of Phase Stability for Chemistry and Process Design of Ni-based Superalloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Ji-Cheng Zhao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2019
* USD 249,630.00

Nickel-based superalloys have a number of critical applications relevant to the
US economy and national defense, including commercial and military jet engines,
gas turbines, and power generators. These materials can operate at relatively
high temperatures, but often are limited in their application by their poor
performance at the highest operating temperatures. In order to design
superalloys that can withstand ever increasing temperatures, it is necessary
first to understand what happens at the microscopic level in these alloys. This
award supports fundamental research to understand the microscopic processes that
control superalloy behavior at high temperatures, and the development of robust
computational tools to predict this behavior and design high-performance
materials. The approach takes advantage of a unique high-throughput approach to
experimental characterization, coupled with a data-driven computational approach
to enable the calculation of phase stability in these superalloys. This project
will educate next-generation materials scientists and engineers with strong
materials processing expertise and both computational and experimental skills to
better serve the U.S. manufacturing industry.

The overall objective of this research is to establish a new paradigm for
reliable and effective assessments of the thermodynamic stability of
intermetallic phases during process. This objective will be achieved by: 1)
performing high-throughput first-principles calculations of sublattice
stabilities and atomic interaction energetics in individual sublattices of the
complex topological close-packed (TCP) phases with multiple sublattices (Wyckoff
sites) that cannot be directly measured experimentally; 2) exploring innovative
and systematic strategies to enable facile incorporation of first-principles
results into calculation of phase diagrams ; 3) making high-throughput diffusion
multiples to obtain reliable phase diagrams of ternary systems critical to TCP
phase stability evaluation, and employing the data to optimize the Gibbs energy
parameters of the phases; and 4) expanding the infrastructure capabilities to
seamlessly use both first-principles calculation results and experimental data
to perform high-throughput phase diagram calculations, including uncertainty
quantifications. In addition to establishing a new paradigm in phase diagram
modeling, the outcomes of this study include valuable phase diagrams of
important ternary systems obtained from diffusion multiples, and a set of
reliable Gibbs energy functions for the TCP phases modeled from both
experimental phase diagrams and density functional theory (DFT) predictions that
can be incorporated into thermodynamic databases for Ni-based superalloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.