* 1825440
* Collaborative Research: Emergent Mechanics of Randomly Packed Elastic Filaments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mattia Gazzola, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 264,013.00

When a cardinal builds her iconic cup-nest, she uses her own body as template
and molds thin twigs, grass strands, and bark strips into a structure that,
despite its softness, reliably holds its shape against various mechanical
perturbations. This naturally-selected engineering solution is the result of a
subtle interplay between geometry, elasticity, and friction that has not yet
been characterized or modeled despite its potential in building, packaging,
self-repairing, shock-absorption, and material reusability. The 'bird nest', if
defined as a random packing of slender, elastic elements, is an unusual
material: it is cohesive without attractive interactions; it is collectively
soft and plastic while its elements are hard and elastic. Through coordinated
physical and computational experiments, this collaborative project will advance
the science of soft granular materials by relating bulk mechanical properties of
idealized 'nest systems' with variations in constituents' properties and
geometry. Results will generate new knowledge in granular physics, and will
appeal to emerging aleatory architecture and engineering paradigms. Indeed, the
ability to build through impermanent contacts and design lightweight materials
with prescriptive mechanical properties cuts through many areas of high current
importance: civil engineering and architectures (reliable, inexpensive, reusable
and self-repairing materials), transportation (lightweight composites, shock
absorbers), advanced manufacturing. This is in line with the national need of
increasing industry competitiveness, which advances the national health,
prosperity, and welfare; and secures the national defense. The project also
promises to capture the imagination of a broad audience by creating an unusual
bridge between relatable protagonists (birds) and often inaccessible fields of
physics and engineering. Additionally, STEM outreach activities will be
conducted at individual institutions to attract middle school students and
female students, respectively, towards science and engineering. Undergraduate
students will also be offered positions in either group for exposure to advance
engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing aspect ratio, the
mechanical behavior of disordered granular packings changes. Where applied
stresses distribute in chains of 1D contacts for spheroids, slenderness
introduces bending moments and long-range interaction. Impermanent frictional
contacts set the system apart from semi-flexible polymer networks and other non-
woven materials which derive mechanical response from permanent crosslinks.
Experimental evidence from disordered, randomly packed, elastic fibers or
filaments based structures, such as the bird nests, suggest that these material
systems exhibit frequency-dependent elastoplastic behavior, finite tensile
response, and enhanced specific strength. In the absence of a theoretical
framework and strictly applicable principles of statistical mechanics, an
experimental platform for the benchmarking and physical characterization of
these materials will be developed in this project. These will be complemented by
a high fidelity computational counterpart to direct a search for novel
mechanical states and transitions. The project will provide insights into the
relationship between macroscopic and microscopic mechanics of bird nest-like
systems, paving the way towards prescriptive design of novel materials.
Moreover, it will spur new directions in granular physics theory and explain a
functional mechanism from a naturally-selected engineered
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.