* 1825216
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Role of Directional Porosity in Transport and Mechanical Properties of Hierarchical Sintered Metal Oxide Electrodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Gary Koenig, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 330,237.00

Solid state batteries provide power for countless applications, and their
manufacture and application has significant impact on the US economy, health and
prosperity. The electrodes in these batteries are conventionally made of
composites where each material plays a role: an electroactive material stores
and delivers energy, conductive additives carry electrons, and polymer binders
hold the components together and provide mechanical robustness. If instead a
single multifunctional material phase could be used as the electrode, the energy
storage and power capacity of these battery materials would be greatly
increased. Porous ceramic thin film materials have been developed for this
application, but little is known about the transport properties of ions through
these ceramics during electrochemical reactions, their mechanical properties, or
the tradeoffs between these multifunctional roles and resulting properties. This
award supports fundamental research to understand the properties of electrodes
comprised of a single sintered porous thin film as the active material. This
research has the potential to provide a new paradigm for multifunctional
hierarchical materials which would fundamentally change the way these materials
are designed and processed. This work will provide a framework for understanding
electrochemically active and ion-conducting porous ceramics, which have
application not only in batteries, but also in other devices such as solid oxide
fuel cells and electrochemical sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
collaborative research program, the researchers will test the hypothesis that
concentration polarization and ion transport limits the electrochemical current
density of sintered multifunctional electrodes. To tune the mechanical
properties of electrodes and to achieve tunable, low tortuosity in sintered
electrodes, a novel ice-templating processing approach is used to produce
electrodes of ordered structure, and directional pores with tunable dimensions.
This will enable systematic investigation of the impact of tunable directional
porosity on both ionic transport and mechanical properties. The detailed impact
of microstructure of the ice-templated electrodes on resulting mechanical
properties, especially compressive strength, will be studied. In addition, the
coupling between mechanical and electrochemical properties will be investigated.
Higher bridge density between ceramic lamellae is hypothesized to improve
mechanical strength, but at the expense of increased tortuosity and restricted
transport. This work investigates the tradeoffs between transport and mechanical
properties as a result of ceramic processing, with the objective of
understanding the processing-microstructure-property relationships for high-
performance electrode materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.