* 1825076
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: Principles for the design of digitally-distributed, studio-based STEM learning environments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Leslie Sult, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,825.00

This workshop is funded through the "Dear Colleague Letter: Principles for the
Design of Digital Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Learning Environments (NSF 18-017)." In today's educational climate,
organizations are creating physical learning spaces for hands-on STEM
activities, often called makerspaces, co-working spaces, innovation labs, or
fablabs. These spaces have evolved to be interdisciplinary centers that
personalize learning for individual, diverse learners in collaborative settings.
When designed well, these physical spaces create communities that contextualize
learning around participants' goals and thus address STEM learning in a dynamic
and integrated way. Participation in these learning environments encourages the
cultivation of STEM identities for young people and can positively direct their
career trajectories into STEM fields. This workshop will bring together a
community of collaborators from multiple stakeholder groups including academia,
public libraries, museums, community based organizations, non-profits, media
makers and distribution channels, and educators within and beyond K-12 schools.
Led by the University of Arizona, and held at Biosphere 2, an international
research facility, participants will engage in activities that invite
experimentation with distributed learning technologies to examine ways to adapt
learning to the changing technological landscape and create robust, dynamic
online learning environments. The workshop will culminate in a synthesis of
design principles, assessment approaches, and tools that will be shared widely.
Partnerships arising from the workshop will pave the way for sustained efforts
in this area that span research and practice communities. Outcomes will address
research and development of the next generation of digitally distributed
learning environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three day workshop convening
will provide a unique forum to (1) exchange innovative ideas and share
challenges and opportunities, (2) connect practical and research-based expertise
and (3) form cross-institutional and cross-community partnerships that envision,
propose, and implement opportunities for collecting and analyzing data to
systematically inform the collective understanding. Participation-based
activities will include design-based experiences, participatory activities,
demonstrations of works in progress, prototyping, creative pitching,
practitioner lightning talks, small group breakouts, hands-on design activities,
and an 'unconference' style synthesis of bold ideas. Participants will be
invited to experiment with distributed learning technologies. Five focus areas
for the workshop include (1) inclusivity of learning spaces that invite multiple
perspectives and full participation, (2) documenting learning in ways that are
linked to outcomes and impacts for all learners, (3) implementing the use of new
technologies in diverse settings, such as the workforce, (4) interpersonal
interactions and peer-to-peer learning that may encourage a STEM career-path,
and, (5) methods for collecting and analyzing data at the intersection of
people, the learning environment, and new technologies at multiple levels.
Outcomes of the workshop will serve to advance knowledge regarding critical gaps
and opportunities and identify and characterize models of collaboration,
networking, and innovation that operate within and across studio-based STEM
learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.