* 1825640
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid-Compatible Deformation Processing of Performance Critical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Christopher Saldana, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 214,747.00

Additive manufacturing has emerged as a viable route for fabricating complex
machine components that have important applications in the aerospace, defense,
automotive and energy sectors. Unfortunately, machine components made through
additive manufacturing are often unreliable due to internal defects. This
prohibits their industrial use as defective components can respond to normal
service conditions in unexpected ways or fail prematurely. This award supports
research to establish a novel hybrid-additive method for fabrication of defect-
free components, and therefore directly impacts economic welfare and national
security. This hybrid approach will repair defects using local severe
deformation. Modeling efforts that will support this research will enable rapid
fabrication of high quality additively manufactured components. The project will
also support several classroom teaching initiatives including those focused at
the K-12, undergraduate and graduate levels. These include (i) incorporation of
research results into an interactive educational computer game and (ii)
dissemination through short video-scribe movies available for viewing in open
social media platforms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
facilitate defect control in additively manufactured components through hybrid
post-processing methods. For achieving this goal, the methodology will involve
systematic use of plastic deformation in interwoven steps during additive
manufacturing for mitigation of volumetric defects. Modeling efforts will
involve detailed characterization of material microstructure evolution under
graded plastic strain. Microstructure parameters of interest include grain
structure and defect structure. The deformation response of these parameters
will be studied using in situ loading platforms that will work with existing
electron microscopes and X-Ray computed tomography machines. Deformation strain
fields will be characterized using digital image correlation through secondary
electron imaging. These strain fields will be correlated with the evolving
micro-structure parameters that will be characterized simultaneously. A process
modeling framework for prediction of the surface microstructure as a function of
processing conditions will be validated and used to determine optimal hybrid
strategies for post processing additively manufactured
microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.