* 1825691
* System Level Seismic Performance of Steel Gravity Framing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricia Clayton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 649,976.00

In typical steel buildings in the United States, the lateral force resisting
frames designed to resist lateral seismic loads comprise a relatively small
portion of the structural system, while the remainder of the structural system
is designed to resist gravity loading only. This gravity framing normally
consists of composite beams with concrete on metal deck flooring, which are
connected to the building columns via simple shear connections. The gravity
framing, while not explicitly designed to resist lateral seismic loads, can
provide significant lateral load resistance, particularly due to the large
number of gravity frames in a building. The large deformation capacity and
reserve strength provided by the gravity framing can play an important role in
preventing collapse of steel buildings under very large earthquake ground
motions, particularly for existing buildings that may not have been built to the
current standards required for construction of buildings in high seismic
regions. The largest impact of this research is expected to be on advancing
evaluation procedures of the seismic safety of existing steel buildings, where
inclusion of the gravity system in the evaluation may preclude the need for
costly seismic retrofit measures. Such comprehensive evaluation procedures will
allow limited resources for seismic retrofit to be used more efficiently. This
research will also inform best practices for the design and detailing of the
gravity system in new buildings that will further enhance the gravity system's
ability to serve as a "back-up" to the primary lateral force resisting system,
thereby enhancing the seismic safety of new buildings. Seismic-resistant
buildings will promote post-earthquake national welfare, health and prosperity
by reducing building damage, economic and human losses, and injuries. Data from
this project will be archived and publicly available in the Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot (http://www.DesigSafe-ci.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to investigate the
role of gravity framing systems on the seismic performance and collapse
resistance of steel buildings through large-scale, system-level testing and
robust numerical simulations. Through testing of large-scale, multi-bay, multi-
story steel gravity framing systems, this research will create new experimental
data on the response of steel gravity systems with composite floor systems,
including considerations of the interactions and restraint provided by
surrounding bays of gravity and lateral framing. This experimental data will
lead to better understanding of the force-resisting mechanisms in steel gravity
framing systems, including contributions from connection components, metal
decking, and concrete flooring. This data, along with existing data in the
literature, will be used to develop more realistic component level models for
steel gravity framing connections to support seismic simulations of steel
building performance up to collapse. These new connection models, which will be
disseminated to the engineering practitioner and research communities, will also
be employed in parametric computational studies of a variety of archetype
buildings with variations in lateral and gravity framing designs to investigate
the role of gravity framing systems in reducing the seismic collapse risk of
steel buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.