* 1825257
* GOALI: Nano-Machining of Diamond Mirror for High-Power Laser Optics
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 360,000.00

While breakthroughs in microfabrication have already allowed for billions of
transistors to be integrated on a single integrated circuit, demands for even
more computational power require denser chips and smaller transistors. Extreme
ultraviolet lithography has emerged as a leading technique that can enable this.
However, its performance is limited by the amount of ultraviolet light that can
be produced. Optical mirrors used in these systems cannot withstand extremely
high optical intensities and often fail, thus limiting the reliability of the
system and increasing the production cost. This Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award addresses the need for better mirrors and
develops a novel nanomanufacturing technique that allows for optical components
to be fabricated in diamond. This is challenging since diamond is one of the
hardest materials to shape. The team leverages expertise in material science,
nano-machining, optics, and laser physics to overcome these challenges and
develop a novel and scalable nanomanufacturing technique. This project has the
potential to transform the way chips are made, which has great economic and
societal impact owing to the ubiquitous presence of micro-chips in everyday
life. In addition to the semiconductor industry, nano-machined diamond
components have broad and direct impact on many technologies that use high power
lasers, including defense, medicine, and automotive industry. The team's
findings are shared with the general public through continued collaborations
with Museum of Science (Boston), giving public lectures, and participating in
science fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In extreme ultraviolet source a high-power
carbon-dioxide laser is focused onto micron-scale tin droplets, thus vaporizing
them and resulting in plasma that gives off extreme ultraviolet light. Despite
many decades of work, the overall conversion efficiency (infrared to
ultraviolet) is only a few percent. As a result, kilowatts of infrared power are
required, which demands better mirrors, since currently used ones often fail at
high optical intensities. This project develops a novel nano-machining technique
for forming three-dimensional nanostructures on the surface of bulk diamond
surfaces, that feature &gt; 99% reflectivity. Such diamond mirrors can handle
much larger optical intensities and have much longer lifetime than state-of-the-
art mirrors. In addition, the team develops a wide range of high-power diamond-
based optical components, including filters, polarizers, wave-plates, and beam
combiners. This collaborative effort focuses on fundamental understanding of
nano-machining of optical surfaces from bulk materials and industry-university
relationship through interactive research and exchange of students and
engineers. The industrial partner helps provide the necessary equipment,
metrology and laser expertise to advance this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.