* 1825534
* Human adaptation in high-pathogen environments: iron, infection, and child growth and development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Katherine Wander, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 427,000.00

This project will investigate the evolution of host-pathogen dynamics in human
populations. The investigators will focus on dietary iron, which is vital for
life, but also presents hazards, including its availability to pathogens as well
as an individual host's own cells. Hosts have evolved multiple mechanisms to
withhold iron from infectious agents, and infectious agents, such as bacteria,
have evolved a diverse array of mechanisms to acquire iron from their hosts,
resulting in an evolutionary "arms race" over iron. The project will advance
fundamental knowledge about this "arms race" in a human population with high
pathogen load, to understand how diet, iron nutrition, infection risk, and
growth and development are related, and how humans may have adapted to high
pathogen environments. The research findings may also inform public health
efforts to address iron nutrition and deficiency. This international
collaboration will include both field and laboratory training opportunities for
students at the undergraduate and graduate levels, including groups under-
represented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the impact
of iron status on immunity and infection among children in a population with
high rates of iron deficiency and infectious disease. Over the course of one
year, participating children will be evaluated monthly for measures of diet,
growth and development, iron intake, immune function and infection. The relative
importance of diets as causes of iron deficiency and anemia will be described.
The prevalence of impaired cell-mediated immunity and incidence of infectious
diseases will be compared across iron status groups. In this manner, this study
will work toward disentangling the complex interactions between diet, growth and
development, iron nutrition, immunity, and infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.