* 1825546
* Innovative Framework for Real-Time Estimation of Threats Using Mobile Sensor Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Michael Demetriou, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2022
* USD 325,000.00

This project will establish a mathematical framework that will allow real-time
characterization of evolving conditions that can be detected through data
collected by networks of gas concentration sensors mounted on vehicles. This has
the potential to evaluate development of fires, hazardous chemical spills and
release of hazardous gases, and even changes in the salinity and oxygen in
rivers and estuaries. The innovative attribute of the proposed methodology is
the integration of the estimation of the threats with the guidance and motion of
the network of vehicles that are carrying the sensors. This theoretical and
algorithmic framework can also be pivotal in development of evacuation and of
search and rescue missions, thereby advancing national health and welfare needs.
This project will promote teaching and learning by providing teams of graduate
and undergraduate students with research opportunities in multi-disciplinary
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will perform research on
measurement, control and analysis of a distributed dynamic environment comprised
of a heterogeneous mobile sensor network. The mobile vehicles-sensors carry
onboard gas concentration sensors and are deployed in a spatial area where a
stationary or possibly a moving gaseous source generates a spatiotemporally
evolving threat field. A source localization and state reconstruction in
distributed dynamic environments will utilize a heterogeneous network of terrain
mobile vehicles-sensors whose guidance and formation control is dictated by the
physics of the spatially distributed process. The research will result in new
theoretical state estimators of plants describing the evolution of
spatiotemporally varying fields that augment the operation, motion and guidance
of connected vehicles-sensors. The limitations of sensor technologies are
circumvented by a performance-based formation motion of the vehicles-sensors and
a transition of the vehicle guidance from information-sensitive to information-
averse. The spatiotemporally varying field estimation approach will be validated
with an experiment using a heterogeneous network of terrain vehicles-sensors and
a gaseous source. The project has wide-spread applications and offers an
excellent learning opportunity for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.