* 1825402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multivariate Asymmetry and Allometry in Skeletal Elements for Osteometric Sorting
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Amanda Lee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 6,828.00

The problem of sorting human skeletal remains is encountered in
bioarchaeological and forensic settings where the bones of multiple individuals
are intermingled with no readily apparent indication as to which bone elements
belong to which individual. Anthropologists use bone measurements to compare and
match bones to single individuals, but current methods do not adequately account
for the size and shape relationships between bones. This research project
incorporates information on comparative bone morphology to create an automated
sorting method. The expected product of this project will be a novel method that
improves upon standard techniques, which would reduce the cost and increase the
quality of results for bioarchaeological and forensic research. Sorting human
remains is essential for aiding and streamlining medicolegal cases in the
aftermath of mass fatalities and for returning deceased individuals to their
loved ones. The project contributes to the training of a female graduate student
with a strong commitment to diverse, inclusive science outreach efforts, and
results of this study will be published in peer-reviewed journals, as well as
presented at academic conferences.

This project applies multivariate analyses of bilateral asymmetry and allometry
to address the problem of osteometric sorting. Large data sets of bone
measurements from archaeological and recent human populations will be evaluated
to determine and characterize patterns of asymmetry and allometry in humans.
Based on this information, novel methods will be developed for the sorting of
mixed skeletal elements using bone measurements (osteometric sorting). This work
will be done using the statistical and graphics package R, based on multivariate
algorithms, such as Mahalanobis distance. This project will generate useful
information about the morphological relationships between skeletal elements
across different human populations and will result in the creation of an
improved method for osteometric sorting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.