* 1825356
* Reconfigurable Continuous Flow Reactor for Manufacturing of Complex Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

This grant supports research that leads to new knowledge in the manufacture of
emerging nanomaterials such a quantum dots and nanorods. The ability to make
materials so small that changing their size and shape drastically alters their
properties is paving new paths to a wide range of applications from displays to
solar energy conversion to medical imaging. However, these materials are usually
made in small batches that can easily lead to variations in quality and
difficulties in scaling up. As nanomaterials become more complex for additional
functionality, difficulties in their manufacture and quality control quickly
escalate. Continuous flow reactors carry chemical reagents through a flowing
stream, allowing for high-throughput fabrication with tight control over
reaction parameters. Continuous flow reactors with inline monitoring
capabilities and reconfigurability can lead to versatility in the manufacture of
diverse range of nanomaterials with high quality. This award allows fundamental
studies to enable continuous manufacture of emerging complex nanomaterials. The
knowledge gained from this project helps to accelerate advances in a variety of
industries including energy, medical and electronics, thus advancing national
prosperity and security. Multi-faceted challenges to be tackled here provide
educational and training opportunities for the students involved to be better
prepared to become leaders in interdisciplinary science and engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As multiple components of nanometer dimensions are
brought together for the precise engineering of their characteristics and
behavior, exciting new capabilities arise. However, viable manufacturing of
nanomaterials that are becoming increasingly complex must ensure not only high
crystallinity and narrow size dispersion but also uniformity in shape and
composition despite each added component leading to an exponentially increasing
number of possible products. The modular and reconfigurable design and
construction of a continuous flow reactor setup with in situ optical measurement
capability, developed in this project, helps to address these critical issues by
allowing precise control over shape, size, and composition. The inclusion of
high-throughput screening using real-time product monitoring provides a better
understanding of how each one of a vast number of processing parameters affects
nucleation and growth at the individual particle and ensemble levels. The
success of this project should help to establish foundational knowledge that
enables scalable nanomanufacturing of a wide range of complex nanomaterials with
exceptional control over their structure and
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.