* 1825486
* NNA/Collaborative Research: Emergency Response in the Arctic (ERA): Investments for Global Capabilities and Local Benefits
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Birkland, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 204,010.00

The Arctic has been experiencing significantly longer ice-free, navigable
maritime seasons, thereby changing the types of activities taking place in
Arctic waters. Cruise ships are travelling through the Northwest Passage, oil
exploration is occurring off the North Slope of Alaska, and the Northern Sea
Route is seeing an increasing volume of cargo ships travelling through it. In
Arctic Alaska, these tourism and industrial activities will occur far away from
the infrastructure and resources of urban and industrial centers, limiting
response capabilities when an emergency occurs in Arctic waters. For all of
these reasons, there is a critical need to improve Emergency Response in the
Arctic (ERA) to meet the increase in the demand for these capabilities. The
scientific contribution of this research is to create prescriptive decision-
making models that help to determine where, when, and how to make infrastructure
investments to improve global ERA capabilities while also providing benefits to
Arctic communities. Because the infrastructure required to improve ERA will be
built and maintained in local Arctic communities, this project will involve
Arctic stakeholders, including representatives from indigenous communities, to
guide the research and help disseminate its results. This project contributes to
the NSF's Big Idea on Navigating the New Arctic by: (1) safeguarding human and
environmental welfare in increasing ERA capabilities and (2) working closely
with local and indigenous populations to co-produce knowledge about the types of
benefits potentially provided to communities should ERA infrastructure be
located in them. Potential benefits include local management of ERA
infrastructure and deployment of resources, training and workforce development
opportunities, and improved transportation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create new Operations
Research (OR) models that not only account for where and when to make
infrastructure investments to improve ERA capabilities but how to properly
integrate these investments into the communities where they are located. To
accomplish this, this project is creating an innovative methodology where social
science research done in conjunction with local Arctic communities is conducted
in a way that informs the creation of the OR models and, in later stages of the
work, validates their results. Therefore, this research integrates methods
across OR and social science that link economic, social, cultural, and technical
feasibility and desirability by incorporating expert local knowledge into the
planning process. The results of this research will transform our understanding
of how to design ERA systems that have positive impacts in the local communities
where the supporting infrastructure is built and
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.