* 1825115
* Multi-Scale Modeling and Multi-Objective Design Framework for Location-Specific Material Behavior in Additively Manufactured Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Somnath Ghosh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 514,594.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) processes for metallic materials, namely powder-bed
fusion, and various powder-feed and wire-feed systems, are bringing dramatic
changes to the manufacturing industry. The unprecedented agility achieved
through layer-by-layer material addition is enabling near net-shape production
of complex components. Despite this promise and progress, the qualification and
acceptance of AM parts have been compromised by the lack of consistency in
material behavior and life-limiting properties, e.g., undesirable ductility and
fatigue behavior. These inconsistencies are often attributed to subtle, yet
characteristic variations in the microstructure (morphology and defect
structure), possibly a consequence of small perturbations in the AM process
parameters. By implementing a multi-pronged approach incorporating innovative
methods of integrated computational materials engineering (ICME), such as
physics-based multi-scale modeling, multi-objective design, and materials
characterization and testing, this research will address this shortcoming by
developing a robust framework for location specific material properties and
behavior in structures fabricated by AM processes. Ultimately, it will provide
guidance on the links between process parameters and product performance and
life, paving the acceptance of AM parts in critical applications. The research
will promote the sciences associated with ICME; advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare by establishing the provenance of AM manufacturing; and
secure the national defense by enabling near on-demand, net-shape production of
critical parts in theaters. Collaborative partnerships with Sandia National
Laboratories and JHU/Applied Physics Laboratory will be a strength of this
research. Graduate students on this project will undergo multi-disciplinary
training in state-of-the-art techniques in multi-scale modeling, design
optimization, materials characterization and modern manufacturing processes. The
collaboration with Sandia and JHU/APL will also provide them exposure to the
most advance technological advancements that will help their professional career
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two specific developmental modules will be
realized for AM processed metals and alloys with polycrystalline-polyphase
microstructures. They are: (i) development and implementation of parametrically
homogenized constitutive/damage models (PHCMs) with explicit representation of
microstructural descriptors in the form of representative aggregate
microstructural parameters or (RAMPs), and (2) development of PHCM-based robust
design methods for location-specific material design in structures designed,
e.g., by topology optimization. Furthermore, PHCM-based simulations readily
estimate the effect of variations in the microstructure on structure-scale
variables like stresses, strains, strength, and even ductility or fatigue life.
This will facilitate sensitivity analysis in location-specific material design
in AM processed structures that have been conceptualized by design methods like
topology optimization. A multi-objective function framework will be incorporated
for identifying a Pareto front, defining the achievable cross-property space.
The outcome of the detailed material design undertaking will be a structural-
scale layout of the microstructure (in terms of RAMPs) for a robust, site-
dependent distribution of macro-scale properties. This will guide the selection
of AM processes parameters and routes to improve structure-material performance
and life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.