* 1825276
* Structured Filaments for High Performance 3D Printed Plastic Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2020
* USD 299,877.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new fundamental knowledge
related to the design of the feedstock for one common method of 3D printing to
provide guidance for improved plastic parts to enable the translation from rapid
prototyping to manufacture. Additive manufacturing generates near net shape
object of virtually any shape from a digital computer model and is critical to
the development of new manufacturing approach essential for the national
productivity. Additive manufacturing is commonly called 3D printing and offers
revolutionary possibilities in terms of massive customization for the individual
consumer, so the fit is ergonomically perfect. However, almost all additive
manufacturing processes for plastic parts lead to inherent weaknesses in the
parts that make them inferior to traditionally manufactured plastics. This grant
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
improved performance of additive manufactured plastic parts through scalable
changes in the feedstock for one type of 3D printing called fused filament
fabrication. The new materials will be compatible with existing printers,
including consumer printers that are available to the general public, but will
enable significant improvements in obtaining parts that better match the desired
dimensions and with improved toughness. Additive manufacture of plastic parts is
growing with applications from healthcare to assist doctors with planning
surgery and custom implants for craniofacial restoration to aerospace parts to
decrease the weight of non-critical components. Through improving the
performance of plastic parts, this research will benefit the U.S. economy and
society by extending the potential applications for additively manufactured
plastic parts. This research involves several disciplines including
manufacturing, materials science, and mechanical engineering, which will provide
a unique educational experience for the students involved in this research.
Additionally, the materials produced will be compatible with many commercial 3D
printers, including those found in some K-12 schools, so outreach to these
schools will provide the students with an opportunity to learn about additive
manufacturing and design of materials with a hands-on approach. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The design of structured filaments is hypothesized to overcome the
intrinsic trade-off between mechanical properties and dimensional accuracy
associated with extrusion-based polymer additive manufacturing. Generally, there
is poor interlayer strength during the print as the interdiffusion of polymer
chains is limited by the temperature and increasing the printing temperature
leads to flow and deformation of the printed part. This research seeks to
overcome this trade-off with a core-shell structure to the feedstock filament,
where the core provides mechanical reinforcement to inhibit flow, while the
shell solidifies at lower temperature to provide interlayer strength. However,
the fundamental requirements associated with the materials selection and the
print processing are poorly understood for the core-shell materials in additive
manufacturing. This research will fill the knowledge gap on the relationships
between solidification temperature, mechanical properties and miscibility of the
core and shell polymers through systematic experimental investigation. The
research team will establish relationships between process parameters, intrinsic
material properties of the polymers, the dimensional accuracy of the printed
part, and mechanical properties to provide insights into the limitations of
extrusion-based additive manufacturing for plastic
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.