* 1825724
* Study of the Regulative Role of Integrin Tension in the Formation and Function of Plasma Membrane Protrusions in Cancer Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Xuefeng Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 371,028.00

Metastasis, which is invasion of normal tissues by cancer cells, is the main
cause of cancer patient death. The cells that metastasize have special sites on
their surfaces call "invadopodia" that make it possible for the cells to spread.
Multiple lines of indirect evidence suggest that invadopodia are use mechanical
loads are part of their invasion function. How these forces function in
invasion, however, remains unknown. Two molecular tension tools were developed
by the investigators and will be used to measure loading of the invadopodium.
This research will determine how tension affects invadopodia formation and
facilitates cell motion. High resolution cellular force maps will also be
created as a biomechanical assay for the detection of cancer cells in pre-
clinical models. Overall, this research will yield valuable insights to the
mechanobiology of invadopodia, and potentially create a new tool for assessing
biomechanically the probability that cancer cells will invade. As part of the
research project, the investigators will provide summer research opportunities
to undergraduate students recruited through the NSF LSAMP IINSPIRE program which
recruits underrepresented undergraduate students to labs for summer research.
Also a one-day workshop featuring aspects of the research imaging progress will
be created for 60 undergraduates in the PI's university department at Iowa
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The invadopodium is a protein complex formed in
cancer cell membranes which is and involved in matrix degradation and cancer
metastasis. Mechano-sensitive protein integrins are expected to transmit force
to critically regulate the formation and function of invadopodia. However, such
force has not been studied in invadopodia due to previous technical barriers.
The goal of this project is to characterize integrin-transmitted molecular
tension (integrin tension) and investigate its fundamental role in the formation
and function of invadopodia. Using innovative molecular tension tools developed
by the PI, the research in this project will first calibrate and image integrin
tension in invadopodia with high resolution and sensitivity. Integrin tension
and various structural proteins will be co-imaged at 0.3 micron resolution to
reveal the force-structure interplay in invadopodia. Next, integrin tension will
be globally and quantitatively knocked down to a designed level using a tension
modulator, the consequent structural deficiency and function loss of invadopodia
in matrix degradation will be examined to determine the role of integrin tension
in the activities of invadopodia. At last, high-resolution tension map
contributed by integrins in both invadopodia and focal adhesions will be tested
as a biomarker for the identification of cancer cells from a large population of
regular cells. This unique biomechanical assay has the potential to provide a
fast and convenient approach for the detection of circulating tumor cells in
patient blood samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.