* 1825502
* Collaborative Research: Direct, Nozzle-Free Printing of Functional Nanomaterials Using Ultrasound Bubble Cavitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* David Estrada, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 224,301.00

The project aims to provide a robust understanding of the fundamental science
behind the working mechanism of a nozzle-free liquid-jetting system. Widely
employed state-of-the-art printing techniques rely primarily on the use of
nozzles to deposit materials. Nozzles can get clogged, which adversely affects
printing reliability and reproducibility. This problem becomes more significant
when the nozzle diameter is reduced for high-resolution printing, which is in
increasing demand. Additionally, it is difficult to print inks or pastes that
contain particles, flakes, and high-aspect ratio nanomaterials. This award
supports research to provide knowledge for the development of a nozzle-free
additive manufacturing process, which can eliminate clogs and enable narrower
jet streams required for high resolution printing. The ultrasound bubble
cavitation process enables deposition of different types, shapes, and sizes of
nanomaterials on rigid and flexible substrates. The absence of nozzles
eliminates clogging problems. Nanomaterial-based additively manufactured devices
find a wide range of applications, from electronics to biomaterials to sensors.
Therefore, the results from this study benefits the printing industry and the
national economy. This project involves several disciplines including applied
physics, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, bioengineering, and
materials science. The multi-disciplinary research creates a unique environment,
which helps broaden participation of women and underrepresented groups in
research and positively impacts engineering education. The project uses YouTube
and other social media platforms to disseminate knowledge to a wider
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies a liquid jetting system
enabled by a single cavitation bubble created by laser-generated focused
ultrasound to print various nanostructures. The ultrasound bubble cavitation
printing process is nozzle-less, thus avoiding the clogging problems in existing
nozzle-based additive manufacturing techniques. However, a robust understanding
of the fundamental mechanism behind the liquid jetting and energy conversion
processes involved is needed to realize the full application potential of using
this technique for additive manufacturing. To understand the ultrasonic liquid
jetting mechanism, the research team develops models of acoustic interference at
the air-liquid interface and cavitation zone, laser-flash shadowgraphy to
capture the hydrodynamics of bubble formation and jetting, and bubble formation
dynamics as a function of varying physical parameters. To design efficient an
optoacoustic transducer, the team studies the effect of laser parameters on
thermal transport properties in light-absorbing nanocomposite materials leading
to high pressure amplitudes, investigates design aspects of photoacoustic lens
leading to high focal gain, and fabricates composite lenses and determines the
geometric gain, peak pressure amplitude, and lens breakdown factors. Finally,
the team prints nanomaterial films, and compares the quality and characteristics
of printed films against those obtained with traditional printing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.