* 1825129
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Encephalic Arterial Canals and their Functional Significance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 27,566.00

The cost of evolving a large brain, like the human brain, is hypothesized to
require energetic trade-offs, such that increases in brain metabolism may
require reductions in energy used for growth and reproduction. However,
additional comparative data on brain metabolism (the rate at which energy is
used) are needed to better investigate these potential trade-offs. Because
direct measurements are difficult to obtain for most living species and
impossible for extinct ones, this doctoral dissertation project will use
measurements obtained from skeletal features affected by brain metabolic demands
to infer rates of brain metabolism in a broad group of mammals. Comparing how
and why mammals may vary in the energy they expend on the brain relative to
their body's metabolism will advance knowledge in primate and human biology and
brain evolution. This project will generate numerous 3D scans of skulls that
will be used for student mentoring and public outreach at Duke University and
the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences. These data will also be released
for public access on the digital archive MorphoSource, which will yield further
research and educational utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies suggest
that the size of foramina that transmit the brain's arteries may be used to
predict brain glucose utilization rates in euarchontans. This project aims to
further evaluate the use of these foramina to test energetic hypotheses of brain
size evolution. Diameters of the transverse foramina (which transmit the
vertebral artery) and carotid canals (which transmit the internal carotid
artery) will be measured from osteological and 3-D digitized specimens obtained
from high-resolution computed tomography scans, respectively, in a broad
taxonomic sample of marsupials, glirans, afrotheres, xenarthrans, and some
carnivorans. A study of bony canal area and predicted blood flow rate change
through ontogeny in a cadaveric osteological sample of humans will also be
conducted to further elucidate the relationship between foramen size, brain
size, and brain metabolism. Using these data, this project will test the extent
to which large brains in primates and other mammals are sustained by increasing
the body's metabolic rate. This research will further the understanding of human
brain evolution within the context of mammalian brain
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.