* 1825908
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Experimental-Numerical Methodology and Field Calibration for Characterization of Peak Wind Effects on Low-Rise Buildings and Their Appurtenances
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Peter Irwin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 217,747.00

Mitigating hurricane damage to building envelopes and appurtenances,
particularly for low-rise buildings, remains a principal challenge to achieving
coastal resilience. Building envelopes include roof and wall cladding systems
and openings such as windows, doors, and garage doors. Building appurtenances
include roof-mounted renewable energy devices such as photovoltaic arrays,
rooftop equipment, telecommunications equipment, and architectural ornamentation
such as spires and trellises. During hurricanes, damage to cladding elements and
appurtenances can puncture the building envelope and render the building
unusable due to water intrusion and loss of interior contents. Such damage
largely results from underestimation of peak wind loads on these components.
This research will synthesize field data, experiments, and numerical analysis to
more accurately characterize peak wind loads and wind-induced vibrations on low-
rise buildings. Better characterization of peak wind loads can lead to better
design and retrofit of cladding and appurtenances, thus reducing building
vulnerabilities and community losses during major windstorm events. This
research will foster sustainable, high-performance buildings with wind-resilient
and renewable on-site energy generation systems, to reduce societal disruption
from windstorm-induced power outages. The project will enhance the education of
underrepresented student groups by leveraging STEM programs and using research
outcomes to inform the next generation professionals on windstorm damage
mechanisms of low-rise building roofs and how to improve on-site renewable
energy systems. Finally, telepresence will be used during testing to increase
awareness of wind hazard impacts and serve as a multiplier to reach additional
audiences. Data from this project will be made available in the NSF-supported
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major gaps in fundamental
knowledge exist in the estimation and mitigation of peak wind effects on low-
rise buildings and their non-structural components, which are vulnerable to
damage under high winds. First, for low-rise buildings, large-scale models are
needed for accurate testing. However, these scales impose constraints on
turbulence simulation, resulting in unconservative wind tunnel estimates of peak
aerodynamic loads in areas of strong vorticity where damage is typically
initiated. Second, for building appurtenances (e.g., rooftop solar panels),
wind-induced resonant vibrations at high frequencies are unaccounted for in
current wind load provisions. The research objective is to create a new physics-
based, hybrid experimental-numerical methodology for accurately predicting peak
wind effects on low-rise building cladding and appurtenances that (a) uses
large-scale, high Reynolds number physical model tests that accurately simulate
high frequency turbulence, (b) augments the test results with post-test
numerical analysis to incorporate the effects of missing low frequency
turbulence and dynamic responses, and (c) accounts for interference effects from
surrounding structures. This methodology will be developed through a synthesis
of in-situ data on building components with results from large-scale experiments
at the NSF-supported NHERI Wall of Wind experimental facility at Florida
International University and associated numerical analysis. This new
methodology, supported by field calibration, will allow obtaining peak wind load
estimates that: (a) are not subject to errors due to scaling effects, (b)
include the effects of various scales of turbulence in the oncoming flow,
including low frequency gusts and smaller eddies generated by the surrounding
structures and by the building itself, and (c) incorporate the resonant
amplification of vibrations of smaller appurtenances induced by high frequency
turbulent eddies. This research will also contribute to formulating procedures
that will enhance the ability of conventional boundary layer wind tunnels to
simulate turbulence for larger model scales than are currently possible, and
achieving new design guidelines for wind-induced dynamic effects on building
components, needed in view of observed widespread hurricane-induced damage to
such components. In addition, this research will lay the foundation for the
formulation of structural and functional fragility curves with and without
retrofitting strategies that can incentivize citizens to adopt cost-effective
retrofits. Field data on peak wind effects, made available in the NHERI Data
Depot, will inform the research and professional communities and help benchmark
future computational fluid dynamics tools to enhance design and achieve more
resilient communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.