* 1825300
* Moire Patterns and the Mechanics of Defects and Interfaces in 2D Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Harley Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,218.00

Graphene and other atomically thin, two-dimensional layered materials can be
used as surface additives to tailor the mechanical properties of materials,
despite their extreme thinness. For example, coating the surface of a metal with
single layer of graphene can effectively stiffen and strengthen the underlying
material, as well as enable unusual friction and wear properties. The organized
stacking of a graphene layer on another surface, each having different atomic
arrangements, results in what is called a heterostructure. Moire patterns form
as a result of periodic arrangements of aligned and misaligned atomic stacking
in the layers. These Moire patterns are the signature of modifications of the
electric and mechanical properties of the stacked materials, and the origin of
new heterostructure behavior. This study will advance the science of two-
dimensional materials by creating new theoretical and experimental tools to:
probe the mechanics of the Moire patterns at the atomic scale, discover new
useful material behavior, and reveal strategies to leverage these properties at
larger scales. The success of the project will advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare by facilitating design and fabrication of advanced
materials with superior properties. As part of the project, a Science,
Technology, Engineering, Art and Math (STEAM) activity on the Art of Moire will
be created for middle and high school girls through an extensive collaboration
with the School of Arts+Design. This will be an annual summer camps to excite
and motivate female students about engineering by connecting art and design to
the mechanics of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures of 2D
materials are a unique space for engineering design, both for discovering new
emergent phenomena and for developing novel devices. The objective of the study
is to explore the mechanics of Moire patterns observed in vertical, or stacked,
interfaces between 2D materials and their defects. The study is driven by the
hypothesis that defects in stacked 2D materials endow heterostructures with
unusual mechanical and electronic properties. A grand-canonical minimum hopping
(GCMH) computational method will be applied within the LAMMPS molecular dynamics
framework to resolve defect structure and motion in 2D material layers and their
heterostructures. Mechanical Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) techniques will be
used to measure the mechanics of the Moire patterns of graphene on various
crystalline substrates. The use of calibrated multi-frequency and lateral force
AFM to observe the Moire will give information on the local modulation of
elastic, plastic, and frictional properties. These complementary studies will be
used to uncover the energetics of partial dislocation reconstructions unique to
2D materials, defect interactions, and coupling to out-of-plane
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.