* 1825991
* A Concept to Eliminate the Meshing Bottleneck During the Design and Analysis of Fluid Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jason Hicken, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 312,004.00

The proper function of many systems vital to the United States' economy,
defense, and national health depend on fluid flow (i.e., the flow of a liquid or
gas). Examples of such systems include commercial and military aircraft,
automobile engines, wind turbines, and heart pumps. Fluid systems are
characterized by unintuitive physics, which makes them exceptionally difficult
to design. This difficulty is particularly acute during the conceptual design of
unconventional fluid systems, for which experimental data and engineering
experience is lacking. In principle, engineers could use numerical simulations
to analyze innovative fluid systems, but high-fidelity simulations have found
limited use during conceptual design. Why? Flow simulations typically rely on
meshes, which divide the region occupied by the fluid into many smaller volumes,
and generating high-quality meshes for complex geometries remains a time-
consuming, human-in-the-loop process. This research will investigate a
fundamentally new approach to mitigate the meshing bottleneck and thereby
improve the fluid system design process. Project outcomes will include novel
algorithms and prototype implementations of the algorithms that will be made
available in an online repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project
will study a novel immersed-boundary method and its application to design
optimization. The key insight is to frame the immersed-boundary method as an
inverse problem. The idea is to introduce a body force, or surface flux,
interior to the geometry that acts like a control variable to impose the
boundary conditions. The optimal value for this control is determined by solving
a partial-differential-equation constrained inverse problem. This approach is
attractive for the analysis of fluid systems during conceptual design, because
the computational mesh does not need to conform to the geometry. Furthermore,
unlike most immersed-boundary methods, this project's approach remains accurate
and is compatible with high-order discretizations. To assess the potential of
the concept, the project will investigate several critical questions: among
alternative inverse-problem formulations, which one is the best? How should the
problem be regularized? How do we solve the inverse problem efficiently? How
robust and accurate is the concept when applied to imperfect CAD geometries?
And, how can the method be used to advance shape optimization
algorithms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.