* 1825379
* Dynamic Barriers to Swimming Agents in Complex Fluid Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Kevin Mitchell, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

The motion, orientation, and control of self-propelled bodies in aqueous
environments is an active field of scientific research. This field clearly has
important engineering applications to, for example, swarms of autonomous
underwater vehicles, collections of aerial drones, or swimming microrobots. This
field is also important for understanding the fundamental physics of swimming
organisms, such as bacteria, larvae, or even artificial colloidal particles.
Many past studies focused on the interactions between bodies (agents) within a
stationary ambient fluid; these interactions can lead to collective behavior
like schooling, flocking, and group alignment. However, few studies have
explored the motion of swimming agents in complicated flows that are caused by
external disturbances. The current research will explore how isolated, self-
propelled swimming agents are transported within such a flow. This is important
for understanding swimming in the "real world", where swimmers often encounter
nonnegligible, even turbulent, background flows. This work seeks to identify
regions that are inaccessible to a swimmer, or accessible only after a long
time. In many cases, these regions are delineated by geometric barriers that are
not imposed by physical walls, but rather arise from subtle interactions between
the dynamics of the swimmer and that of the flow. This work will develop
techniques to predict where such barriers exist. These studies will be conducted
in collaboration with a Bucknell University investigator, who is conducting
experiments on bacteria in microfluidic flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For several
decades it has been understood that invariant manifolds are the critical
structures controlling the transport of passive tracers in fluids exhibiting
chaotic advection. More recently, Lagrangian coherent structures have provided
an analogous framework for passive advection in unsteady, aperiodic flows. The
objective of this research is to extend these theories to agents that are both
advected in the fluid and propelled under their own power. The passive invariant
manifolds, and Lagrangian coherent structures, are no longer the most relevant
objects. Rather, new objects called swimming invariant manifolds (SwIMs), which
depend explicitly on the swimming speed, appear to be the key structures. This
research will develop the theoretical framework for SwIMs, assess their
importance to the transport of swimmers, and apply this framework to various
scenarios, including: (i) swimmers of differing aspect ratios; (ii) steady,
periodic, and aperiodic fluid flows; (iii) flows in 2D and 3D; (iv) hyperbolic
versus elliptic flows; (v) the influence of stochastic effects in the swimmer's
direction, and (vi) interactions between swimmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.