* 1825646
* QRM: Understanding the Mechanical Design of Natural Cellular Materials via a Multiscale Quantitative Structural Representation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Yunhui Zhu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2022
* USD 590,919.00

Many biological materials systems, such as wood, bones, sponges, and sea
urchins, utilize cellular structures for simultaneous mechanical function and
weight saving. Similarly, engineering cellular solids with lightweight design
and mechanical efficiency, have become increasingly favored for applications in
energy, infrastructure, aerospace, biomedical, and the automotive vehicle
industries. While many engineering cellular materials are manufactured to have
either completely stochastic or periodic lattices, natural cellular materials
often exhibit complex three-dimensional cellular designs with controlled
structural morphologies at multiple length scales. This is believed to
contribute to their remarkable mechanical robustness, especially considering
their mechanically weak or soft constituents. This award will support a
fundamental study to elucidate the multi-scale structural basis of the high-
performance natural cellular materials, through an integrated multi-disciplinary
effort involving materials science and engineering, mechanical engineering,
computer vision, and data science. The insights gained from natural cellular
materials will provide important guidance in the design and manufacturing of
engineering cellular materials, deepen our understanding of structural cellular
solids, and provide insights for the design and fabrication of advanced
lightweight materials and structures, with potential benefits to US
Manufacturing and Infrastructure sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
establish a quantitative, comprehensive, and efficient structural representation
scheme for the multi-scale cellular network of highly porous structures found in
natural systems. The researchers will study the bioceramic cellular structure of
sea urchin spines as a testbed system, and multiscale structural representations
will elucidate fundamental understanding of their remarkable mechanical
robustness and damage tolerance. The work will address the challenges of
representing complex, hierarchical cellular structures via three major
innovations, including high-resolution tomography imaging and adaptive
compressive data processing, multi-scale representation of the cellular
structure (individual strut and node level, local unit-cell level, and global
cellular network level), and in-silico "regrowth" of bio-inspired cellular
structures with morphological control at multiple length scales. The research
team will further validate the multi-level cellular structural representation
through systematic finite element simulations coupled with synchrotron imaging-
based in-situ mechanical testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.