* 1825331
* RUI: Regenerative Electroless Etching for the Production of Si Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kurt Kolasinski, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 168,927.00

Applications of nanostructured silicon in, e.g., consumer products, nanomedicine
and rechargeable batteries, would benefit from economical production of porous
silicon powder on the kilogram-to-ton scale needed in new technologies essential
for national prosperity. Electroless etching, which is an electrochemical
process that is recognized possessing industrial potential but requiring
advances in its reproducibility, controllability, purity, cost and scaling. This
research will develop a new electrochemical process called regenerative
electroless etching (ReEtching), a new concept in electroless wet etching with
the capability of producing nanostructured and hierarchically structured
semiconductors. ReEtching is a method in which one oxidant is used to
continuously regenerate a low concentration of a second oxidant in the reaction
mixture which is used in the reaction. These investigations will transform
electroless etching from an irreproducible procedure into a process that can
produce homogeneous porous films of arbitrary thickness, produce pillared
particles of arbitrary length, produce either crystalline or amorphous pillars,
produce hierarchical porous materials with nanopores inside of mesopores or
nanopores inside of macropores. This work is carried out in a primarily
undergraduate institution with strong international components providing the
undergraduates involved in the research a unique international research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regenerative electroless etching (ReEtching) is
a electroless wet etching process with the capability of producing
nanostructured and hierarchically structured semiconductors. ReEtching produces
nanostructured semiconductors in a process which an oxidant (Ox1) is used as a
catalytic agent to facilitate reaction between a semiconductor and a second
oxidant (Ox2) that would be unreactive in the primary reaction. Ox2 is used to
regenerate Ox1, which is capable of initiating etching. The extent of reaction
is controlled by the amount of Ox2 added and the rate of reaction is controlled
by the injection rate of Ox2. A specific example is the production of highly
luminescent, nanocrystalline porous Si powder through reaction with V2O5 (the
catalytic agent) and H2O2 (the regeneration agent) in HF(aq). Because it
facilitates control the rate of reaction independent of the extent of reaction,
ReEtching possesses previously unattainable processing capabilities. This grant
will transform electroless etching from an irreproducible procedure into a
process that can produce homogeneous porous films of arbitrary thickness,
produce pillared particles of arbitrary length, produce either crystalline or
amorphous pillars, produce hierarchical porous materials with nanopores inside
of mesopores or nanopores inside of macropores. These meso-to-nanostructures
will be characterized by photoluminescence and correlated with the materials
structural parameters. Extension to other semiconductors will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.