* 1825466
* GOALI: Understanding Light-weight Transparent Ceramic Mechanical Response: From Single Grain Boundary to Bulk Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* John Lambros, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 477,336.00

Transparent polycrystalline light-weight ceramics provide a unique combination
of processibility, optical properties, and mechanical properties making them
suitable for applications as transparent armor, optics for aviation, and high-
pressure glass for submarines. Unfortunately, these materials often exhibit
greater variations in strength than other glasses, making them less suitable for
such high-reliability applications. This Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project is based on the hypothesis that minor
changes in chemistry at the boundaries between material crystals have a large
effect on the overall mechanical behavior. Understanding what chemistry is
favorable at these boundaries could allow for improved engineering of the
material and create new markets for applications as a high strength optical
element. Achieving this goal will progress experimental mechanics; advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; and secure the national defense. To
establish this hypothesis, mechanical testing and simulation must be performed
on samples ranging in size from 1/100th of the width of a human hair (to measure
single crystal boundaries) to the size of the entire component. Newly developed
testing methods have only recently made such experiments feasible, thus creating
new opportunities to understand this problem. As part of the project, student
internships will be provided at the industrial partner, underrepresented
undergraduate students will be recruited in the research group, and prospective
female students will be motivated through Girls Learning about Materials Camp
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical strength of large-format MgAl2O4
spinel exhibits considerable variability that is hypothesized to result from
local variations in grain boundary stoichiometry and chemistry. However, the
granular geometry, grain boundary anisotropy, and variations in grain boundary
chemistry make relating simple metrics like average boundary composition and
average strength challenging. To develop a mechanism-informed understanding of
the mechanical behavior of spinel, this work bridges experimentally relevant
length scales: from measuring fracture properties and grain boundary chemistry
on single boundaries to predicting the fracture strength of large specimens and
their property distributions. The project develops digital particle-tracking
methods for mapping evolving strain during single grain boundary fracture
experiments performed in situ in a transmission electron microscope. Cohesive
zone models developed from associated finite element analyses can be correlated
with measured grain boundary chemistries and misorientations. Grain boundary and
bulk property distributions as a function of anisotropy can be observed at the
mesoscale (dozens of grains). This allows us to define representative volume
elements for use in a continuum analysis of the macroscopic samples. At this
scale, experimentally reasonable compositional gradients, residual stress
gradients, and grain boundary property distributions will be used to predict the
distribution of macroscopic strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.