* 1825470
* Continuous Manufacturing of Anhydrous Metal Sulfide Nanocrystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Colin Wolden, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2022
* USD 387,192.00

Metal sulfide nanocrystals have attracted great attention because of their
excellent properties and widespread applications in diverse fields including
lubrication, optoelectronics, catalysis, biotechnology, and energy storage.
Reactive precipitation of nanocrystals is typically accomplished by combining
aqueous solutions to create supersaturated mixtures. Such processes are
sensitive to processing conditions making the synthesis of anhydrous phase pure
materials challenging, in general, and impossible for moisture sensitive alloys.
This award supports the study of the manufacture of anhydrous metal sulfide
nanoparticles through the reaction of hydrogen sulfide gas with metal-organic
precursors in an organic solution. The project addresses the engineering
challenges involved in translating this solution-based approach into a scalable
nanomanufacturing process. It develops a bubble column reactor platform for
continuous manufacturing of the nanocrystals via reactive precipitation. The
project targets important materials challenges facing next generation battery
technologies. Such a manufacturing capability is critical for enabling
widespread deployment of renewable wind- and solar-generated electricity, which
greatly impacts the nation's prosperity and infrastructure. This project
provides interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate engineers and
scientists in energy technology areas. Project results are integrated into the
undergraduate curriculum. The building and implementation of the bubble-column
platform serves as a module in a unit operations laboratory
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a green chemistry approach
that results in complete reduction of the hazardous industrial waste gas
hydrogen sulfide while generating metal sulfide nanocrystals and recovering
valuable hydrogen. The project aims to extract general principles for the design
and operation of reactive precipitation processes in bubble columns, including a
four-phase design. The research involves demonstrating the ability to control
the size and morphology of metal sulfide nanoparticles through rational
selection of chemistry (solvent, auxiliary reagent) and systematic manipulation
of mass transport parameters. Studies of nanoparticle synthesis under semi-batch
operation are used to guide the design and implementation of a continuous
manufacturing platform. The structure, properties and performance of the
nanoparticles are characterized through the fabrication and evaluation of
prototype cathodes and solid-state electrolytes. Continuous production is
expected to improve control over nanocrystal shape and size distribution that is
critical in the applications of these materials. The combination of gas-phase
reactants with organic solutions offers a new paradigm for the reactive
precipitation of moisture sensitive nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.