* 1825815
* Collaborative Research: Process-Specific Topology Optimization for 3D-Printed Hierarchical Composites and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brett Compton, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 364,377.00

A close look at almost any biological structure reveals an elegant and complex
hierarchical arrangement of materials at different length scales that imparts
desirable mechanical robustness and function to the structure with minimal
wasted material. Prior to the development of additive manufacturing
technologies, the creation of components with analogous complexity and hierarchy
using engineering materials has been prohibitively expensive or entirely
impossible. Now, additive manufacturing technologies, which build materials and
structures from the ground up using incremental deposition of material, have
opened the doors to designing and creating entirely new classes of structures
with unprecedented complexity, hierarchy, and performance. However, design tools
do not currently exist that can identify the optimal combinations of materials,
hierarchy, and shape for any given application, nor do engineers yet understand
exactly when, how, and why hierarchy leads to superior performance. This award
will improve our understanding of how structural hierarchy in mechanical
components leads to superior performance and create a novel method for designing
such structures. By generating this knowledge, design engineers will be better
able to make decisions about if, when, and how to utilize hierarchy to create
stronger, stiffer, lighter, more efficient components for applications ranging
from implants, prosthetics, and sporting equipment, to shipping and aerospace.
The project includes activities to educate high school students about advanced
manufacturing and dissemination of results directly to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on fused filament
fabrication and direct-ink writing, since these additive technologies are the
most widely accessible and have seen rapid recent development in new high
strength, lightweight composite feedstocks. The specific scope of the project is
comprised of a series of coupled experimental/numerical research tasks. These
tasks build from assessing the effects of 3D printing and hierarchy in simple,
classic topology optimization benchmark problems to designing, fabricating, and
evaluating designs that utilize cellular infill with graded shape and density.
By incorporating the unique features that result from material extrusion
additive manufacturing (i.e., perimeter, infill, and material anisotropy) into
topology optimization schemes, structures will be optimized specifically for the
combination of feedstock material and type of hierarchy desired. While additive
manufacturing technology has become ubiquitous in schools, universities, and
industry, systematic approaches to teach "design for additive manufacturing"
require further development. This project will also help address this national
imperative through hands-on additive manufacturing and topology optimization
demonstrations, industry educational seminars, and outreach programs for
underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with disabilities that will
inspire the next generation Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.