* 1825872
* Humidity-Controlled Micro-Additive Manufacturing with Polymeric Bioinks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bulent Gozen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 317,547.00

Bio-inks are biocompatible hydrogels and water-soluble polymers that are used to
additively manufacture next-generation medical and pharmaceutical products.
These materials are synthesized to carry substantial amounts of water along with
living cells, their nutrients or drugs, while supporting their activity or
controllably releasing them in the human body. Through additive manufacturing,
bio-inks precisely loaded with bio-materials can be extruded and assembled
layer-by-layer to fabricate personalized artificial tissues and drug delivery
vehicles. Success of such groundbreaking technologies relies heavily on how
precisely they mimic the native tissues they are working with. This requirement
poses a significant manufacturing challenge since human tissues are highly
complex with critical feature sizes in the order of tens of microns. Current
bio-printing technologies, having a print resolution of greater than 100
microns, are incapable of printing sufficiently fine features. Challenges arise
because of a lack of a complete understanding of the bio-ink behavior when
printing smaller features, and other practical issues such as rapid drying of
the smaller printed geometries leading to print non-uniformity. This project
will address these scientific challenges and substantially increase the
resolution of bio-printed components. If successful, this novel approach will
advance U.S. bioprinting manufacturing capabilities and National Welfare by
enabling the realization of effective personalized medicine. Immediate impacts
in this regard will include increased success rate in artificial tissue implants
for treatment of degenerative diseases, and higher effectiveness of drug
delivery through the skin in the treatment of chronic skin diseases, which
affect more than 30% of the population. The research activities of this project
will be closely integrated with educational and outreach activities. Educational
components will prepare the next generation of engineers to work in biomedical
related additive manufacturing technologies, while the planned outreach will
increase the public's awareness and understanding of these exciting
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to achieve controllable
micro-additive manufacturing of bio-inks via localized humidity and temperature
control at the printhead nozzle. It is believed that local control of these
parameters will prevent the higher bio-ink drying rates, associated with smaller
printed geometries, that currently hinder high-resolution print uniformity and
adhesion between subsequent build layers. The fundamental aspects of the
humidity-controlled printing process will be studied through a combined
experimental and computational modelling approach. Tasks include; 1)
characterization of the humidity and temperature dependent visco-elasto-
capillary behavior of various hydrogels and water-soluble polymers, 2)
generation a multi-physics-based computational model, incorporating visco-
elasto-capillary action, to capture ink deposition and layer-to-layer fusion
mechanisms under specified humidity and temperature conditions, and 3)
experimental validation of the model by examining the mechanical integrity and
properties of high resolution, bio-printed structures. The findings of this work
will advance the science of hydrogels and water-soluble polymers, while also
informing product and bio-printing process design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.