* 1825328
* Research: Next Generation Engineers: Examining the Pathways of Adolescent Females in SWENext
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Roberta Rincon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,921.00

Despite the increase in women's representation over the past few decades in many
occupations that are both high-status and high-income, such as medicine and law,
relatively few women enter engineering majors and occupations. At best,
engineering remains approximately 80% male, which is particularly concerning
given the national need for more engineers. Prior studies have found that one of
the major roadblocks to increasing women's representation in engineering is the
fact that compared to boys, girls express very low levels of interest in
engineering from early ages, and ultimately are unlikely to choose to pursue
engineering majors in college despite having strong educational backgrounds in
math and science. Therefore, the factors that likely discourage girls' interest
in engineering appear social and psychological in nature, rather than academic.
To examine these factors in detail, this unique study will follow a large group
of high school girls who have already expressed an interest in engineering, with
the goal of understanding how the support of adults and peers in their lives, as
well as girls' own views about gender roles, influence whether or not they
remain interested in the field and ultimately choose an engineering major in
college. By shedding light on the factors that support girls' pursuit of
engineering, as well as those that function as deterrents, valuable insight can
be gathered that can then be leveraged to better support a larger population of
girls and young women to enter into engineering. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project is a research collaboration between the
University of Texas and the Society for Women Engineers that follows a purposive
sample of high school girls participating in SWENext, an organization dedicated
to identifying and supporting young women interested in engineering. This study
will employ a mixed-methods approach; the quantitative component will follow a
sample of approximately 700-900 girls over a period of three years (as they
transition from high school into college) via online surveys, while a
qualitative component will similarly follow a longitudinal sample of 30 girls
over time with in-depth interviews. This project will address several aims that
will extend the research on inequality in engineering and STEM fields in
important ways. First, the study will examine the gender identity of SWENext
members, to shed light on how these young women view their own gender and make
sense of prevailing gender norms and roles. Second, it will examine whether and
how peers and adults provide support and encouragement for SWENext members'
interest in engineering, recognizing the array of peers (e.g. friends,
classmates, extra-curricular participants, and online peers) and adults (e.g.
parents and teachers) that girls interact with, and considering the potential
for conflicting messages, as some are likely supportive of girls' non-normative
interests at the same time that others negatively sanction such interests.
Further, the research team will examine whether support is more available or
impactful when it comes from same-gender sources. The final aim of the study is
to examine how these factors help shape girls' decision to declare an
engineering major in college, as well as their engineering-related self-efficacy
and identity. In addressing these three broad aims, the research team employs an
intersectional lens to examine how girls' views, experiences, and outcomes
differ by racial/ethnic background. Results of the project will be widely
disseminated to academic research audiences, as well as educational
practitioners and stakeholders in engineering and industry who share the goal of
increasing the representation of females in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.