* 1825044
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Proteomic Detection of Amelogenin Proteins for Biological Profiles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jane Buikstra, Center For American Archeology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,546.00

In both bioarchaeological and forensic settings, scientists need to be able to
establish the biological profiles of individuals based on their skeletal
remains. In this EAGER research project, methods for determining whether a
skeleton was female or male based on the chemistry of tooth enamel will be
developed and compared to other methods of sex estimation. The research will
expand the available suite of tools for establishing biological profiles, with
the aims of validating and improving protocols and expanding the range of time
periods and environmental conditions in which skeletal sex estimation can be
accomplished. Findings and protocols will be shared with researchers in
anthropology, chemistry, and other disciplines, and the project will support
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral student training and mentoring across
the three collaborative research sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inability to
accurately determine the sex of sub-adult and/or incomplete skeletons is a
persistent problem in biological anthropology and forensic anthropology. Both
osteological analysis and DNA-based methodology have particular strengths and
limitations. This project seeks to develop a robust, reproducible, and sensitive
method for bioarchaeological and forensic sex estimation based on the detection
of sexually dimorphic amelogenin peptides in human enamel, the hardest and best
preserved tissue in the human body. The investigators will optimize peptide
extraction from enamel, increase the sensitivity and quantification of sexually
dimorphic peptides, establish a uniform protocol that can be applied as broadly
as possible to archaeological material, and replicate and build on other work
done in the field. The approach developed will be statistically grounded and
result in sex estimation with established error and false positive and negative
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.