* 1825189
* Evaluating Liquefaction Potential of Challenging Soil Sites: Linking Geomorphological Controls and Novel Approaches for Site Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Roman Hryciw, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,208,000.00

This project focuses on improving engineering models for predicting the severity
of earthquake-induced liquefaction at "challenging soil sites." Liquefaction is
a phenomenon wherein loose, saturated, sandy soils lose their strength during
earthquake shaking, leading to significant damage to nearby infrastructure.
Field investigations performed following recent earthquakes in Christchurch, New
Zealand highlighted the limitations of the current engineering liquefaction
severity models for profiles having clay layers interbedded within the
liquefiable sandy layers (i.e., "challenging soil sites"); similar geologic
profiles are common in the US and worldwide. However, the root cause of the
model shortcomings is unknown. The ramifications of not being able to accurately
predict the liquefaction response of these deposits are high. For example, a
recent liquefaction hazard study for the Hawke's Bay region of New Zealand
(Napier and Hastings) predicts severe liquefaction for the design event.
Similarly, a study performed for a stretch of levees in the northern portion of
the Netherlands also predicts a high liquefaction hazard. In both cases, the
deposits that are predicted to severely liquefy have similar characteristics to
those in Christchurch, New Zealand that highlight the limitations in currently
used evaluation procedures. As a result, government regulators are faced with
the question of whether limited resources should be expended, potentially/likely
unnecessarily, to mitigate the perceived risk of liquefaction based on these
studies (e.g., the remediation cost for only one stretch of levees in the
Netherlands is estimated to be ~$100mil, with costs potentially exceeding $1bil
to remediate all the levees in the region). On the contrary, the consequences
could be even higher if the results of the liquefaction hazard studies are
offhandedly dismissed, and the deposits are truly susceptible to severe
liquefaction when subjected shaking from future earthquakes. Challenging soil
sites similar to those in Hawke's Bay, Christchurch, and the Netherlands are
prevalent in regions across the US and worldwide. Towards understanding the root
cause of the shortcoming in current engineering models, large vertical slices of
soils will be extracted from challenging soil sites in Christchurch, New Zealand
where the engineering models accurately and inaccurately predicted the severity
of liquefaction. The existence of evidence of the occurrence of liquefaction at
depth in these profiles will be determined by examining these "geo-slices,"
allowing us to determine whether the issue with current models is related to
predicting the occurrence of liquefaction or whether the issue is related to
predicting the severity of the manifestations of liquefaction at the ground
surface. Additionally, the characteristics of these soil profiles will be
documented in detail. New, advanced tools for identifying the types of profiles
will be developed and used in conjunction with revised engineering models to
accurately predicted the occurrence and severity of liquefaction in future
earthquakes. Two doctoral students from Virginia Tech and the University of
Michigan will work on this project, in collaboration with New Zealand-funded
students from the University of Auckland and the University of Canterbury, New
Zealand. The Principle Investigator for this project has established an outreach
program for military veterans and will use the project to further his efforts of
working with veterans. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Comparison of predicted versus
observed severity of surficial liquefaction manifestations at "challenging" soil
sites (e.g., sandy soil deposits with interbedded silt and clay layers) during
the 2010-2011 Canterbury, New Zealand earthquake sequence (CES) highlights
significant limitations in currently used procedures for evaluating the
liquefaction response of these deposits. The potential issues with current
procedures include limitations in commonly used site characterization techniques
and distinguishing between evaluating liquefaction triggering at depth versus
severity of surficial liquefaction manifestations, where the latter has been
shown to correlate with damage potential. The ramifications of not being able to
accurately predict the liquefaction response of these deposits are high.
Accordingly, this research will development a procedure to evaluate the
liquefaction response of challenging soil sites based on the linkage of
geomorphological controls of challenging soil sites and novel approaches for
site characterization. This study will exploit to the extent possible the wealth
of field performance data from recent earthquakes in New Zealand, as well as
data from other well-documented historic liquefaction case histories, and will
employ ?geo-slicing? and Vision Cone Penetration Tests, VisCPT, as well as more
conventional field and laboratory testing. The project will be performed
collaboratively by researchers from Virginia Tech, University of Michigan, and
QuakeCoRE: New Zealand Centre for Earthquake Resilience (i.e., Univ. of
Canterbury, Univ. of Auckland, and Tonkin + Taylor
Ltd).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.