* 1825133
* Boosting the Speed and Accuracy of Vibration-Prone Manufacturing Machines at Low Cost through Software
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 337,575.00

Quality, productivity and cost are three key pillars of manufacturing. To stay
competitive in an increasingly global economy, U.S. manufacturers must find ways
of improving the quality and productivity of their manufacturing processes while
keeping costs low. Most manufacturing machines tend to vibrate as they move, due
to weaknesses in their mechanical structures. The resultant motion-induced
vibration adversely affects the accuracy and speed of the manufacturing
machines, thus degrading the quality and productivity of the associated
manufacturing processes. Software solutions that involve generating motion
commands to avoid unwanted vibration of the machines are very attractive in
practice because they are low cost and, unlike hardware solutions, they do not
add to machine weight and size. However, existing software solutions sacrifice
motion speed and/or accuracy, or are impractical because they cannot properly
handle uncertainties and variabilities that occur during normal usage of the
machines. This award supports a scientific investigation into a software-based
vibration mitigation approach that shows great promise to overcome the technical
and practical shortcomings of existing software solutions. The approach involves
representing the desired machine tools in B-splines, then modifying them to
account for characteristics of the machine. To keep calculations manageable,
tool motions will not be calculated for the entire part but will be calculated
for a "window" around the current tool location. Knowledge created through this
scientific investigation will enable industry to boost the accuracy and speed of
manufacturing machines at low cost, thus increasing their competitiveness in the
global marketplace. This directly affects a number of economic sectors,
including medical devices, automotive, aerospace and defense; it therefore
directly and positively impacts both economic competitiveness and national
security. The broader impact plan includes: educating students and industry
about software based vibration mitigation methods through curriculum development
and (online) tutorials; and K-12 outreach to motivate underrepresented minority
students to STEM fields by demonstrating the benefits of software-based
vibration mitigation techniques on desktop 3D
printers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the work is to
mathematically characterize and experimentally validate the effects of limited-
preview filtering of B-splines on the accuracy and speed of manufacturing
machines that suffer from motion-command-induced vibration. The motion commands
for a vibration-prone machine will be represented as B-splines. To facilitate
computationally efficient online vibration compensation, the B-splines will be
filtered in small batches (limited preview) using a model of machine dynamics.
However, limited-preview filtering of B-splines introduces approximation errors
with poorly understood effects on the accuracy and versatility of online
vibration compensation. Methods from linear systems theory will be employed to
characterize and mitigate the effects of the approximation errors. Moreover,
effects of uncertainties in machine dynamics on the accuracy of filtered
B-splines will be analyzed mathematically with a goal of maximizing the
robustness of online vibration compensation to variations in system dynamics.
Lastly, techniques from model predictive control will be leveraged to develop a
scientific methodology for maximizing the speed of vibration-prone machines
without sacrificing positioning accuracy. The theoretical understanding and
methods developed through this research will be validated experimentally on 3D
printers and various other vibration-prone manufacturing
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.