* 1825669
* Design and Development: Fostering Graduate Student Professional Development Through an Instructional Incubator and Teaching Apprenticeship Model
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Aileen Huang-Saad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2021
* USD 398,295.00

Biomedical research in the United States is highly dependent on academic
research primarily performed by graduate students. Throughout their graduate
studies, biomedical students immerse themselves in research, with little or no
training in best teaching practices or knowledge of alternative, non-academic
career opportunities, such as industry or government agencies. As a result,
graduates who do not continue with traditional academic careers struggle with
the transition to non-academic careers because they know very little about
alternatives; also, those who remain in academics and research struggle with the
increasing teaching demands they face as faculty. While graduate school used to
be considered a rite of passage to a career in academic research, a job in
academics is no longer a guarantee. Thus, biomedical graduate programs have a
responsibility to reconsider how they are training their students for their
careers after graduation. The goal of this project is to develop a course
sequence for graduate students to learn more about alternative careers and best
teaching practices. The graduate students will not only learn about careers and
teaching practices, but they also will work with postdoctoral fellows and
faculty to translate what they learn into an undergraduate classroom. This will
give them a chance to have a first-hand teaching experience and consider how to
develop the critical skills needed by today's biomedical workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this Design and Development project is to
develop a transferrable model for graduate student professional development as
both educators and non-academics. Graduate education is faced with two
fundamental problems: 1) students who choose to pursue academics are not trained
how to teach; and, 2) graduates who choose to leave academics have little
exposure to alternative postgraduate opportunities. This project focuses on
developing an Incubator/Apprenticeship Model that exposes graduate students to
the rapidly changing world of science and technology innovations and workforce
trends, while being immersed in the exploration of learning theories and
research-based teaching approaches for curriculum design (e.g. problem-based
learning, active learning). As a result, graduate students will participate in
an immersive curriculum development experience informed by evidence-based
practices and be exposed to non-academic postgraduate opportunities commonly not
addressed directly in higher education. The development of this innovation
leverages the instructional design process, social constructivist theory,
situated learning theory, and instructor beliefs. While this proof of concept is
grounded in the context of biomedical engineering, the proposed theory of action
is broadly applicable. The impact of the proposed sequence will be studied
qualitatively and quantitatively. Students will be surveyed pre- and post-
instruction. A subset of students will also be interviewed. This proposed
instructional design sequence is a proof of concept for a novel, transferrable
model for programs to foster graduate student professional development that is
responsive to the rapidly changing world of science and technology innovations
and workforce trends. Results will be disseminated on the University of Michigan
Biomedical Enginering Transforming Engineering Education website and through
educational conferences and journal articles. Other institutions interested in
implementing this sequence are invited to attend any of the classes and reach
out for consultation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.