* 1825398
* A Multiscale Material Approach to Understanding the Effects of Viscoelasticity on Cell Adhesion, Migration, and TGF-beta Activation/Signaling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas LaBean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 416,000.00

Cells are able to sense and react to changes in the mechanical properties of
their microenviroment through a process known as mechanotransduction. The effect
of the surrounding environment affects cell attachment, migration,
proliferation, and differentiation. However, most tissues that include cells do
not behave in a simple, elastic fashion. In fact, their properties are generally
non-linear and viscoelastic -- meaning that they vary as the tissue is stretched
and based on how quickly the force or stretch is applied. Significant research
effort is being conducted into the best ways to get cells to develop into
healthy tissues for tissue replacement or enhancement. Understanding how cells
respond to their surroundings is key to being able to design systems that will
optimize these engineered tissues. This project will focus on the effect of the
viscoelastic properties of a substrate -- its ability to dissipate energy based
on how quickly the force is applied -- on the clustering of a cellular receptor
for a common growth factor (TGF-Beta) as well as how cells respond downstream to
signals that are generated. In addition to the scientific impact, the project
team will focus on training students in a multidisciplinary environment so that
they can in the future work effectively on interdisciplinary teams to tackle
complex problems at the interface of engineering, materials science, and
biomedical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to investigate the nonlinear,
viscoelastic substrate variation on fibroblast behavior, three objectives have
been established. First, to determine how the viscoelasticity of a developed
microgel, colloidal thin film influences fibroblast adhesion, spreading,
migration, and myofibroblastic differentiation. Second, to analyze TGF-Beta
receptor clustering, activation, and signaling as a function of microgel film
viscoelasticity. And, finally, to examine the effect of pre-patterning TGF-Beta
receptors on the substrate via DNA origami on cell adhesion, spreading,
migration, and myofibroblastic differentiation. The studies will provide new
insights into how cells respond to changes in viscoelasticy in their
microenvironment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.