* 1825858
* Assessing Transport Pathways into the Arctic and Their Efficiencies
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Mingfang Ting, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 03/31/2024
* USD 631,701.00

In this multifaceted study, the investigators will advance fundamental
understanding and our ability to simulate long-range atmospheric transport
pathways into the Arctic region. This has implications for important atmospheric
constituents such as pollutants and water vapor, affecting human health and
climate change both regionally and globally. The investigators will use a range
of modeling approaches and experiments in a systematic fashion that will
ultimately identify model deficiencies as well as improve links between the
underlying physical dynamics and atmospheric transport. The project will support
an early career lead investigator, as well as provide training for a graduate
student and postdoctoral investigator. The investigators will collaborate with
colleagues at the National Center for Atmospheric Research and National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, providing a bridge to the wider scientific
and modeling communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project
are to provide a systematic assessment of the performance of state-of-the-art
global chemistry climate models to advance fundamental understanding of long-
range atmospheric transport pathways into the Arctic, their efficiencies, and
the underlying mechanisms. With the use of both comprehensive and idealized
models, the research will improve links between dynamics and transport and help
pinpoint potential model deficiencies in simulation of transport. The
investigators will first assess the multi-model simulations of transport into
the Arctic using Chemistry-Climate Model Initiative experiments. Second, they
will study transport pathways into the Arctic and their transit time
distributions by conducting pulse tracer diagnostics in a comprehensive
atmospheric model. Finally, using a simplified atmospheric model, the
investigators will assess underlying dynamical mechanisms and sensitivities. The
end result will be a better understanding of long-range transport into the
Arctic, its intra-seasonal and inter-annual variability, and future
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.