* 1825993
* Risk-Aware Planning and Control of Robot Motion Including Intermittent Physical Contact
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ludovic Righetti, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 403,106.00

This project considers the problem of planning and controlling motions that
involve intermittent physical contact. These motions include such tasks as
walking across unexplored terrain, or manipulating an object with poorly known
weight, shape, or surface roughness. The project approaches this problem in two
ways. The first builds upon findings that humans respond to uncertainty by
varying the effective springiness of their limbs. The project will formulate a
corresponding approach to robot control by finding the robot limb stiffness that
minimizes a probabilistic measure of risk under uncertain initial conditions.
That is, the first part of the project will find the best possible outcome of a
movement, while taking into account a spread of possible starting points. The
second part of the project addresses the challenge of considering all the ways
in which small changes to intermittent contacts -- such as when a foot hits the
ground, or where a finger touches a tool -- can propagate through a larger task.
There are efficient methods to handle such variability when the problem being
study has a property called "convexity," which allows for efficient partitioning
and search of the space of solutions. Contact problems do not have this
desirable property, however the project will explore ways to approximate the
true problem by a sequence of convex problems. Walking and grasping robots will
increasingly help human co-workers in manufacturing settings, and assist elderly
and disabled citizens in everyday tasks. This project will promote the national
health and prosperity by improving the performance and reliability of robotic
walking and grasping. The results are not limited to robotics and will also be
beneficial in bio-mechanics and human motor control research, where they could
suggest an explanatory framework for analyzing human
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will characterize the optimal
mechanical impedance modulation for robust contact interactions and provide a
methodology to compute motions that are open-loop robust despite environmental
uncertainties. It will leverage recent results in risk-sensitive optimal control
and robust optimization to explicitly consider uncertainty about the environment
while ensuring low computational complexity. The last but key objective of the
project is to conduct extensive robotic experiments with a one-legged jumping
robot, a manipulator grasping unknown objects, a quadruped walking and jumping
and a humanoid robot climbing up high steps using its arms and legs therefore
demonstrating the general applicability of the methodology in realistic and
diverse robotic scenarios. The experiments seek to clarify the influence of
external disturbances and environmental uncertainty on optimal impedance
modulation and robust movements. Additionally, they will shed light on the
important factors enabling robust execution of complex tasks in unknown
environments. The project will also compare the optimal leg impedance predicted
by the established modeling methodology with human walking
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.