* 1825995
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating underlying mechanisms of primate shoulder adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Benjamin Auerbach, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 16,125.00

The way that an animal species behaves, moves, and interacts with its
environment is related in complex ways to the shape and function of its
skeleton. Investigating the functional relationships among different parts of
the skeleton, and the genetic underpinnings of functionally related traits, can
advance fundamental knowledge about form-function relationships and mechanisms
of biological adaptation and speciation. This doctoral dissertation project will
investigate the strength of the genetic connections among functionally related
traits in the primate shoulder, head, and neck regions, to elucidate processes
that led to the substantial anatomical diversity we see in modern primates, and
inform our interpretations of the primate and hominin fossil records. The
project promotes participation of under-represented groups in STEM research,
interdisciplinary research and collaboration, and the sharing of data with the
broader scientific community. The results of this project will be communicated
to the public through both traditional and online science outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primates show a wide range of variation in shoulder
anatomy and, relatedly, engage in diverse forms of movement. Researchers often
study these skeletal traits in isolation, but this approach makes the implicit
assumption that traits evolved independently, when in fact there may be other
traits in the upper body that are functionally and evolutionarily interconnected
with the shoulder. This study examines the many patterns of association in
shoulder-related skeletal dimensions across ten primate taxa, each with unique
functional demands on the upper limb. The investigators will evaluate different
evolutionary scenarios of species diversification to identify underlying
evolutionary processes. The strength of the genetic connections among traits
(morphological integration) and how these connections affect the ability of
traits to evolve (evolvability) will be assessed, and Bayesian phylogenetic
comparative methods will be used to evaluate the factors and evolutionary
processes affecting the observable variation in primate shoulder
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.