* 1825594
* Manufacturing of Two-Dimensional Metal-Organic Framework Nanosheets by Two-Phase Solution Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Bin Mu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge in the manufacturing
of two-dimensional metal-organic framework nanosheets, which are a new class of
technologically important materials. Two-dimensional materials have attracted
significant attention due to their unique properties in comparison to their bulk
counterparts. Two-dimensional metal-organic framework nanosheets have emerged
and received interest due to their atomically-thin layers and large surface
areas with highly accessible active sites. The judicious combination of varied
metal clusters and organic ligands generate desired structural and functional
properties, which make two-dimensional metal-organic framework nanosheets occupy
a rather unique place in the field of two-dimensional materials. However, all
reported synthesis is on a lab scale through sonication-assisted approaches
causing low product yield, low purity, and low aspect ratio. This award supports
fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a two-
phase solution manufacturing process. The new process enables large scale
manufacturing of two-dimensional metal-organic frameworks with high aspect
ratios and fewer defects. Two-dimensional metal-organic framework nanosheets
have many potential applications, such as separations and catalysis, which
benefit the chemical and energy industries and, thus, the nation's economy and
prosperity. This research involves several disciplines including chemistry,
chemical engineering, materials science, and manufacturing. The multi-
disciplinary approach helps broaden participation of women and underrepresented
groups and K-12 students in research and positively impact Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of the two-phase
solution method provides a fundamental understanding of diffusion-controlled
approach to the bi-phase process design by elucidating the roles of
deprotonating agent, capping agent, and modulator. It also provides a general
principle to improve scalable nanomanufacturing of two-dimensional metal-organic
framework nanosheets by studying the processing kinetics and testing on a series
of new material sets. The research team studies factors affecting growth
direction and crystal size of the metal-organic framework nanosheets and
develops a method to control the interlayer forces in these nanosheets. A series
of capping agents, modulators, and deprotonating agents are explored to
elucidate their effects, while different metal ions, anions, and ligand
structures are used to manufacture these unique two-dimensional nanosheet
materials. Results from this research fills the knowledge gap on the mechanisms
of nanosheets formation during metal-organic framework synthesis from many
different material sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.