* 1825341
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Vulnerability of Mobile Home Parks to Disaster: A Longitudinal Study of Affordable Housing Loss After Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrew Rumbach, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2023
* USD 439,711.00

Hundreds of mobile home parks located in diverse geographic, political, and
demographic parts of the Houston area were flooded during Hurricane Harvey. This
project examines the damage and tracks the recovery of those parks over time
using a combination of geospatial, qualitative, and quantitative research
methods. This research design will identify the reasons for differential damage
and recovery across parks. This scientific research contribution thus supports
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national
welfare. In this case, the benefits will be new knowledge about the
vulnerability of the mobile home parks to natural hazards and methods to
mitigate risks. The project provides training and mentoring for a diverse group
of student researchers, and its findings will be incorporated into graduate
education programs. The study's methodology, modeling framework, and key
findings will be made available to policy-makers and planning practitioners
through a mobile home park vulnerability assessment guide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will identify and analyze factors that influence
post-disaster mobile home park recovery, defined by park closure, rebuilding,
housing loss, and change in assessed value. A geospatial database of all Houston
mobile home parks that experienced flooding will be created to analyze exposure.
It will be populated with data from a recovery survey of park owners at one and
two years after Harvey and spatial, regulatory and socio-demographic information
on parks. Interviews with mobile home park owners, resident leadership, and
local officials, and analysis of codes and plans will be conducted in 15-20
mobile home parks strategically sampled from the study population. Indicators
representing the factors that enable or impede park recovery will be tested
across the study population using quantitative modeling techniques. Results will
be interpreted and disseminated to provide a better understanding of
vulnerability in mobile home parks, a critical though understudied component of
the U.S. affordable housing supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.