* 1825126
* Research:  D eveloping  E ngineering  E xperiences and  P athways in Engineering Technology Career  Formation (D.E.E.P. Engineering Technology Career Formation)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Claretha Hughes, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 274,879.00

Absent from most discussions of the future of the U.S. engineering technical
workforce, has been the role of engineering technology education in supporting
the nation's technical infrastructure and capacity for innovation. According to
the Department of Education, in 2014 over half of engineering related
credentials (53%) awarded are in certificate, two-year degrees, or engineering
technology, yet there is little understanding of this field and role that these
workers play. The purpose of this research project is to develop a greater
understanding of the professional identity, institutional culture, and formation
of engineering technicians and technologists prepared at two-year colleges.
Understanding the role engineering technology education plays and can play in
supporting the nation's technical infrastructure and capacity for innovation is
essential as engineering scholars seek to enhance the careers of future
engineers. This study represents a multi-institutional research partnership
between Clemson University, the University of Arkansas, and Tri-County Technical
College. This increased understanding will provide insights into shaping
targeted educational programs, career counseling, professional development, new
policies and strategies to support engineering technology students, promote
career guidance, and increase professional satisfaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three primary objectives of this study: (1)
Identify dimensions of career orientations at various stages of professional
preparation and map to engineering technology career pathways by surveying
engineering technology students, transfer students, and early career engineering
technology professionals using Schein's Career Anchor Inventory; (2) Develop an
empirical framework, incorporating individual career anchors and the effect of
institutional culture, for understanding engineering technology professional
formation informed by the Hughes Values Framework; and (3) Develop and pilot
interventions aimed at transforming engineering formation systems in engineering
technology contexts. This study will utilize a mixed methods research design
focusing on both descriptive and correlational analyses of data. Three
integrated theoretical frameworks, Social Cognitive Career Theory, Schein's
Career Anchor Inventory (online surveys of engineering technology students and
professionals), and the Hughes Value Creation Model for Organizational
Competitive Advantage (open-ended interviews with students, professionals, and
engineering technology institutions/organizations) will be integrated. The use
of multiple theories provides an evidence-based framework building new
interdisciplinary perspectives and understanding focused on describing and
comparing engineering technology pathways and understandings of professional
identity and culture. The outcomes of this research study are expected to
address and bring awareness to an existing gap in engineering technology and
two-year college engineering education research which will impact teaching and
learning in both formal and informal settings, reveal new pathways and critical
transition points, and impact career preparation and training in the engineering
education and human resource development fields. Additional benefits of this
study include catalyzing interaction of researchers and practitioners with
policy-makers and the public on outcomes and challenges related to career
development and institutional cultural impact in engineering technology
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.