* 1825046
* CNH-L: Land-Climate-Water Feedbacks and Farmer Decision-Making in an Agricultural System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jill Caviglia-Harris, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,449,984.00

This project examines how clearing forests for agriculture impacts regional
water cycles and how these changes, in turn, affect agricultural production. The
research will expand the emerging field of socio-hydrology (the study of the
feedbacks between human decisions and water systems) by focusing on how land-use
choices made by farmers influence water availability and thus alter the
productivity of agricultural land. Understanding the relationships between land-
use change, water, and agriculture is crucial to balancing tradeoffs between the
environmental costs associated with converting forests and other natural
habitats to crop fields and pasture, and the need to increase food production to
meet growing demands as global populations and incomes rise. This project will
contribute to the health and welfare of the United States and elsewhere by
informing choices about how to increase agricultural output while limiting
impacts on water, atmosphere and biodiversity. It will enhance research and
education infrastructure by expanding a scientifically relevant and publicly-
available dataset linking a survey of farm households to data and models of land
and water use. Lastly, it will develop capacity in interdisciplinary research
through the training of students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land-use decisions of individual farmers can
aggregate up to landscape-level changes that influence the regional hydroclimate
in ways that alter the availability of water for agricultural production,
including both soil moisture or 'green' water and surface/ground or 'blue'
water. How farmers adjust their investment and land-use decisions in response to
water scarcity has implications for agricultural productivity and ultimately the
supply of agricultural commodities. This project will advance basic scientific
knowledge of the dynamic feedbacks among agricultural production choices,
regional environmental variability, and vulnerability to water stress. It will
address questions of how environmental variability and land-use changes affect
the regional hydroclimate and property-level green and blue water; the extent to
which individual farmers are vulnerable to variation in green and blue water and
how they adapt; and how inter-related farmer production decisions aggregate to
determine water, land-use, production and welfare outcomes under different
policy scenarios. Data from a unique long-term household panel survey
(1996-2018) will be combined with data and models of land cover, climate and
hydrology to understand the effects of the regional hydroclimate on property-
level water availability and the effects of water availability on agricultural
production decisions. Analysis of the property-level empirical relationships
will inform an agent-based model (ABM) that will be linked with a regional
climate model to assess the aggregate consequences of these feedbacks for land-
use, agricultural output and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.