* 1825709
* Understanding Pedestrian Dynamics for Seamless Human-Robot Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yi Guo, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 358,535.00

In the near future, robots will navigate alongside people in busy, crowded and
unconstrained environments such as shopping malls, airports and elder-care
facilities. Current mobile robot motion planners are inadequate because current
models of pedestrian dynamics do not fully capture the complexity of human
motion behavior in crowds. As a result, robots can "freeze" in places where
crowd density is high, which further impedes pedestrian traffic flow. This
project will use novel machine learning techniques to develop a robot motion
planner with human-like navigations features. The project team will use
objective and subjective performance measures to evaluate the predictability and
acceptability of human-robot interactions with robots and their novel control
algorithms deployed in shopping malls and campus buildings. This project serves
the national interest because the resulting pedestrian dynamics modeling methods
and robot controllers may result in public safety applications such as emergency
evacuations and crowd planning/management. The project will involve an
educational component that provides engineering and research methods training to
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as STEM outreach to high-school and
middle-school students. Additional efforts will be made to attract and retain
women into careers in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates new control methodologies that promise improved
pedestrian/mobile-robot navigation through crowded and unconstrained
environments. Methods include the extraction of features related to pedestrian
behavior from existing datasets and their use in training a deep neural network
(DNN) to model pedestrian dynamics; the use of inverse reinforcement learning to
generate a cost map that humans follow to navigate; the implementation of the
map within a robot motion controller; and the experimental testing and
validation of the controller in real-world human environments using objective
and subjective performance criteria. The experimental and evaluation data will
be made available for use by the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.