* 1825583
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic Diversity of the Colonial Chesapeake: Insights into Kinship and the Trans-Atlantic Colonization of the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Theodore Schurr, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 07/31/2021
* USD 32,200.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the impact of kinship in
shaping patterns of present-day human genetic diversity and explore ancestries
of individuals in the African diaspora in the United States. The investigators
will characterize the genomic diversity of archaeological individuals and
descendant populations from the 17th century Chesapeake colonies of Maryland,
Virginia, and Delaware. This project's interdisciplinary approach combines DNA
data from past and contemporary descendant populations with archeological,
archival and historical information to better understand how demographic
processes in the past have shaped present-day genetic variation. The
investigators will work closely with historical and genealogical societies and
hold outreach workshops discussing the application of genetics to inform
historical, family, and personal genealogical research questions. These
workshops will contribute to public science education for adult learners,
enhancing scientific literacy surrounding the interpretation of genetic ancestry
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a diachronic assay
of genetic variation to assess the impact of kinship in shaping patterns of
human genetic diversity in colonization contexts. They will collaborate with
historical and genealogical societies to recruit 150 study participants with
genealogical ties to the 17th century Chesapeake colonies and characterize
mitochondrial DNA, Y-chromosome and autosomal SNP variation using the GenoChip
2.0 microarray. Complete mitochondrial and whole nuclear genome shotgun
sequencing will also be conducted on 29 individuals from two archaeological
sites, Patuxent Point (1650-1680, Maryland) and Avery's Rest (1680-1710,
Delaware). Patterns of genetic ancestry and levels of endogamy within these
sample populations will be characterized to determine geographic origins and
possible kin relations. The results will provide insights into the population
dynamics of the first 100 years of European colonization and the genetic legacy
of colonization in the Chesapeake region, and provide ancient DNA data from 17th
century European colonists and enslaved African individuals from colonial North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.