* 1825362
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: City Living And Biological Frailty
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* James Wood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 13,734.00

While increased population density and the growth of cities are often thought to
be important sources of social and economic opportunity, the potential negative
effects of urbanization can sometimes harm human health. In living societies,
increasing settlement and population density can be accompanied by greater
exposure and susceptibility to dangerous infectious diseases, social inequality,
unsanitary living conditions, and unstable food supplies. Paleodemography; the
study of human populations in the archaeological past based on skeletal remains
- can provide important insights into the complex relationships between people,
their social and physical environments, and their diseases even in the absence
of written historical records. This project will investigate the effects of
urbanization on human health and the risk of death in medieval Denmark (c. AD
1050-1536) to disentangle the social and biological influences on human health
in changing populations. In paleodemography, "frailty" is defined as an
individual's age-adjusted risk of death. Frailty can vary owing to individual
differences in susceptibility to disease and death that may have underlying
genetic, social, or environmental causes. New statistical analyses of skeletal
samples from medieval Denmark will be used to determine how patterns of
variation in frailty and risk of death in the past differed as a result of
increased urbanization during the medieval period. This project will inform us
about the role of urbanization in past preindustrial populations that dealt with
the same illnesses and conditions that continue to influence people today, and
as such will provide insight into how to avoid emerging health risks. Broader
impacts of this study include museum exhibitions, public science outreach
efforts (particularly aimed at promoting the role of women in scientific
research), and continued international collaborations.

This dissertation project brings together established paleodemographic
approaches and a new model of frailty, along with newly-developed statistical
methods, to investigate the relationship between childhood and adult frailty and
the risk of death from skeletal data in order to determine the effects of
urbanization on age-at-death distributions from medieval Denmark. Skeletal
remains from the Ole Wormsgade urban cemetery, Sejet rural parish cemetery, and
the monastic cemetery of Om Kloster, which represent samples of the people who
occupied the area in and near the medieval port city of Horsens on the eastern
coast of Jutland, Denmark, will be examined. These samples will be analyzed to
determine: (1) how frailty and age-at-death patterns differed as a result of
urbanization over the medieval period, (2) how males and females were affected
differently by their social and physical environments within and across the
three samples, and (3) what the relationship was between childhood frailty and
resulting adult frailty and mortality. These goals will be met by estimating
disease prevalence and the associated risk of death in relation to boney
indicators of childhood stress, infection, and malnutrition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.