* 1825535
* Investigating the Effectiveness of Machine Learning Paradigms for Supporting Engineering Designers in Rapidly Evolving Digital Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Timothy Simpson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2022
* USD 424,743.00

Manufacturing technology is advancing at an unprecedented rate as it become
increasingly digital. Taking advantage of new manufacturing technology is
critical for maintaining national security and prosperity, but even dedicated
experts and leading-edge companies struggle to keep pace with manufacturing's
rapid advancement. This makes it difficult for engineers to learn about the
latest manufacturing technology and design products that take full advantage of
new fabrication processes as they become available. Fortunately, many new
manufacturing technologies rely on digital models that produce abundant design
data to which machine learning can be applied to derive design knowledge. While
design and manufacturing datasets may be useful for that reason, they are also
highly variable in both number and quality of solutions. This work investigates
how the size and quality of these datasets relate to the accuracy and usefulness
of machine learning insights, and how this impacts the support provided to
engineering designers. In this work, we focus on additive manufacturing (also
called "3D printing") as a representative digital manufacturing technology that
is rapidly evolving and growing, and which is projected to contribute
substantially to the nation?s future manufacturing portfolio. Studies conducted
with engineering students as part of this work will be used to provide skill
training as well as collect data, helping prepare them for the manufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will combine machine learning,
additive manufacturing, and explainable artificial intelligence to evaluate the
use of automated design feedback derived from existing crowdsourced additive
manufacturing design challenges. First, part designs will be mined from open,
online repositories as well as through curated repositories established in this
work via in-class design challenges. Next, a machine learning pipeline will be
implemented to extract design patterns from curated digital repositories. This
will make it possible to test the effect of repository size on the accuracy of
design feedback and of repository size on the granularity of feedback. Finally,
a user validation study will be conducted in which students will undertake a
design task specific to additive manufacturing technology. Feedback with varying
characteristics will be provided to some participants by extending the machine
learning pipeline developed previously with explainable capabilities. Specific
technical deliverables will include (1) a novel dataset of voxelized part
designs, (2) a deeper understanding of the impact of repository size and quality
on usefulness of machine-generated feedback, and (3) empirical evidence of the
impact of real-time additive manufacturing feedback on the solutions generated
by engineering designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.