* 1825023
* Developing Experiential Laboratories for Computing Accessibility Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Paul Tymann, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,994.00

This proposal aims to address the shortage of computer software that can be
easily used by people with disabilities. Working with the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf, the project will develop a set of five experiential
"Accessibility Learning Labs." These labs will be designed to raise awareness of
accessibility challenges faced by users with disabilities and to teach students
how to write accessible software. The self-contained labs will be appropriate
for both foundational computing courses (e.g., Computer Science 1) and upper-
level computing courses at two and four-year institutions. Providing instructors
with teaching materials, including videos, lecture slides and activities, will
facilitate the adoption of the Accessibility Learning Labs by other
institutions. The labs will be written entirely in HTML/CSS and JavaScript,
meaning that they will work on any computer that has a modern web browser and
Internet connectivity. By making these labs broadly accessible, this strategy
will increase their potential to improve computer science education and increase
the development of accessible software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to improve computing accessibility education. Every lab developed for the
project will contain information about an accessibility requirement and an
emulation feature to demonstrate the accessibility challenge to non-disabled
users. Labs will include steps to address the accessibility problem and
demonstrate ways in which the particular problem has been addressed. Every lab
will also contain empathy-creating materials such as videos of users with
disabilities describing how inaccessible software lowers the quality of their
digital lives. A project strength is its collaboration with National Technical
Institute for the Deaf, RIT's Access Services, and the Association for the Blind
and Visually Impaired to verify the fidelity of the labs. This collaboration
will also aid in evaluating the effectiveness of the labs at generating
awareness of the need for accessible software and at helping computer science
students learn how to create it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.