* 1825256
* Collaborative Research: Wafer-Scale Nanomanufacturing of 2D Atomic Layer Material Heterostructures Through Exfoliation and Transfer
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Kyusang Lee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2021
* USD 222,473.00

Two-dimensional atomic layer materials are strong candidate materials for
semiconductor and energy device technologies. When stacked together three-
dimensional heterogeneous nanostructures are formed. Owing to weak vertical
interaction between two-dimensional materials, their heterostructures display
unique device functionality and novel physical phenomena. However, it has been
extremely challenging to fabricate such two-dimensional building blocks and
three-dimensional heterostructures from them due to a lack of methodology to
control layer numbers and limited manufacturing scale. This award supports both
modeling and experimental research to develop a low-cost nanomanufacturing
process of wafer-scale two-dimensional materials-based heterostructures through
exfoliation and transfer. This technology offers unique features of enabling
preparation of a wide range of freestanding monolayer two-dimensional materials
and providing the potential for heterogeneous integration at wafer-scale. The
success of this project broadly impacts high performance, atomically-thin
semiconductor device technologies, such as new transistors, solar cells, light
emitting diodes (LEDs), photodetectors, lasers, and sensors that could touch
every aspect of daily life. Therefore, results from this research benefits both
the U.S. economy and society. The project's broader impacts plans involve
learning to apply textbook theories to industrial applications through intensive
nano-engineering lab modules, which includes results from the exfoliation and
transfer process to fabricate heterostructures of 2D materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Layer Resolved Splitting (LRS) process
enables manufacturing of wafer-scale heterogeneously integrated two-dimensional
(2D) atomic layer building blocks by precisely controlling the exfoliation and
transfer of a wide variety of 2D materials. The research team demonstrates the
feasibility of the LRS technique to manufacture multiple monolayer materials at
wafer-scale by performing "one growth" of multiple layers of 2D materials on the
wafer. Furthermore, the proposed dry stacking process substantially improves the
performance of wafer-scale heterostructures compared to heterostructures
prepared by wet stacking. Eventually, this project opens up new opportunities in
2D materials research by providing a reliable platform to manufacture monolayer-
resolved wafer-scale 3D heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.