* 1825254
* Collaborative Research: Chemical and Dynamic Heterogeneities in Interfaces for Adaptive Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Rahmi Ozisik, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2022
* USD 319,816.00

Polymer composites are widely used as lightweight functional materials for a
breadth of applications, including sensors, wearable electronics, and biomedical
applications. These materials, however, often suffer from low mechanical
strength, particularly at elevated temperatures. Soft hybrid materials with high
strength under extreme conditions have been developed at small scales, but to
scale these materials up to manufacturing capacities, the fundamental mechanisms
of controlling the mechanical behavior of these materials must be understood.
This award supports fundamental research to uncover the underlying physics and
chemistry that control the high mechanical and functional performance of
adaptive polymer nanocomposites. The scientific knowledge resulting from this
research has the potential to enable a new class of high-performance materials,
and the combined experimental and computational approaches build on an
educational paradigm that provides opportunities for students participating in
the research, training the next generation workforce in advanced engineering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A driving motivation of this research is to
develop mechanically adaptive materials based on the unique dynamic behavior of
nanocomposites. The material system of interest consists of miscible polymers
with large differences in glass transition temperature (Tg), coupled with a
dispersion of nanoparticles. Spherical nanoparticles adsorbed within a high-Tg
polymer and dispersed in a low-Tg polymer matrix have been shown to result in a
thermally-induced stiffening behavior. In this research program, the
investigators examine the role of chemical and dynamic heterogeneities in
particle-polymer interfaces of such polymer nanocomposites to understand the
mechanical characteristics of adaptivity. Chemical heterogeneities in
interfacial polymer layer are studied to explain the reinforcement phenomena in
different polymer architectures and with different particle shapes (nanotubes
and nanospheres). Conformation of chains, in looped, stretched, and collapsed
states, will be explored via molecular dynamic computational simulations to
support the experimental results. Computer simulations are designed to run in
parallel with experiments to guide experimental work and to inform material
design space. More importantly, the influence of various molecular physical
parameters such as chain stiffness can be identified by these simulations.
Deformation of polymer nanocomposites under large oscillatory shear will be
utilized to reveal the fundamental mechanism of adaptive mechanics in
composites. Existing network theories will be used to analyze the non-linear
rheological data and the effects of different polymer architectures on particle
behavior. The knowledge gained from this project will transform the current
knowledge of static properties of nanocomposites to extend to dynamically
adaptive polymer hybrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.