* 1825761
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Consistent Nursing Home Staff Planning under Heterogeneous Service Demand
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hongdao Meng, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 302,055.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will
advance the national health by improving the delivery of health-care to the
growing sector of the population served by nursing homes. Nursing homes are
responsible for caring for the frail and vulnerable population of older adults
who suffer from diverse chronic diseases, functional limitations and
impairments. They must coordinate distinct caregivers to provide patients with
round-the-clock physical and emotional care and assistance. Because of growing
demand due to immutable population demographics, rapidly increasing health-care
costs, and escalating nursing staff shortage, proper care for nursing home
residents is at-risk. The goal of this project is to improve long-term nursing
home quality of care and reduce costs using analytical methods and tools to
realize proactive, resident-centered staffing plans. This project will improve
workforce planning, recruitment and allocation decisions for nursing home
managers, reduce stress and burn-out by better balancing workloads for nursing
home staff, and enhance health outcomes for nursing home residents by better
meeting their diverse care needs. The close involvement of the engineering team
with a nursing home operator and national aging health policy experts will also
help transform nursing home culture into delivering more resident-centered and
home-like care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be achieved
through the development of a set of innovative models, algorithms, and decision
tools. A predictive data analytics model and efficient estimation algorithms
will be developed to characterize heterogeneous service need trajectories and
length-of-stays of nursing home residents for service demand prediction
improvement at the resident level. A two-stage stochastic programming model and
efficient numerical optimization algorithms will be developed for consistent
nursing home staff planning under service demand fluctuation and uncertainty. To
maximize the practical relevance of research deliverables, a decision support
system will be also developed to evaluate and validate the work in a real-world
nursing home setting through our academic-industrial partnership with Greystone
Healthcare Management Corporation and industry-scale solution deployment in
their facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.