* 1825678
* Understanding Impacts of Social Network Interventions on Engineering Project Outcomes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Dong Zhao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 02/29/2024
* USD 529,000.00

This project will conduct fundamental research to understand how team
interactions across disciplines and organizations in complex engineering
projects impact project outcomes by studying teams on large engineering
projects. Engineering project performance depends on both the performance of
individuals and the networks through which knowledge flows between team members.
These networks impact information access and the ability of team members to
coordinate as they work towards common goals. Establishing efficient knowledge
transfer networks is a challenge in engineering project teams, but there is
limited evidence about specific impacts of network structure and dynamics on
project outcomes. Using information about the distribution of expertise in a
project network at any given time, this study will evaluate specific network
interventions for their potential to improve knowledge transfer-related behavior
in individuals or groups and whether this has a positive impact on project
outcomes. The study will focus on construction projects for LEED-certified
buildings, but the results will be relevant to large systems engineering
projects in many industries, including manufacturing, civil infrastructure,
aerospace, and defense. Outcomes will include extensive observational data of
the projects, statistical analyses of the data, and an engineering solution to
systematically improve coordination in project teams and enhance project
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to advance understanding
of how manipulating interactions across disciplinary boundaries in inter-
organizational engineering project teams can improve individual, sub-group, and
project performance. The study will adopt a longitudinal, comparative research
design with two architecture, engineering, and construction project teams, one
of which will be treated with social network interventions. The research team
will pursue an exploratory approach to examine network characteristics and
collaboration mediums that can lead to improved individual and team performance
and the links between team performance and project outcomes. A quantitative
approach will be followed to test the impact of interventions on individual and
sub-group performance. The multiple cycles of interventions will inform how
engineering project teams react to network interventions at the individual and
sub-group levels to improve project performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.