* 1825801
* Fur Anti-Fouling via Physiological Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Andrew Dickerson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 453,805.00

Surfaces such as those of pipes, trees or stones that are frequently covered in
water are highly vulnerable to the growth of extensive films of bacteria. Even
though bacteria grow on almost everything that is frequently in the water, furry
mammals who live in and around the water of ponds rivers, streams and the ocean
do not suffer from thick bacterial films on their fur. Extensive growth of
bacteria causes "biofouling," when the bacteria interfere with the function of a
man-made system. The consequences of biofouling are of major concern as they
include reduced hydrodynamic efficiency, reduced buoyancy, surface corrosion,
flow blockage and contamination. The first bacteria that colonize a surface make
a "primed surface" on which macroscale foulers (e.g., algae and barnacles) can
congregate. It is the goal of this research to discover the combination of
mechanisms that keep fur fouler-free. The study will address the commonly
overlooked function of fur in mammalian survival, its ability to resist
biofouling, thereby illuminating its role beyond insulation. A potential outcome
of this research will be the discovery of new mechanisms to prevent to growth of
bacteria on surfaces, which will further the economic goals of the United States
by significantly reducing the need for surface maintenance for structures
exposed to water. This work will enrich graduate and undergraduate curricula
offered by the PI and Co-PIs. The project team will create an educational
website, 'Hairy Tales,' to provide a platform for K-12 outreach related to this
work. Focus will be given to providing research opportunities to minority
students and students with diverse backgrounds via the University of Central
Florida Office of Diversity and Inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this research is the characterization of fur's resistance to biofouling
by the consideration of its properties at various length scales, ranging from
individual follicle texture and bending properties, to array morphology and
aggregate texture. Fur's anti-fouling mechanisms will be characterized using
representative furs from semi-aquatic and terrestrial mammals: North American
beaver, river otter, sea otter, and caribou. By exposing these furs to three
bacterial species that are common primary foulers, biofilm formation,
persistence, and disruption will be measured and compared. Singular hairs
submerged into liquid cultures containing proliferating bacteria will expose the
possible effect of (1) fiber surface topology and (2) deformability on microbial
attachment. Naturally arranged hides will (3) demonstrate the effectiveness of
fiber-to-fiber contact to stunt bacterial proliferation and enable self-
cleaning. Finally, (4) a fur's natural oils could impact fouler adhesion, which
will be tested by comparing biofilm formation on untreated fibers to those
cleaned of natural surfactants. These four experiments will unravel which
physical mechanisms of fur predominately contribute to
cleanliness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.