* 1825354
* Collaborative Research: Accurate Determination of Acoustic Wave Sources using Periodic Microstructured Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ankit Srivastava, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 237,453.00

The goal of this project is to exploit the dynamic behavior of microstructured
periodic materials to accurately locate the sources of sound waves. The
traditional method of identifying source location is using phased array sensors
whose precision is limited by the size of the sensor in comparison with the
wavelength of acoustic waves. This research will aim to use the vibrational
properties of periodic composites to improve determination of source location.
The principles developed will have direct application to radar and associated
technologies in both defense and civil applications. Through various outreach
efforts, this research will help in broadening the participation of the public
in the highly multi-disciplinary subject of waves and their
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Level Repulsion (LR) zones are frequency regions
where the state of a periodic microstructured material undergoes rapid change in
response to minute changes in a controlling parameter, e.g. wave incidence
angle. Therefore they may be utilized for precise measurement of their
controlling parameter, for example, the bearing angle of an incident stress
wave. The principal research objectives of this project are: (a) To determine
the conditions under which phononic eigenvalues coalesce to give rise to LR
zones and to exploit this to demonstrate that phononic crystals can act as
extremely sensitive directional sensors near LR zones; (b) To establish the
relationships between the sensitivity of localization and the topological
properties of LR zones in order to create tuned/tunable LR zones through
modulations in the geometry or material properties of the PC; and (c) To create
lab-scale phononic crystals and demonstrate the existence of LR zones, followed
by verification of precision and robustness of the developed source localization
methods in noisy and multisource environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.