* 1825104
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Estimation of Mantle Viscosity Structure and Geodynamic Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Maxwell Rudolph, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,100.00

Earth's mantle comprises more than 80% of our planet's interior, and convection
in the mantle is linked to plate tectonics, the magnetic field, volcanic
activity, and the gases in our atmosphere. Solid mantle rocks deform and flow
over long time scales, and the viscosity (resistance to flow) of mantle rocks
affects the rate of flow in the mantle, the energy budget of Earth's deep
interior, and the speed with which tectonic plates move past one another. One of
the best constraints on the mantle viscosity structure comes from modeling
variations in Earth's long-wavelength gravity field. The team will combine
mantle flow models, seismic images of the Earth's interior, and results from
mineral physics to better constrain the depth variation of viscosity and its
influence on mantle convection. The project will address the following
scientific questions: (1) How does viscosity vary with depth, (2) How does
viscosity structure affect behavior of buoyant, upwelling mantle material, and
(3) How does uncertainty in seismic images of Earth's mantle affect our
uncertainty in the viscosity profile? In addition to this research, the project
contributes to the training and professional development of a graduate student
and a postdoctoral researcher. Additionally, the team will work with a Portland-
area high school teacher to develop curricular materials to teach concepts
related to flow in the mantle from the Next Generation Science Standards.

Full waveform whole-mantle tomography has recently provided improved
measurements of lower mantle shear wave velocity anomalies. These images shed
new light on the behavior of mantle upwellings and downwellings. Wide plumes,
continuous from just above the core mantle boundary to the base of the
lithosphere, are resolved beneath many of Earth's active volcanic hot spots, and
plumes frequently appear to be deflected laterally below the transition zone, at
a depth of 1000 km, a depth not coincident with known seismic discontinuities,
but at which slabs stagnate, plumes are deflected, and changes in long-
wavelength radial correlation structure appear in many tomographic models.
Tomographic studies combining whole-Earth free oscillations with various other
seismological observations (e.g. body wave travel times, surface wave
dispersion, full waveforms) have recently improved constraints on the long-
wavelength variations in wavespeed in the transition zone and mid mantle. Recent
seismological data sets also suggest a deviation from simple scaling
relationships between density and shear velocity, indicative of large-scale
chemical heterogeneity in the lowermost mantle. The investigators will identify
robust aspects of recent tomographic models, estimate uncertainties associated
with their translation to density variations and employ a new inversion
technique that incorporates these results in a probabilistic way to obtain
improved constraints on the mantle viscosity structure. They will then use the
solutions as the basis for numerical mantle convection simulations to evaluate
the extent to which the inferred viscosity structures are compatible with
available constraints on the style of convection and rate of heat transport in
the mantle. In addition to training and mentoring of a graduate student and a
postdoctoral researcher, the investigating team will work with a high school
educator to develop curricular materials relevant to the Next Generation Science
Standard HS-ESS2-3.