* 1825122
* Design of Force-Sensitive Hydrogels for Adhesives and Strain Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 302,078.00

The adhesion of hydrogels on solid and soft surfaces, such as human skin,
biological tissues, and metal substrates, is important in many practical
applications, such as robust artificial tissues, smart robots, electronic skins,
and motion/damage sensors. These broad application areas indicate their
importance to developing key sectors of the US economy including health care and
defense systems. The generation of hydrogels with the appropriate level of
adhesion, and the need to re-adhere to a surface once removed, however, has been
very challenging. This research will focus on creation of a new family of
physically-based tough hydrogels and hydrogel adhesives with integrated superior
mechanical, self-healing, and stimuli-responsive properties in bulk and on solid
substrates. The use of two polymer networks in the hydrogel, with the networks
intertwined and possessing differing properties key to the performance of the
material, is a novel feature of the approach. One network could provide
mechanical toughness while the other network could lead to reformable adhesive
bonds to a surface leading to the incorporation of typically incompatible
properties. Once developed, the two polymer networks can also be used in the
fabrication of strain sensors for human motion detection in medical
applications. New knowledge, techniques, and materials derived from this project
will be important in the engineering and design of other soft materials and in
advancing the manufacture and performance of new smart materials. The project
will provide research opportunities to all-level students, particularly from
underrepresented groups, learning hands-on skills from polymer
physics/chemistry, lab-on-chip design, and ergonomic engineering, thus promoting
the next-generation of STEM education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Most of hydrogel
adhesives adhere weakly to diverse surfaces with very low adhesion energy,
easily lose adhesive capacity after multiple on-and-off peeling tests, and lack
self-recovery and self-healing functions to recover their adhesive and
mechanical properties. The current materials design strategy prevents both bulk
and interfacial toughness to be presented in the same hydrogel, because the bulk
and interfacial toughness of hydrogels stem from different origins. To overcome
these scientific barriers, this research strives to design a new family of
physically-linked double network hydrogels by understanding, coupling, and
engineering the interactions between different networks and the associated
energy mechanisms to achieve multiple force-activated functionalities, including
high bulk/interfacial toughness, multiple-stimuli self-healing property, and
reversible adhesion both in bulk and on solid substrates, as well as to
fabricate the hydrogel adhesives into strain sensors with integrated multi-
functions for human motion detection. The function and performance of this new
class of physically-linked hydrogels will be controlled by tuning their network
components and structures in a programmable way. This research will advance
fundamental knowledge and practical principles for rational design of new smart
materials, better understanding of component-structure-property-performance
interrelationship of the materials, and improvement of materials multi-
functionality, processing, and fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.