* 1825070
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: Weaving the Fabric of Adaptive STEM Learning Environments Across Domains and Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Bryan Brown, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 99,999.00

This workshop is funded through the "Dear Colleague Letter: Principles for the
Design of Digital Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Learning Environments (NSF 18-017)." The goal of this workshop is to articulate
a transformative vision of future STEM learning for diverse learners across
domains and settings. It forges a nexus among the emerging (a) sciences of
learning, (b) assessment, and (c) big data to formulate frameworks and tools for
designing STEM learning environments. Taking an equity-first approach for
broadening participation through innovative designs, this project convenes
interdisciplinary teams to produce a white paper proposing forward-looking
digitally-augmented STEM environments that bridge formal and informal learning
contexts and are responsive to the needs to every learner. The white paper will
also articulate a future research agenda that could lead to new breakthroughs at
the Human-Technology Frontier. The open-invitation design workshop,
strategically located at Stanford University, and dissemination through a public
website and community outreach activities at key conferences in which these
scholarly communities convene will ensure broad awareness of and access to these
models, tools, frameworks, design principles, and research priorities for
educators, researchers, and analysts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop is
designed to construct needed new collaborations with the learning sciences,
psychometrics, and computer science to design integrative STEM learning
environments with robust in-process measures of adaptive learning that address
key aspects of deeper learning. It convenes innovators advancing the state-of-
the-art in equity-focused, technology-enhanced STEM learning, educational data
mining and learning analytics, and computational psychometrics, to develop
innovative ways to design and scale for a future of integrated STEM learning in
an era of big data. An infrastructure of generative new algorithms and knowledge
models, psychometric models, and learner pathway models will emerge from project
activities at the intersection of these disciplinary perspectives to transform
learning and assessment designs by incorporating signals from multimodal
learning analytics and software for multi-faceted measurement of academic
competencies. The project scope will be guided by three questions: (1) How can
learning environments for integrated STEM learning scale successful efforts
across diverse student populations and bridge formal and informal learning
contexts? (2) What innovative research methods, statistical techniques and
modeling formalisms are necessary to embed theoretical models in data-driven
computational approaches in order to capture, characterize and support causal
claims about individual and team-based learning, especially for complex, multi-
source streaming data? (3) How can multi-domain threaded learning progressions
be created for integrated learning and assessment of STEM
subjects?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.