* 1825582
* Fundamental Investigations of Adiabatic Shear Localization in Materials with Mesoscale Heterogeneities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Pradeep Guduru, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 441,413.00

Progress in critical technologies is often enabled by advances in development of
new materials, an important class of which is high-performance structural
materials. The primary function of these materials is to withstand severe
mechanical loads, often in harsh environments, with minimal weight. This award
supports fundamental research to develop new and relatively unexplored materials
in which the mesoscale structure of materials can be rationally designed to
result in superior performance. The project will advance future materials design
strategies for dynamic loading applications, examples of which include high
speed impact of protective armor, explosive loading of structures, and high-
speed machining, thereby advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare; and
securing national defense. The fundamental materials design principles that will
emerge from this research can be exploited by modern additive manufacturing
technologies in manufacturing materials with rationally designed mesoscale
architectures. In addition, the award supports educational activities for
undergraduate students who will work in multidisciplinary teams to develop short
educational animations and disseminate scientific discoveries in a manner
accessible to middle and high school students. The award also supports
development of educational modules for an outreach program at Brown University
that serves students from underrepresented groups in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program focuses on understanding the role of
mesoscale heterogeneities in the formation and propagation of adiabatic shear
bands (ASB), which are an important mechanism by which materials and structures
subjected to dynamic loading often fail catastrophically. The research aims to
experimentally investigate the mechanics of how a propagating ASB interacts with
a controlled heterogeneity through in situ high-speed microscopy, which is a new
technique capable of high spatial (up to 0.7 micrometer) and temporal (250 nsec)
resolutions simultaneously. When a propagating ASB encounters a heterogeneity of
controlled geometry and properties, there are several possible outcomes: the ASB
can get arrested, deflected or continue to propagate through and across the
heterogeneity. Through in-situ measurement of the transient deformation fields
during such interactions, the research seeks to determine the conditions under
which each outcome prevails. Computational simulations of ASB-heterogeneity
interactions will be carried out to interpret the experimental results, guide
the experimental design with respect to the choice of material properties and
geometry of the heterogeneities, and develop a predictive capability to help
design more complex mesoscale architectures. The new fundamental knowledge
gained from these studies can help develop novel mesoscale architectures with
significantly enhanced resistance to ASB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.