* 1825433
* Investigating the Forces that Transduce Mechanical Cues to Branching Neurons
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Bonnie Firestein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 558,601.00

Neurons, the basic cells of nerves, are one of the most difficult to regenerate
after disease or injury. If advances are going to be made in engineering systems
that support nerve regrowth and regeneration, it is imperative that we develop a
full understanding of how these cells respond to their biomechanical
environment. This study will investigate how changes in the extracellular
mechanical environment affects the development of neurons and the branching of
dendrite -- the structure that receives signals from other nerve cells.
Knowledge gained from this project will help to develop strategies that may
eventually improve treatments for degenerative neural diseases or following
nerve injury due to trauma. The research team will integrate students at all
levels, from graduate school through high school, as well as teachers into the
project. In addition, outreach will involve the development of hands-on projects
and demonstrations that can introduce the public to concepts of neuroscience,
imaging, and biomechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two hypotheses are being
investigated related to neuron growth and development within this project. The
first is that local structural changes associated with applied cell forces act
to transduce extracellular mechanical cues to the cytoskeleton. The second is
that local changes in cellular tension in response to changes in the
extracellular mechanical microenvironment act to transduce extracellular
mechanical cues to the cytoskeleton. The research team will make use of a
vinculin force sensor for which the tension can be measured using Forster
resonance energy transfer (FRET). This mechanical measurement will be combined
with fluorescence imaging of the cytoskeletal dynamics. Thus, the specific aims
of this project are to: 1) demonstrate that vinculin expression changes as a
function of substrate stiffness and tension; 2) demonstrate that vinculin
tension is altered in response to changes in substrate stiffness and investigate
the role of integrin, cadherin, and neurotransmitter receptors in mediating this
response; and 3) investigate the relationship between vinculin tension,
microtubule assembly, and the resulting dendritic
branching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.