* 1825942
* Collaborative Research: Learning to Control Dynamically Complex Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Dagmar Sternad, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 418,961.00

Human sensorimotor capabilities vastly out-perform those of modern robots. Prior
research suggests that humans achieve skillful movement by exploiting
combinations of "dynamic primitives", which are robust building blocks of
coordination that simplify control. Interaction with complex objects - such as
spreading a tablecloth - requires prediction which, in turn, requires mental
representations of the objects and environment. This project explores the extent
to which such mental models may also take the form of dynamic primitives. The
project team will perform fundamental research exploring: how humans learn to
manipulate a complex flexible object through the composition of dynamic
primitives; the impact of explicit instruction on the acquisition of the mental
models; and whether a primitive-based control structure to be implemented in a
robot can achieve skillful manipulation of complex objects and fluid
interactions between humans and robot. This project serves the national interest
because the resulting understanding of human sensorimotor control and robot
control methods may result in improved efficacy of robot-assisted physical
rehabilitation after neuromotor injuries such as stroke, where safe physical
cooperation with humans is fundamental and mutual learning is of paramount
importance. The project will involve an educational component that provides
engineering and research methods training to graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as STEM outreach to individuals of all ages at the Museum of
Science in Boston. Additional efforts will be made to attract and retain women
into careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates a biomimetic approach to robot control that promise improved human-
robot physical interaction during co-manipulation of flexible objects with
complex continuum dynamics. Methods include skill acquisition experiments
involving expert and novice human subjects to test how mental representations
are formed and the extent to which they may be shaped by explicit instruction
during training; a theoretical study of how motor learning may be facilitated
using mental models based on dynamic primitives vs. lumped mechanical
properties; and a study of human-robot co-manipulation of flexible objects
wherein dynamic primitives provide the basis not only for robotic control, but
also for communication and mutual learning between the human and robot partners.
This research promises new insights into the manipulation of complex objects and
tools, an area where humans still outperform machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.