* 1825123
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Potential for Urban Resilience Planning to Mitigate Long-term Flood Risks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Shannon Van Zandt, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2022
* USD 205,622.00

Costs from flooding continue to rise because of the isolation in most
communities of hazard mitigation planning from land use planning processes.
Resilience planning that recognizes the interdependencies between disasters and
the constant stressors cities face, such as poverty, aging infrastructure, and
social inequity, has emerged as a new framework to coordinate flood mitigation
and planning. This project examines how resilience is translated into practice,
whether it fosters collaboration across city departments and stakeholders, and
if this collaboration leads to more integrative plans that reduce vulnerability
to flooding. New knowledge will be acquired regarding how resilience planning
shapes urban governance at a time when flooding poses an increasingly serious
threat for communities. This scientific research contribution thus supports
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national
welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights for local practitioners
about the governance of resilience efforts and for federal, state, and non-
profit officials on how to foster local resilience. The project will educate
future resilience planning professionals through the development and
implementation of educational case studies and participation of graduate
students throughout the research process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
surveys, interviews, social network analysis, and plan evaluation in four cities
at the forefront of resilience planning, this study provides critical and timely
information about the governance structures and planning processes that address
long-term flood risk. Specifically, the objectives of this study are to: (1)
examine how public, private, and community actors who are engaged in flood
mitigation efforts interpret and operationalize the concept of resilience; (2)
characterize inter-organizational connectivity around flood resilience planning
by analyzing urban governance networks with social network analysis; (3) assess
and compare the quality, consistency, and level of integration among different
types of city plans that impact flooding; and (4) evaluate the influence of
different conceptualizations of resilience and governance network structures on
cities? plans and policies. The project will combine social network analysis
with assessment of plan quality and integration. By comparing plan quality and
integration with measures of network collaboration, results will address the
widely cited claim that collaboration leads to better and more integrated plans
that are more likely to reduce flood damages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.