* 1825386
* Understanding the Mechanism and Kinetics of Pyrrhotite-induced Damage in Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Aleksandra Radlinska, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 332,652.00

This research will deliver fundamental knowledge necessary to rapidly and
reliably distinguish durable from deleterious aggregates for concrete.
Specifically, it will focus on mechanisms and kinetics of pyrrhotite-induced
damage in concrete, a situation that has devastated some residential communities
in the northern United States. Challenges in identifying and procuring high
quality and durable construction aggregate are on the rise, as good quality
virgin aggregates are being depleted. Sustainable management of natural
resources requires a well-thought-out philosophy of using the remaining
supplies. This project will lead to identifying optimal protocols for detection
and quantification of pyrrhotite reactivity in concrete. By enabling science-
driven selection of the aggregates, the costs of remediating premature
deterioration and concrete degradation can be reduced. As such, societal and
economic benefits are high and translate into new knowledge and technology to
design sustainable built environment. The outcomes of this project will ensure
safety, serviceability and continued use of concrete buildings and structures,
along with protecting health and financial livelihood of their owners and
occupants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pyrrhotite damage in concrete is a result of
deleterious expansions taking place when pyrrhotite (an abundant sulfide mineral
in aggregates) oxidizes in contact with moisture and atmospheric oxygen, forming
expansive iron hydroxides and sulfuric acid inside concrete. The latter
subsequently leads to secondary damages, including acid attack, sulfate attack,
and rebar corrosion. To date, pyrrhotite oxidation has been analyzed only in the
context of acid mine drainage (low pH). The novelty of this research is in
thorough investigation of pyrrhotite oxidation in concrete environment.
Specifically, the effects of pH, temperature, RH, and oxygen level on the
magnitude and rate of reaction and damage evolution in concrete will be
quantified. Selective dissolution of Fe-oxide phases will be conducted and
geochemical calculations executed to calculate volumetric changes resulting from
pyrrhotite reactivity. Integrated oxygen transport and thermodynamic models will
be created for rapid and reliable assessment and prediction of damage. While
developed for pyrrhotite-related degradation, this transformative approach will
be applicable to a wide array of aggregate-induced damages in
concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.