* 1825444
* Collaborative Research: Knowledge and Data-driven Design of Mechanical Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Meredith Silberstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,075.00

Traditionally, materials have been designed through choices of molecular level
composition and structure. With the advent of increasingly sophisticated
material-forming techniques like additive manufacturing, structures repeated at
microscale are also now being used to realize effective overall properties;
these materials are termed "metamaterials". The most obvious gain for
metamaterials versus traditional fully dense materials is in weight and material
consumption, but there are also responses that are simply not achievable with
fully dense polymers. In particular, 3D printing of polymers has reached a
critical threshold of quality, speed, and size at which it can be used for
production rather than just prototyping. The geometry within the repeated
structural cell of a metamaterial critically influences the overall properties.
Determining the optimal geometry requires a design framework distinct from that
used for dense materials. This work will explore innovative ways of combining
expert knowledge (i.e., physical laws, models, heuristics) and databases of
actual and simulated material behaviors, using advanced machine learning and
search algorithms to foster the discovery of metamaterials with desired
properties. Progress in the project will promote the new field of data-driven
design as well as advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare by
facilitating the design of advanced materials with hitherto unknown, yet
desirable combination of properties. Beyond this technological impact, this
grant will serve to prepare the next generation of students for a new era of
design for intelligent materials and structures. Doctoral, undergraduate, high
school, and middle school students will be reached through in-lab research
experiences and design outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
objective of this work is to create a design method for 3D printable elastomeric
metamaterials that leverages both available engineering knowledge and data. The
design space of interest will include two distinct geometry classes -- lattice
materials and minimum energy surfaces. The methodology in this project will
leverage physics-based models, existing knowledge, and data to minimize the
resources needed to reach an acceptable design. The intermediate research
objectives are to: (1) formulate and validate a comprehensive set of low
computational cost mechanics models for lattice and minimum surface energy style
metamaterials, together with a set of heuristics for designing such materials;
(2) develop data-driven surrogate models and identify sources of and quantify
uncertainty in predicted mechanical properties of 3D printed mechanical
metamaterials; (3) develop knowledge representations and data fusion strategies
to incorporate expert knowledge including physical laws, heuristics, and beliefs
into the design of 3D printed metamaterials. In contrast to the current state-
of-the-art for metamaterial design, the design framework that is produced by
this grant will be well oriented to accommodate large deformation. This will
facilitate design of printed metamaterials for properties such as toughness and
failure strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.