* 1825787
* Fabrication of High Performance Metasurfaces by Nanoimprinting of Refractive Index
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Judson Ryckman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 404,349.00

This grant supports manufacturing research that advances knowledge pertaining to
the fabrication of optical devices, an effort which promotes scientific progress
in emerging technologies with the potential to advance national health,
prosperity, and defense. Specifically, this research advances key capabilities
in cost-effective nanomanufacturing of components known as metasurfaces, which
can be tailored to manipulate light with almost arbitrary wavefront shaping
control. This important technology holds relevance in areas such as biomedical
imaging, optical communications, laser imaging detection and ranging, and
optical management for laser trapping and solar energy applications. Nearly all
currently available manufacturing processes for producing metasurfaces rely on
structuring optical materials through patterning followed by material etching or
deposition. This general approach faces fundamental limitations which impact
metasurface performance, manufacturing yield, and scalability. This project
conducts fundamental research that investigates an innovative fabrication
pathway wherein a material's optical properties are directly manipulated and
patterned at high resolution without any deposition or etching. In addition to
supporting the fabrication of existing metasurface architectures this approach
uniquely enables new metasurface designs offering superior operating bandwidths
and fabrication tolerances. This award supports training of skilled workers to
enter into science, technology, engineering, and math careers, provides support
for research experiences at the undergraduate level, offers opportunities to
integrate research within the undergraduate classroom, encourages women and
underrepresented minorities and supports local outreach activities which fosters
interest in science for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical scope
of this work includes: (a) developing a method for patterning refractive index
on the surface of a chip with nanoscale resolution, (b) mapping the
morphological tuning of porous nanomaterials to effective optical properties,
(c) demonstrating the straight-forward fabrication of high performance
metasurfaces with both binary and arbitrary refractive index profiles, and (d)
offering a transformative new approach for non-resonant (broadband) phase
control which overcomes interparticle spacing limitations and improves
fabrication tolerance. This research focuses on a technique wherein porous
substrates are locally imprinted and densified at high resolution by direct
imprinting with three-dimensionally mastered stamps then planarized. With the
aim of developing this nanomanufacturing approach to enable the cost effective
fabrication of high performance metasurfaces, this research addresses key
questions regarding process parameters, process variation and control,
mechanical integrity, optical quality, and process
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.