* 1825758
* Carbon Nanotube Textile Fabrication by Programmable Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sameh Tawfick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Carbon nanotubes are extremely fine, lightweight fibers having outstanding
strength and electric properties. With suitable weaving technology, smart carbon
nanotube textiles could enable multi-functionalities such as sensing, thermal
regulation, health monitoring, and wearable prosthetics with embedded energy
storage. However, weaving carbon nanotubes into fabrics using current
technologies faces several challenges due to their short lengths and their
tendency to aggregate into random clusters. This award studies programmable
self-assembly of carbon nanotubes to overcome these challenges and fabricate
smart textiles and fabrics. The fabrication process relies on liquid surface
tension to autonomously weave carbon nanotubes into continuous fabrics. More
broadly, the project advances the knowledge needed to transform nanostructure
self-assembly processes to scalable nanomanufacturing technologies applicable to
a wide range of industries and products, thus impacting national prosperity and
society. The project engages middle and high school students, women and
minorities in inspiring outreach programs at the intersection of engineering,
biology and the arts. New education modules called The Art and Life of Cilia are
developed to demonstrate a palette of nature-inspired fibrous materials and
their use in designing various textures, patterns and functionalities. These
education activities connect materials science and manufacturing to art and
design using examples ranging from the physics of painting brushes and bird
feathers to the processing of engineering materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is to reveal the dynamics of capillary self-assembly of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) into meter-scale engineering textiles. Complex self-
assembly dynamics, which occur at extremely small time and spatial scales,
govern the uniformity of this fabrication process. By exploiting the dynamics of
capillary self-assembly, a new paradigm of textile manufacturing by self-weaving
can be realized. Programmable self-assembly can produce CNT textiles with
unprecedented precision and repeatability at high throughput. This project
includes a study of the kinetics of CNTs self-weaving by new mathematical
dynamics models and experimental validation by in situ high-speed imaging. The
processing conditions, including the choice of liquid, the residual polymers in
the textile, and the weaving topology, are studied towards developing continuous
roll-to-roll defect-free self-weaving process. A variety of complex self-woven
textile architectures are produced by the programmable self-assembly of highly
aligned CNTs, and studied for applications in smart
textiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.