* 1825772
* Functionally Graded Carbon Nanotubes by Dynamic Control of Morphology during Chemical Vapor Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mostafa Bedewy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2022
* USD 338,486.00

This grant will support basic research aimed at revealing the fundamental
mechanisms underlying the process of manufacturing aligned carbon nanotubes for
emerging applications of national interest. Carbon nanotubes are tubes that are
smaller than one ten-thousandth of a human hair and can be thought of as atom-
thick sheets that are wrapped seamlessly into tubes. The superior chemical and
physical properties of individual nanotubes, as well as the collective unique
directionality of energy and mass transport through large populations of aligned
carbon nanotubes underpin their potential in many critical technological areas.
The commercial production of carbon nanotubes exceeds several thousand tons per
year and are used in products that rely on the random dispersion nanotubes of
various lengths and diameters into a matrix to enhance the composite properties.
However, emerging applications such as high power-density devices, 3D
nanoelectronics, nanoporous membranes, and structural materials require more
precise control of the spatial variation of sizes, order and hierarchical
morphology of aligned carbon nanotube ensembles. This research looks to
producing, through new understanding of their initial nucleation and subsequent
growth, large arrays of vertically aligned carbon nanotubes which are all
identical in width and length. These 'forests' of identical nanotubes have
excellent mechanical properties and can be used in new application areas where
the random length of the nanotubes would lead to poor performance. Research in
this project will contribute knowledge towards building the process-structure-
property relationship necessary for pushing emerging applications of nanotubes
closer to market, leading to enhancing the American economic competitiveness,
while advancing university-level education of molecular-scale manufacturing.
Public outreach will be facilitated by the continued development of YouTube
channel explaining nanotechnology-related topics to a general
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collective properties of vertically aligned
carbon nanotubes (VACNTs) are dependent on the spatially varying morphology
across their macroscopic forest-like structure. However, there is currently a
lack of understanding of the mechanochemical factors governing the nucleation
kinetics of large CNT populations, leading to an inability to control these
variations in a repeatable fashion during the simultaneous growth of billions of
CNTs. This project aims at filling this knowledge gap to enable precise control
of spatially-engineered VACNTs grown by rapid thermal chemical vapor deposition
(RT-CVD) and allow predicting their properties. This will be achieved by
experimental growth of VACNTs under periodic growth conditions with in situ
monitoring of height kinetics, combined with ex situ X-ray-based morphological
characterization and electron microscopy, as well as stochastic modeling of the
rates of catalytic activation and deactivation of CNTs nucleating from
substrate-bound catalyst nanoparticles. Hence, the results generated from this
project will enable predictably tuning CVD-grown CNTs in a process that is
relevant to industrial CNT production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.