* 1825406
* Collaborative Research: Performance  Guarantees for Approximate Dynamic Programming Approaches to Pricing and Capacity Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Huseyin Topaloglu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 356,000.00

This project will benefit the U.S. economy and public quality of life by
developing new solution methods for problems that involve dynamically managing
the prices and limited resources to serve uncertain customer demands. Such
pricing and capacity management problems occur in many settings, including
selling processing capacity in cloud computing, pricing itineraries in airlines
and hotels, and matching drivers with passengers in on-demand transportation. In
these problems, finding the optimal course of action at any point in time
requires keeping track of a large amount of information, including remaining
processing times on thousands of servers, capacities left on hundreds of
flights, and locations of thousands of drivers, along with forecasts of future
needs. Existing solution methods often ignore the uncertainty in demand or the
detailed customer arrival process. The fundamental research of this project will
provide new knowledge and techniques for solving these challenging problems. The
techniques will apply to a wide range of applications, will scale to large-scale
problems brought by the information age, and will help make decisions at a rapid
rate. This project will also broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups and positively impact engineering education through the development of
online certificate programs, shared data-sets, and industry collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic programming is a general framework that can
address dynamic decision-making problems under uncertainty, but dynamic
programming formulations often end up with high-dimensional state variables,
which make them difficult to solve. This research will develop approximate
dynamic programming methods for a variety of pricing and capacity management
problems that frequently occur in practice, including (a) pricing problems with
reusable products, applicable to cloud computing systems where processing
capacity is reusable, (b) pricing problems over a network of resources,
applicable to airlines and hotels where there is an underlying network of
resources and the sale of a product consumes a combination of resources, and (c)
product pairing problems for upselling, applicable to online retail where
additional product recommendations are made during checkout. The approximate
dynamic programming methods will have performance guarantees. Some of these
performance guarantees, especially those for pricing over a network of
resources, will be the first of its kind. The methods will be flexible for a
wide range of applications and will be scalable to industrial problem
instances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.