* 1825132
* Modeling of Nano-architected Electrodes with Elastic Instabilities: The Role of Buckling on Electrochemical Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Claudio Di Leo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 316,766.00

The development of next generation lithium-metal electrodes can revolutionize
the energy storage industry as the theoretical energy density of these materials
greatly overshadows current battery capabilities. In practice, however, the
high-volume expansion of the host material due to lithium insertion/reaction
results in large deformations and loads which can cause fracture, pulverization,
and eventually device failure. This award will support research towards
investigating the use of elastic instabilities, such as buckling, in the design
of nano-architected battery electrodes. This research will promote the
electrochemo-mechanical sciences by elucidating the way buckling can improve
electrochemical and mechanical battery performance, and the degree of
improvement. Critically, this research will enable experimentalists to rapidly
prototype and test next generation electrodes as well as provide a clear
guideline as to the potential benefits of these designs. Finally, the research
performed is not restricted to Li-Ion electrodes but can improve our
understanding of several chemo-mechanical systems such as systems for catalysis
and solid oxide fuel cells amongst others, which will advance the national
health, prosperity, and welfare. The research will have a broad impact on U.S.
education where it will aid in the training of a diverse group of next
generation undergraduate and graduate students with a multi-disciplinary
understanding of mechanics of solids and electrochemistry. The training of such
future scientists is critical to the U.S. energy industry. Finally, the award
will support outreach to underrepresented K-12 students through the development
of hands on experiments on the physics, manufacturing, and deployment of Li-Ion
batteries for clean energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
next-generation Li-Ion electrodes relying on lithium-metals will necessarily
require the means of accommodating the large deformations which are incurred by
these materials during the lithiation process. Elastic instabilities, in
particular buckling, is one possible mechanism whereby deformation of the
material can be accommodated with limited generation of stresses. At present,
however, there is no numerical tool to enable the rational design of nano-
architected electrodes that buckle. Our approach will make use of two types of
model: i) a detailed three-dimensional, fully-coupled finite element model which
accurately resolves the transient behavior of these complex systems under
experimentally accurate electrochemical boundary conditions, and ii) a
simplified reduced order model which integrates enough physics to provide a
reasonably accurate estimation of the electrochemical performance at a fraction
of the computational cost. These models will be experimentally validated and
applied towards developing novel designs and design guidelines for nano-
architected electrodes which buckle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.