* 1825352
* Laser Fabrication of Subnanometer Catalysts from Metal Organic Nanocapsules
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jerry Atwood, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 02/29/2024
* USD 469,284.00

This award investigates a novel method of making small nanometer-sized clusters
from metal organic nanocapsules using laser decomposition. These clusters are
assembled on highly conductive graphene supports to form heterogeneous
catalysts. The project involves experimental investigations of the nucleation,
growth and stabilization of these clusters supported by computational modeling.
This project leads to progress in laser science, material science, thermal
science, and supramolecular chemistry, all of which advances the field of
nanomanufacturing. The availability high-efficiency catalysts are important in
chemical processes, metal-air batteries, flexible electronics and fuel cells,
which greatly enhances U.S. industrial competitiveness in global markets,
increases U.S. economic growth, and strengthens national security. This grant
engages underrepresented minority students in chemistry and engineering. It has
plans to improve local STEM education through an outreach programs such as Women
Engineer and Scientist Day at Mizzou to stimulate high school girls' interests
in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to establish
a computational and experimental framework to investigate how the laser induces
the decomposition of metal organic nanocapsules and promotes nucleation of
reactant intermediates to form sub-nanometer clusters on graphene support.
Studies are conducted on the effects of the size of metal organic nanocapsules,
which ranges from 1-2 nanometers, on the microstructures of the fabricated
nanoclusters, and the effects of the support on their growth kinetics. Inherited
from the study is the development of a serial of technique, bottom up
supramolecular synthesis, in-situ catalyst conversion by laser-induced
pyrolysis, molecular dynamics simulations of the fabrication mechanism,
statistical analysis on the morphology of the fabricated nanoclusters, and
analytical tools for characterizing and confirming the catalytic active
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.