* 1825007
* Synthesis and Design Workshop: Digitally-Mediated Team Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Ronald DeMara, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2019
* USD 99,999.00

This project will convene a workshop of researchers, educators, and
practitioners to advance transformative pedagogical approaches for technology-
enhanced team learning within science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines. The workshop will advance the utilization and efficacy of next-
generation learning architectures through a focus on instructional technologies
that facilitate digitally-mediated team-based learning. Interdisciplinary
science and engineering researchers, developers, and educators will identify
near-term and future research directions to facilitate adaptable digital
environments for highly-effective, rewarding, and scalable team-based learning.
The workshop will emphasize personalization of collaborations among diverse
learners by automating the identification and utilization of learners'
efficacies and knowledge gaps to create complementary collaborative teams that
maximize avenues for peer teaching and learning. The workshop will advance both
national and societal goals of improving STEM instruction to develop a stronger
national STEM workforce, while uniting experts in data analytics, data mining,
and instructional design &amp; technology. Dissemination of the findings from
the workshop will include social, traditional, and popular media outlets, and
the outcomes of the workshop will benefit researchers, educators, and
practitioners from multiple disciplines, while informing digitally-enhanced
learner-centered approaches to learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on technical objectives of: (1) identifying new research in learning
analytics required to automate more optimal composition, formation, and
adaptation of learner design teams; (2) detecting advances in physical and
virtual learning environments that can achieve more effective and scalable
observation and assessment of learner teams in real-time; (3) distinguishing
data mining techniques to leverage devices such as monitors, trackers, and
automated camera observations to increase efficacy of team learning; and (4)
extending collaborative learning technologies to broaden participation and
achievement of diverse learner groups, including women and other
underrepresented and underserved populations in STEM. Prior to the workshop, a
call for papers will solicit submission of an expertise profile and position
abstract. During the two-day workshop, participants will be afforded
opportunities to participate in a poster session, keynote, panel session,
breakout technical sessions, and action committees. The workshop will result in
1-, 3-, and 5+ year research and development plans organized into tracks for
each technical focus. In addition to social and popular media, dissemination
activities will include a white paper, executive summary, infographics, and
public-facing website to maximize the outreach towards the goal of providing a
unifying roadmap for the design, development, implementation, and evaluation of
digitally-mediated teams advancing the achievement of all
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.