* 1825861
* Determining the Locking State of the Updip end of the Cascadia Megathrust using Real Time Seafloor Geodetic data
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,020.00

Large earthquakes and tsunamis can occur due to the motion of Earth's tectonic
plates at plate boundaries where oceanic crust is subducted under overlying
crust in places such as Cascadia, which is offshore of the northwestern US near
Vancouver Island, or Japan. Faults causing these earthquakes sometimes rupture
from deep in Earth's crust all the way up to the surface of the seafloor. When
that happens, displacement of the seafloor occurs; and, depending on the size of
the up-thrust, this can generate a megatsunami. One such example would be the
magnitude 9 earthquake that struck Japan in 2011 and generated a major tsunami
that devastated communities along Japan's northeastern shore. Not all subduction
ruptures, however, create such large tsunamis because, in some, displacements
are confined along parts of faults that are well below the ocean floor. This can
be seen in the 2014 magnitude 8.3 Chile Iquique earthquake which did not cause
any major tsunami because most displacement in the Earth occurred at depths
around 10 km. This research focuses on collecting and improving seismic data in
the Cascadia region that is streaming from a unique subseafloor borehole
geophysical observatory. These data are being used to study fault mechanics in
the Cascadia area and provide tsunami hazard forecasts. Cascadia is an area of
interest because it is close to the US and is a place where active subduction is
occurring and for which there are no known large subduction-related earthquakes.
It is important to understand if this "locking" of the fault is real, thus
raising concern that accumulating stress is building up and result in a major
earthquake or if the stress is being released through a series of slow and low,
slip events. To help understand the fault dynamics in the Cascadia area, in 2016
a unique borehole geophysical installation was established in the seafloor off
Vancouver Island on the Ocean Networks Canada cabled observatory. This research
calibrates and validates data streaming from the borehole installation to test
its reliability and provide real time-seismic and geodetic data from the
shallowest part of the Cascadia subduction zone. This new system is designed to
be especially sensitive to ruptures and properties in the shallow parts of the
Cascadia fault zone. Broader impacts of the work include increasing
infrastructure for science in terms of developing the unique capabilities of
this new installation and providing important hazards-related data for
earthquakes and potential mega tsunamis generated by continued subduction of the
ocean plate under the northwest US and Canada. It also represents an important
collaboration between the US and Canadian scientists running the Ocean Networks
Canada cabled undersea observatory and the leveraging of infrastructure from the
NSF International Ocean Discovery Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2016, an
international team of US and Canadian scientists and engineers installed a
borehole geophysical observatory in the seafloor near the up-dip end of the
Cascadia subduction zone offshore of Vancouver Island on the Canadian cabled
observatory. Since 2017, this system has been returning high quality, real-time,
seismic and borehole tilt data. Sensors are positioned about 300 m below the
seafloor and about 4 km above the Cascadia plate boundary fault. Initial
analysis of the data indicates the borehole system should be able to detect low
magnitude, slow slip, earthquake events as small as magnitude 4. However, many
small signals and excursions in the data still remain to be investigated to
determine their sources and establish the stability of the instruments and the
reliability of their data. This research continues the improvement of streaming
data and determining its reliability. It involves optimizing the borehole
instrumentation, with a focus on improving the de-tiding algorithm, cataloging
potential transients at different time scales, and investigating instrument
performance and stability. These activities ensure the best data quality for all
users, ranging from scientists to managers of real-time warning systems who
study earthquakes and tsunamis. Data from the borehole observatory can also be
used to detect and track marine mammals and provide information on gas hydrate
stability. The work will also ensure the dataset collected is archived if there
are outages in telemetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.