* 1825032
* Design and Development: Diversifying Engineering via Identity-Congruent Education (DE-ICE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Lux, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Studies show that students who are not able to see themselves as an engineer at
an early age are less likely to pursue engineering careers later in life. This
can be especially true of students who may not have easy access to academic and
extracurricular activities, including diverse students from rural and urbans
populations. Research has shown that incorporating engineering-related
educational games into middle school curricula can help students develop an
identity as an engineer. This project focuses on fourth grade students because
this is a pivotal age where many students from underrepresented groups opt out
of an engineering educational trajectory. This project develops and introduces
educational games for fourth grade classrooms that demonstrate engineering
concepts. The effect of playing these games, which are co-designed with
teachers, will be studied in terms students' sense of engineering and how the
way they identify with engineering as a result. The study will collect a variety
of data from students about their related educational experiences. The data,
including notebook entries, interviews, and focus groups, will help researchers
investigate and generalize the efficacy of such games for promoting helping
middle school students identify with the potential to pursue a career path in
engineering. Descriptions of the educational game experiences, their classroom
implementations, and assessments on student engineering identity formation will
be shared freely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies show large positive
effects of small educational interventions when employing integrative frameworks
that are culturally-responsive, chronically-salient and identity-congruent.
Additionally, digital game-based learning has demonstrated significant promise
in elementary engineering education. This project will operationalize the
identity-based motivation framework via digital game-based learning experiences
aimed at enhancing engineering identity formation of diverse elementary
students. Assessment of students' engineering identity will be made using
instruments including the "Draw an Engineer Test" and the "Engineering Identity
Development Scale." The identity-based motivation framework will inform the
interventions, which will include students' creation of engineering characters
who will interactively solve basic engineering problems. The interventions will
integrate humanitarian engineering applications of math and science, with lesson
plans mapped to the Next Generation Science Standards and aligned with Essential
Understandings within Montana's Indian Educational for All Act. Assessment of
students' post-intervention engineering identities will augment analyses of
interviews, focus groups and game play artifacts in elucidating intervention
features effective in enhancing engineering identity formation. Data collection
and analysis will rely on innovative qualitative methods, including effects
matrices and network analyses, to determine the influence of the educational
intervention experiences on students' engineering identity. This mixed-method
research will result in a deeper understanding of students' attitudes and
dispositions toward engineering, and the features of the intervention design,
development and/or experiences that influenced them. This research will also
result in adoptable educational interventions designed to encourage engineering
identity formation in a diverse group of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.