* 1825881
* Using Self-Assembled Cyclic and Linear Block Copolymer Blends as Templates for Sub-10 nm Soft Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Henry Ashbaugh, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 398,786.00

Thanks to advancements in the microelectronics industry over the past fifty
years, today's smart phones are more powerful and less expensive than the best
supercomputers of the 1970's and 1980's. These technologies impact nearly every
facet of life - from entertainment and personal communication to healthcare and
national defense. Currently, computer chip manufacturing uses lasers to pattern
ever-smaller features to make faster processors and create higher density data
storage. However, the cost of patterning using this approach is rising faster
than the benefits afforded by smaller features, necessitating the development of
new manufacturing approaches to advance the field and maintain U.S. status as a
world leader in advanced manufacturing. This grant supports fundamental research
into an alternative patterning method that uses block copolymers, a type of
rubbery plastic that naturally forms nanoscale patterns through a process called
self-assembly. The research generates the knowledge necessary to transform the
manufacture of next-generation nanoelectronics that can be incorporated into
communication devices, security technologies, health monitors, and disease
treatments. These advances contribute to national prosperity, health and
security. This project brings together an interdisciplinary team of researchers
with expertise in molecular simulations and experimental materials synthesis to
train a diverse cohort of high school, undergraduate, and doctoral students that
will drive innovation in advanced materials
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymer self-assembly offers a
direct manufacturing route to nanostructure formation that eliminates the need
for more complex, time-consuming, and costly laser-based patterning methods.
This project investigates the phase behavior of strongly segregated cyclic block
copolymers, which show promise for accessing sub-10 nm feature sizes and
stabilizing polymer thin films against dewetting. The project uses complementary
experimental and computational approaches to not only compare cyclic block
copolymers to linear analogues but also to evaluate nanostructure quality in
cyclic/linear block copolymer blends as templates for nanolithography. To
realize manufacturing scalability of this approach, two critical challenges are
addressed: First, using small quantities of cyclic block copolymer as a
structure-directing and film-stabilizing agent to achieve target lithographic
domain sizes while minimizing the amount of specialty cyclic block copolymer.
Second, if shorter reaction times and less dilute solution conditions are used
in the synthesis of cyclic molecules to improve yield, understanding what linear
impurities are generated and how do they impact self-assembly. Throughout the
project, insight into the thermodynamic origin of the structures formed are
derived from molecular simulations to guide and optimize experimental
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.