* 1825576
* Collaborative Research: Photon-Enabled Atomic Drilling of Graphene for Supercapacitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Qiong Nian, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Supercapacitors have emerged as next-generation high-performance power sources
for portable devices used in a wide range of consumer, biomedical, healthcare,
and military applications. It remains a fundamental challenge in supercapacitor
design to simultaneously achieve high energy and power densities with a long
cycle life. A porous graphene framework, consisting of a three-dimensional
graphene structure containing nano-sized holes and micro-size pores, has emerged
as a promising solution to address this challenge due to its superior
electrochemical properties. However, the existing methods for fabricating this
graphene framework often rely on thermal chemical etching processes, which
suffer from low efficiency and poor controllability due to complex experiments
and poor thermal stability of etchants. This award supports fundamental research
to provide knowledge for the development of a novel manufacturing strategy using
photon-material interactions to realize porous graphene framework fabrication
with a high efficiency. This research will have significant broader impact
because of the spillover into literally all economic sectors because of the
potential transformative performance improvement of supercapacitors. This
project also provides an integrated science and engineering training platform
for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, with particular emphasis on
promoting participation of women and underrepresented students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a novel
photon-enabled atomic drilling process to fabricate porous graphene frameworks
toward supercapacitor applications. The photon-enabled atomic drilling approach
utilizes photons from a nanosecond pulsed laser to initiate atomic drilling of
nanoholes in the graphene basal planes for porous graphene framework fabrication
with high efficiency and controllability. The major research objective is to
establish a fundamental understanding of mechanisms involved in the photon-
enabled atomic drilling process responsible for the formation of porous graphene
frameworks. A computational model capable of predicting photon-enabled bond
excitation and dissociation as affected by the laser processing parameters will
be developed. Microstructure characterization and electrochemical property
testing will be conducted to establish the process-structure-property
relationship. This research contributes to advances in photon-based
manufacturing technology development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.