* 1825941
* Nanomanufacturing of Protein Macromolecular Frameworks Through an Integrated Bioengineering and Computational Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Masaki Uchida, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 498,481.00

New materials with innovative functionalities are needed to build new and useful
devices and systems that enrich our lives. Ordered three-dimensional arrays
built from nanoscale building-blocks, often called superlattices, are exciting
because new functionalities can emerge from the interactions between individual
building-blocks. The use of proteins as building-blocks is a groundbreaking new
direction because proteins exhibit a wide range of properties and behavior,
including catalytic and immune activities, which are often difficult to realize
in synthetic molecules. Making ordered materials by conventional protein
crystallization is a laborious procedure and the ability to tailor the structure
of protein crystals is limited. This award supports fundamental research to
develop versatile and tunable approaches to manufacture superlattice materials
constructed of proteins. The availability of these unique protein-based
materials impacts diverse industries such as energy, biomedical and catalysis,
which advances national welfare. This project uniquely integrates several
disciplines including materials science, bioengineering and computational
modeling. The integration of experimental and computational approaches in this
project impacts research efforts of the Network for Computational Nanotechnology
(NCN), synergistically. Alongside the scientific impact of the project, it also
leverages the multi-disciplinary approach to promote students, including women
and minorities, on this project by acquiring broad skills and knowledge and by
providing a positive impact on science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team envisions that protein cage nanoparticles and linker proteins,
which bind non-covalently to symmetry-specific sites on the protein cages, are
promising building-blocks for constructing a new class of protein superlattices,
i.e. protein macromolecular frameworks. Protein cages have hollow spherical
architectures composed of a distinct number of subunits with well-defined
symmetry-specific sites. The investigators anticipate that specific binding
geometries between protein cages and linkers result in highly regular network
structures with a wide range of functionalities. The research team integrates
bioengineering and computational modeling approaches to develop a range of
linker molecules with different lengths and binding affinities to protein cages.
By connecting the protein cages together through protein linkers, they are
geometrically confined, thus forming highly regulated structures. The structure
of the protein macromolecular frameworks is tunable through the selection of
protein cages and specific linker proteins. Additionally, protein macromolecular
frameworks have two types of unique spaces internally to accommodate cargo
molecules. These are interior cavity of individual protein cages and
interstitial space between protein cages within the lattice. The team
demonstrates that various cargo molecules, such as enzymes, could be
encapsulated inside of the protein cages. In this project, reversible
incorporation and release of guest molecules are studied, which could lead
protein macromolecular frameworks to practical applications such as drug
delivery and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.