* 1825308
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Optical Metasurfaces by Hierarchical Printing and Predictive Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Arka Majumdar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,797.00

Optical metasurfaces are designed to steer and control light and images
instantaneously. They enable applications ranging from thinner, lighter
smartphones to ultrafast image processing for self-driving cars and industrial
robots. Processes used today to make optical metasurfaces are slow and costly,
preventing their wide scale use in products. This grant investigates a new
process to manufacture optical metasurfaces. The process, called scalable
nanomanufacturing by hierarchical printing, involves rapidly rolling special
stamps onto transparent sheets to produce nanotextured surfaces at large scale,
thus minimizing manufacturing waste and cost. High speed digital inkjet printing
with special inks is then used to modify these metasurfaces to manipulate light,
turning the sheets into surfaces that can perform different functions. For this
to become a reality, research on coatings with special properties that allow
them to be rapidly nanotextured is performed. This project also studies
interactions between printing ink and nanotextured surfaces, a critical element
of the approach. The availability of highly functional metasurface photonic
elements for applications such as planar cameras, medical diagnostics and
optical computing greatly impacts the nation's prosperity, health and security.
This grant engages underrepresented youth in science and engineering through the
outreach work of full-time graduate students working on this project. The
combination of technology-driven manufacturing and education in this work makes
economic and societal impact by expanding a high productivity, technology-driven
US manufacturing base and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable
nanomanufacturing of 2D optical metasurfaces by a hierarchical printing process
could lead to new classes of low cost, ultrathin, photonics for applications in
energy, information processing, and communication as well as provide insights
into nanoscale fluid and surface phenomena which can expand the further adoption
of hierarchical nanomanufacuring. This project's scope is broken down into four
areas. The first thrust is to develop a predictive computational model for the
wetting of femtoliter printed droplets on nanoimprinted surfaces. Secondly, the
results from the predictive model are used to guide experimental studies and
manufacturing research towards scalably fabricating digitally-modified 2D
periodic nanostructure surfaces in an inexpensive process that uses high-
resolution inkjet printing. This hierarchical printing imparts digitally-
customizable photonic functions to the metasurfaces by depositing localized
phase shift modifiers at low-cost. The third and fourth thrusts provide initial
designs for the optical meta-elements, characterize the properties of these
hierarchically printed structures and provide feedback to guide further study
and development of the nanomanufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.