* 1825873
* Collaborative Research: Bias Modeling and Estimation of Networked Transportation Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Zhang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2022
* USD 217,258.00

This award will contribute to national prosperity and economic welfare by
advancing data analytics applied to transportation systems. While big data are
increasingly used in transportation and other disciplines in science and
engineering, the collected data may come with errors and biases, and therefore
may not provide an authentic representation of the entire population. Biased
data can lead to ineffectual policies and suboptimal decisions for
transportation infrastructure related investment, planning, and operations. As
the transportation field undergoes a major transformation towards smart and
autonomous systems, data quality is critical in ensuring that public welfare
results from these investments. This award supports a comprehensive
investigation and fundamental understanding of the sources, taxonomy, and
modeling approaches of data biases and the PIs will develop novel solutions to
address the issues. The project team will work closely with transportation
practitioners to test and validate the findings of this research, and transfer
scientific knowledge to planning and operation practices. The award also
supports efforts to broaden STEM interest in engineering and data sciences
through updated curricula and virtual seminars, and to provide opportunities for
underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop
theories, models, and algorithms of a novel NETwork-based, Data-Assisted
Transportation Analysis (NetData) framework for data bias modeling and
estimation, which can recognize and utilize the underlying network structure and
processes in the data. The NetData framework will explicitly capture bias and
integrate data with proper network models, in both deterministic and stochastic
settings and under realistic network considerations such as dynamic and
multimodal networks. This research fills an important gap in transportation data
sciences and practice in modeling and addressing data bias. The analytical
framework leverages and extends state-of-the-art techniques from transportation
network science, stochastic optimization, and data science. It will produce
algorithms to integrate data from multiple sources to help conduct more accurate
and reliable analysis of travel patterns and
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.