* 1825113
* Collaborative Research: Video Communication Technologies in Survey Data Collection
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Frederick Conrad, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 581,571.00

This research project will examine data quality, participation, respondent
experience, and costs in two promising but not yet widely deployed survey modes
that use off-the-shelf video technology and are less costly than face to face
(FTF) interviews: video-mediated (VM) interviews (live two-way communication via
platforms like Skype) and video self-administered (VS) interviews, in which
video-recorded interviewers ask the questions and respondents answer by typing
or clicking. This project will compare these measures of data quality and costs
in VM and VS interviews carried out by the same professional interviewers and in
conventional online (textual) self-administered questionnaires, asking the same
survey questions to members of a representative sample who are randomly assigned
to one of these three modes. Because VM is synchronous and "live" like face-to-
face (FTF) interviewing, and VS is asynchronous and recorded but still projects
a human face, the project's comparisons will provide new insights regarding how
these decomposable aspects of human contact affect behavior and experience in
surveys. The project's results will reveal the extent to which, and for whom,
less costly interaction (live but remote vs. recorded) with an interviewer
promotes engagement and data quality comparable to what is found in similar FTF
interviews. More generally, the findings will address when and in what ways
modern communication modes that reduce social presence and are less personal
might be equal to or even more effective than FTF interaction. Findings from
this project will provide valuable information relevant to the future of survey
measurement and will be of interest to survey researchers in the Federal
statistical system and other survey organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even as
survey data continue to be central to public policy and decision-making, survey
measurement is challenged by declining response rates, increasing costs,
declining trust in survey organizations, and rapidly changing communication
habits among the public. Understanding how video technologies could fit into the
future of survey data collection is important both because it may meet potential
respondents "where they live" and because it may provide a significantly lower
cost alternative to FTF interviewing. There is even the potential to reach some
members of the public whose location makes FTF interviewing difficult or
expensive, but who may well be able to participate in a video interview (e.g.,
people who live in remote rural areas or members of the military deployed
overseas). In comparing data quality across these three survey modes, the
project will quantify participation rates, connectivity problems, respondent
compliance with the video interviewing protocol, conscientious responding
(giving precise answers to numerical questions, thoughtfully differentiating
answers), and disclosure of sensitive information. The project will measure the
potential impact of individual interviewers, feelings of engagement with the
interview, rapport with the interviewer, and respondent satisfaction. The
project also will allow assessment of data collection costs across these modes.
Access to and use of video technologies are not universal, and even among those
with access some are willing to engage in video interaction while others are
reluctant. The project will begin to address whether and how the effects of
video technologies on survey data collection differ for participants with
different levels of prior experience and preference for using the
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.