* 1825837
* Collaborative Research: Health Monitoring and System Identification of Complex Mechanical Systems Using Fractional-Order Calculus Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Fabio Semperlotti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 271,772.00

Inspection and maintenance are significant cost drivers to manage and preserve
the quality of our nation's transportation systems and infrastructure. Current
strategies are based on preventive approaches that do not consider the actual
real-time status of a specific structural component. In these approaches, the
systems are subject to routine inspections and replacement of components that
are scheduled a priori based on a combination of empirical data and numerical
predictions of the estimated life. Such approaches are sub-optimal because they
may lead to replacement of fully-functional components, on the one hand, and may
miss rapidly deteriorating conditions between scheduled inspections, on the
other. This research will develop new methods to address both shortcomings by
investigating new modeling and monitoring techniques particularly suited and
applicable to modern, complex systems. To enable this condition-based monitoring
approach, better theoretical and numerical models are needed to simulate the
dynamic behavior of complex mechanical systems as well as to produce metrics
capable of tracking their status in real-time. This award supports fundamental
research to develop mathematical and computational models based on fractional
calculus. The methods resulting from this research will be highly useful in
application that use imaging and remote sensing in structural, geological, and
biological media. The educational part of this project will feature, among its
different components, the development of a new course to introduce engineering
students to fractional calculus and its applications to modeling of engineering
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve a systematic study to
determine how fractional-order differential equations will enhance the state-of-
the-art in system identification and monitoring. Fractional-order models are a
new and useful tool for modeling of complex engineering systems, however they
are not yet common in engineering. Their application to structural health
monitoring will provide a substantially new approach for damage detection and
diagnostics, it will introduce the system order as a new parameter for system
assessment, and it will provide highly mathematically structured and concise
descriptions of the dynamics of complex systems. More specifically, this work
will (1) determine the effect of structural damage on the fractional order of
the host system and develop methodologies to account for its impact on the
underlying governing equations; (2) use fractional approaches to achieve
efficient order reduction, sub-structuring, and inverse problem solutions; (3)
develop fractional models for system identification based on purely experimental
data; and (4) develop testbeds for experimental
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.