* 1825467
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ontogenetic changes in primate manual and pedal trabecular architecture
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Anna Ragni, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2019
* USD 19,432.00

Humans are unique among primates in many ways, including that we are bipedal
(walk upright) and our bodies take a long time to reach adult size and shape.
Our hominin ancestors are categorized as such based on evidence for bipedality,
but relatively little is known about hominin bipedalism with respect to growth
and development. This doctoral dissertation project will use comparative primate
skeletal material to assess how hand and foot bones change during growth in
response to changes in locomotor (movement) behaviors. The research will advance
knowledge about how growth impacts adult bone, with application to the hominin
fossil record and the potential to inform clinical research on bone and growth.
The project will also train future scientists, provide K-12 science curriculum
content to a diverse range of local students, and contribute 3D digital data to
online databases.

The researchers will use micro-computed tomography and comparative analyses of
trabecular bone measurements (as a proxy for locomotion) for multiple elements
in the hands and feet of five modern primates in dentally-defined age groups, in
order to accomplish the following: 1) describe ontogenetic trajectories of
trabecular change in a phylogenetic context as it relates to known behavioral
changes in primates representing several locomotor modes; 2) investigate the
unexplored relationship of phylogenetic signal and age in trabecular bone; 3)
improve understanding of the evolutionary pattern and adaptive significance of
primate locomotor ontogeny, including modern humans; and 4) reconstruct hominin
locomotor behavior over ontogeny based on comparisons to modern taxa. The
results of this project will help address longstanding debates about hominin
evolution and better inform future studies of primate ontogeny, form, function,
systematics, and locomotion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.