* 1825476
* Manufacturing of Nanofibrillated Soft Dendritic Particles Using Turbulent Liquid Shear
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,681.00

Due to their fractal nature, nanofibrillated dendritic polymer particles have
enormously increased surface area compared to regularly shaped nanoparticles.
These particles exhibit high adhesive or "sticking" behavior. Their functional
uses are in coatings, gels, textiles, nonwovens, personal care, agricultural and
biomedical products. This award introduces a new nanomanufacturing method, where
a multitude of polymers used in industrial and consumer products are converted
into this novel nanomaterial. The introduction of processes for efficient
manufacturing of nanofibrillated polymer particles could have a transformative
impact on the fabrication of numerous high-volume and high-value products made
by large and mid-sized U.S. companies. The introduction of such a capability to
manufacture advanced polymer nanomaterials greatly impacts the nation's
prosperity, health and security. The novel nanomanufacturing process involves
turbulent liquid shear and is simple, efficient, and scalable. This project
develops fundamental understanding of the complex mechanisms of nanofibrillar
polymer materials formation under turbulent liquid shear and provides the
scientific basis for their large-scale continuous manufacturing. The project
also serves as grounds for nanofabrication and innovation training of graduate
and undergraduate students. It fosters student entrepreneurship and soft skills
in an exciting environment combining innovative science, manufacturing
technology and industrial collaborations. Related hands-on experiments provide
the basis for visually impressive undergraduate projects and enable numerous
science outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new process for making of
dendritic particles by polymer precipitation under shear is simple and
versatile. However, it poses many fundamental scientific challenges. The
complexity of the process of multiphasic polymer precipitation requires
systematic experimentation and characterization, supported through modeling. The
comprehensive research plan includes two complementary thrusts. The first thrust
generates understanding of the physical mechanisms by which polymer
precipitation in turbulent liquid flow leads to the formation of the dendritic
particles. The team elucidates the role of interfacial mass transport, solvent-
solvent and solvent-polymer interactions, polymer precipitation rates, and
turbulent liquid shear rates on the morphology of the precipitated
nanofibrillated particles. The second thrust applies these fundamental insights
to design and test efficient and scalable nanomanufacturing processes. The
research and process modelling enable controlled scalable fabrication of
dendritic nanofibrillar particles at present, and potentially of numerous other
polymeric nanomaterials, including nanosheets, nanoribbons and nanorods, in the
future. Overall, the liquid-based shear nanomanufacturing can become a platform
technology for efficient manufacturing of polymeric nanomaterials with
extraordinary properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.