* 1825348
* Matching Problems in Refugee Resettlement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrew Trapp, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 471,063.00

This project will promote the progress of science and contribute to the national
prosperity and welfare by advancing analytical decision tools tackling the
operational challenges of refugee resettlement in the United States. The goal of
resettlement is to progressively integrate refugees into host societies, while
balancing limitations of communities with the needs of refugees. This research
will augment current manual refugee resettlement decision-making by using
analytical methods that include machine learning and mathematical optimization.
These technologies will improve humanitarian decision-making and have the
potential to transform how domestic and worldwide resettlement decisions are
made. Host communities will benefit by integrating refugees that bring new
skills, youth and diversity to the matched communities. An established
collaboration with a US-based refugee organization will guide the research and
enable validation of the developed models in a real-world
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make two main methodological
contributions. First, it will explore the algebraic and geometric properties of
integral monoids to better understand and capitalize on their structure. It is
believed that integral monoids can excel in contexts with flexible capacity and
multiple objectives. This research will develop appropriate algorithms and data
structures to efficiently and judiciously encode and retrieve monoid
information, and will include algorithmic analyses to ensure the computational
tractability. If successful, this research will contribute to new advances in
optimization methodology, specifically the algorithmic use of integral monoids
to solve other hard linear and nonlinear matching, knapsack, generalized
assignment, and packing problems. Second, this research will construct novel
objective functions by leveraging supervised machine learning techniques on
existing refugee placement and integration (outcome) data. These new objective
functions will guide the search toward more successful resettlement outcomes.
The predictive modeling will also reveal previously undiscovered insights into
how demographic and regional factors contribute to refugee
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.