* 1825692
* Tenocyte Mechanobiology in a Fiber Composite Mimetic
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Bryant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,979.00

Tendons are an important tissue for musculoskeletal function -- they connect
muscles to bones. They are also a very slow healing tissue, due in part to the
limited blood supply and small concentration of cells within the highly fibrous
structure. If tendon cells, tenocytes, are going to be stimulated to enhance
tendon growth and regeneration, it is vitally important that the understanding
of how these cells respond to their mechanical environment is substantially
increased. This project will use a combination of computer modeling and
experimental studies to investigate how tenocytes respond to complex loading
normally seen in a tendon. The work will focus on the micro-level -- in order to
understand how variations in the mechanical environment just around the cell
relate to the cellular response. In addition to advancing knowledge that will
support future work in tissue engineering of tendons and other fibrous
connective tissue, this project includes several educational and outreach
activities. First, the research team will integrate students from high school
through graduate school in order to help them understand the importance of
research in this area and of integrating experimental and computational
techniques. Next, there will be an opportunity for graduate students to travel
to an international collaborator's laboratory to enhance their scientific
preparation. Finally, hands-on workshops will be developed to provide
participants with a broader understanding of connective tissue
biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives for this project are
to: (1) determine the micromechanics and the type and magnitude of the local
cellular strains as a function of fiber composite properties under
physiologically relevant tensile strains; (2) determine tenocyte anabolic and
catabolic metabolism as a function of the type and magnitude of the local
cellular strains and the typed of integrin-ligand interaction; and (3) elucidate
intracellular signaling pathways based on MAP kinase signaling that are involved
in integratin-mediated mechanotransduction within tenocytes. This will be done
through the development of a computational model of tenocytes within a fiber-
reinforced structure and the validation of this model with experimental studies
using a novel hydrogel-fiber composite mimetic that captures aspects of the
tendon's fiber composite mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.