* 1825732
* Research: Staying the course: Understanding the motivational factors contributing to persistence among undergraduate engineering students in online courses
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Jennifer Bekki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2023
* USD 372,370.00

This study will investigate the factors that motivate undergraduate engineering
students enrolled in online courses to complete the courses, rather than drop
out. Online courses have become an increasingly utilized and important
instructional method in undergraduate engineering education. The online format
can provide educational opportunities to students who otherwise may not have
access and, therefore, has the potential to positively affect the size and
makeup of the nation's engineering workforce. However, students in online
courses drop out of these courses at greater rates than those in more
traditional, face-to-face courses. The proposed work will utilize the online
undergraduate engineering degree programs at Arizona State University to
generate a model that describes and predicts course-level persistence based on
the following types of data: attributes of individual students, tracking data
that shows where and when students click within their online course learning
management system, and information about the online courses themselves. The
immediate impact of the work will be an increased understanding of the reasons
that undergraduate engineering students choose to stay in or drop online
courses. In the longer term, the findings will also contribute to efforts that
support a greater percentage of online undergraduate engineering students
successfully completing their degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
project, a Model of Online Course-level Persistence in Engineering grounded in
theories of student motivation and online and undergraduate engineering student
persistence will be developed and empirically evaluated. The project proposes
three studies. The Student Experiences Study uses a longitudinal, within-person
approach to investigate how undergraduate engineering students' experiences in
their online course influence their beliefs about their likelihood of success in
the course, their perceptions of the value of the course, their level of
engagement in the course, and their ultimate decision to complete the course.
The Learning Management System Interaction Study applies the learner-based
technique of associative classification to historical data from online
undergraduate engineering courses at Arizona State University to describe
students' patterns of engagement with their online course learning management
system as they relate to course-level persistence. The final Persistence
Modeling Study generates a unified measure of course engagement from these
patterns. This measure will be used in a longitudinal structural equation
modeling analysis that compares three variations on the model of online course-
level persistence: (1) a variation in which engagement is included as a partial
mediator of the relationships between expectancies of course success, course
task values, perceptions of course characteristics, and course-level
persistence, (2) a variation in which engagement is conceptualized as a full
mediator of the relationships between expectancies of course success, course
task values, perceptions of course characteristics, and persistence to course
completion, and (3) a variation in which engagement is not included at
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.