* 1825469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developmental programming and epigenetic changes in response to maternal environments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Anna Knight, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 31,200.00

Developmental programming refers to early life biological responses to the
environment that can shape long-term well-being. The prenatal period is a
critical window for developmental programming, with a variety of environmental
signals being transmitted from a mother to her offspring, potentially reflected
as "epigenetic" changes in offspring gene regulation. This dissertation project
will advance our understanding of epigenetic mechanisms of adaptation by
identifying correlations in gene regulation between a mother and her offspring
and investigating the impact of acute and chronic maternal stressors on infant
DNA methylation. The project will create STEM training opportunities in
epigenetic research for undergraduate and graduate students. Results from this
study will contribute to biocultural research on life history and social
determinants of well-being, including for understudied populations, and will
have the potential to inform clinical policy and practice. Findings will be
disseminated to study participants and the general public through various
venues, including prenatal care groups.

Developmental programming begins before birth, meaning that the experience of
the mother is critical for offspring adaptability and fitness. Maternal signals
transmitted to the offspring prenatally may represent the mother's total life
history and/or the acute environment, including experiences of stress. One
mechanism through which the offspring can respond to these signals is through
epigenetic modifications, including changes in DNA methylation. The
investigators will use infant DNA methylation at birth as a sensor of the
prenatal environment, to assess how the offspring adapts to various maternal
signals relayed during pregnancy. They will address whether infant methylation
is more correlated with maternal methylation at 7-15 weeks, reflecting the
cumulative life history of the mother before pregnancy as DNA methylation
changes over the life course in response to the environment, or at 23-34 weeks,
where maternal DNA methylation would be expected to change in response to the
pregnancy-specific environment. A collection of DNA methylation marks that
represent an "epigenetic clock" of chronological age will be used as a summary
measure of life history in the mother and developmental maturity in the neonate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.