* 1825768
* National Historical Geographic Information System
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Elizabeth Wrigley-Field, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,084,832.00

This research project will enhance and expand the IPUMS National Historical
Geographic Information System (NHGIS) database. NHGIS is the nation's most
comprehensive source for census data, geographic data, and metadata describing
population characteristics of American regions, places, and neighborhoods from
1790 to the present. This project will provide new spatiotemporal data and tools
for the analysis of spatial change. The enhanced database is needed for basic
social research and policy analysis because models and descriptions of the past
underlie both theories of past social change and projections into the future.
The project outcomes will be important not only for academic research, but also
for social science training, journalism, policy research at the state and local
levels, and private sector research. The planned improvements will expand the
impact of NHGIS by making it more powerful and accessible. Data access and
product enhancements will facilitate a range of new research applications and
data visualizations drawing directly from the massive NHGIS data collection. A
geographically standardized time series will minimize researchers' need to
create their own data using crosswalks, to decide which census concepts are
compatible or consistent over time, or to pay for commercial solutions. This
project will educate and train undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented populations through the Minnesota Population Center's Summer
Diversity Fellowship Program. NHGIS provides a unique laboratory for the spatial
analysis of economic and social processes and offers the empirical foundation
needed for developing and testing models of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the next five years, this project will implement four major improvements to the
NHGIS infrastructure: (1) Spatiotemporal data integration and assessment. Census
unit boundaries frequently change between censuses, making it difficult to
analyze population changes over time and space. The project team will extend
NHGIS geographically standardized time series to cover more years and subjects
using optimized interpolation models, produce robust margins of errors for
standardized estimates, and thoroughly assess standardized data accuracy. (2)
Geocoding of restricted-access census microdata for the 1990 and 2000 censuses.
To assess geographically standardized time series, the project team will produce
high-quality benchmark data by geocoding individual-level 1990 and 2000 census
responses and assigning them to 2010 census units. They also will disseminate
the geocoded coordinates to approved researchers through the Federal Statistical
Research Data Centers. (3) Data access and product enhancements. The project
team will produce a robust public Application Programming Interface (API) and R
package to deliver data programmatically. They also will expand the NHGIS
collection of GIS files to include cartographically generalized boundaries,
water and road data, and population center points. (4) User support, outreach,
and dissemination. The project will sustain and expand NHGIS education and
outreach efforts, offering individual user support and in-person workshops and
creating data visualizations that highlight unique or underutilized NHGIS data
on subjects of interest to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.