* 1825734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local Biologies and the Epidemiologic Paradox
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Isaura Godinez, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 30,724.00

Scientists have observed an epidemiologic paradox in which some populations have
better physiological outcomes than others, despite having lower income and
education that normally would predict higher morbidity and mortality. However,
there are many complex factors that potentially confound such findings, such as
within-group heterogeneity. This doctoral dissertation project will use and
expand the theory of local biologies, the idea that human biology is shaped by
an individual's context, to examine physiological well-being for genetically
similar populations. The research will advance knowledge about the interface of
human culture and biology, minimizing the potentially confounding effects of
population heterogeneity. The project will support training for students from
groups underrepresented in STEM fields, as well as public and community science
outreach and public health information based on the project findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project explores how the
physical and sociocultural environment shapes the development of physiologic
disorders among Hispanic populations in North America. The project combines a
rigorous examination of physiological well-being using biomarkers of
cardiometabolic disorders and an ethnographic exploration of the sociocultural
and physical surroundings of Purepecha individuals in different areas. The
incorporation of standardized instruments to measure acculturation and other
variables will permit comparison with similar studies. The research is
significant in its focus on an understudied population within the broader
Hispanic/Latinx context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.