* 1825489
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Model-Based Motor Control Strategies to Enhance Human-Machine Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Noah Cowan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,470.00

Humans are increasingly asked to cooperate with machines and robots in many
occupational and recreational settings, including teleoperation, driving
vehicles, surgery, rehabilitation, and object manipulation. Not only must humans
learn to share control with a machine, the machines must in turn be better
designed to enable human-machine interaction. The main objectives of this
collaborative project are: to perform fundamental research that will identify
multisensory (visual and haptic), human-in-the-loop, sensorimotor control models
that capture predictive and reactive aspects of how people interact with their
physical environment (e.g., machines); to advance understanding of how
multisensory control can degrade in a patient population with degeneration of
the cerebellum, which is thought to contribute importantly to tool use; and to
advance understanding of how control systems for machines can be developed to
exploit identified models of human sensorimotor control to enhance performance
of human-machine interactions. The project is significant because it develops
computable theories (computational models of human sensorimotor control) and the
physical manifestation of those theories (robotic control algorithms) that will
lead to enhanced human-machine interactions. This project directly serves the
NSF mission by promoting fundamental science exploring modes of interaction
between humans and intelligent robotic systems, which may contribute to
advancing the national health. The project supports education through outreach
activities aimed at recruiting and retaining students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to a fundamental
understanding of human motor behavior by developing a set of multidomain (haptic
and visual) models that describe the application of model-based control
strategies in the context of accommodating (or rejecting) influences from the
environment. Aim 1 builds on the assumption that the computational problem
solved by the human nervous system can be captured using model-based control
strategies involving a combination of predictive (feedforward) and reactive
(feedback) mechanisms. In a series of four sets of experiments, the team will
use single-sine "predictable" and sum-of-sines "unpredictable" disturbances of
visual and haptic feedback to interrogate sensorimotor control during reaching
and object manipulation tasks. By identifying the structure and parameters of
neuromotor control in these tasks, the PIs set the stage for later development
of engineered control systems to improve human-machine interaction. Experiments
supporting Aim 2 will mirror those serving Aim 1, identifying how sensorimotor
control is impaired in a cohort of cerebellar ataxia patients. Expected results
promise insight into the cerebellum's contributions to motor coordination and
control, thereby advancing the national research priority of understanding brain
function in health and disease. Aim 3 seeks to engineer intelligent machine
controllers to "wrap around" a human's model-based control system to enhance
cooperative performance of the overall human-machine system. Cohorts of
neurologically intact and cerebellar patients will be tested. One set of
experiments will examine the extent to which human participants can correctly
interpret haptic feedback to correctly perceive whether a coupled automaton
works "for" or "against" their efforts. A second set of experiments will exploit
individualized models of sensorimotor control to examine the extent to which
real-time visual feedback of hand position can be augmented to enhance
performance of goal-directed reaching in patients with cerebellar ataxia. The
project outcomes may have long-term impact by advancing understanding of how
machine control can be designed to enhance performance of physically-coupled
human-machine systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.