* 1825830
* Research: Longitudinal Exploration of Engineering Design Team Performance in Relation to Team Composition, Climate, and Communication Patterns
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Kathryn Jablokow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 365,792.00

Today's technical challenges are becoming more and more complex. Engineering
organizations around the world are becoming increasingly team-based in order to
deal with these challenges. In order to be effective, engineering teams need to
have strong technical skills and strong interpersonal skills. Effective team
communication and a team working environment that supports active engagement of
all members are essential components of successful teamwork. These technical and
interpersonal skills take time to learn, so it is important to understand how
they develop as engineers engage in the design process and when suitable
interventions might be needed to help engineers learn them more effectively. To
this end, this research will explore the role of team communication patterns on
engineering student team performance throughout the design process. The study
will investigate the role that the composition of the team plays in these
dynamic relationships. This research will provide evidence regarding when team
training interventions should be applied, as well as which types of
interventions will be most effective at specific points of the design process.
The research findings will benefit the broad engineering community by providing
a free collection of tested team interventions that are designed for use with
any engineering team, working in any context. Engineering educators and
practitioners can use these interventions to study their teams, improve their
team performance, and develop new research-based team interventions. When
adopted in professional settings, these interventions have the potential to lead
to improved team performance, which will save time and resources that are at a
premium in industry contexts. All of these results will benefit society by
improving the team skills and training of engineering students and
practitioners, which will support engineering innovation across academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this proposal are:
(1) to develop a model of the impact of interpersonal risk-taking on engineering
design team performance at each stage of the design process and the underlying
role of team communication patterns; (2) to investigate how team composition
(e.g., demographic, personality, cultural, and cognitive differences) influences
team communication patterns and interpersonal risk-taking at each stage of the
design process; and (3) to investigate team interventions that foster
interpersonal risk-taking and improve engineering team performance. These
objectives will be accomplished through long-term empirical investigations in
project-based engineering design courses. This project will result in the
creation of a model of engineering team effectiveness, which will serve as the
guiding framework for engineering team research and will impact the ways in
which teams are studied, their performance is quantified, and interventions are
developed and implemented in engineering education and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.