* 1826535
* Semi-Parametric Factor Analysis for Item Responses and Response Times
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Yang Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2022
* USD 185,314.00

This research project will develop a generic modeling framework for measuring
latent traits, such as language proficiency and cognitive skills, from item
response and response-time data. Response time has been identified as a useful
indicator for test performance. The project will increase understanding the role
of response time in complex test-taking behaviors, such as problem-solving
strategies and the practice/fatigue effect. Research on the role of response
time will benefit the practice of test/survey development and administration.
The measurement model to be developed will rely on very few parametric
assumptions, which will make it appropriate for analyzing a wide variety of
computerized assessment/online survey data. The project will develop efficient
algorithms for estimating the new semi-parametric model. Graduate students will
be mentored, and open-source software will be developed to facilitate the
dissemination of the research product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
formulate a general factor analysis model for categorical item responses and
continuous response times. To achieve maximal generalizability, the
distributions of item responses and response times conditional on the latent
traits will be characterized by smooth probability mass/density functions and
approximated by tensor-product regression splines with a functional analysis of
variance parameterization. The investigators will develop and implement a
stochastic expectation-maximization algorithm for the penalized maximum
likelihood estimation of the proposed semi-parametric model. To avoid
overfitting, they will examine the empirical selection of smoothing parameters
by effective degrees of freedom and a mixed-effects model representation. The
performance of these methods will be assessed via extensive Monte Carlo
simulations. The 2015 Programme for International Student Assessment data and
the Test of Relational Reasoning-junior data will be analyzed to demonstrate the
flexibility of the proposed method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.