* 1826668
* CNH-L: Interactive Dynamics of Reef Fisheries and Human Health
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christopher Golden, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,359,998.00

Coral reefs are the most biologically diverse marine ecosystems and provide
food, jobs, and protection from storms for coastal communities. The foods
derived from coral reefs play a critical role in supporting nutritional health
in many countries. Under optimal conditions, an intact coral reef can provide an
abundant supply of food resources to coastal communities. However, overfishing,
pollution, environmental change, and economic globalization are currently
transforming reefs and the surrounding communities, placing both the health of
the reef and the health of people at risk. This research seeks to understand the
interactions between coral reefs and human communities. The project seeks to
identify effective reef management practices that lead to levels and types of
seafood consumption that promote human nutrition. Undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral researchers, and local inhabitants will be trained in
methods of surveying reef health, human health, and fisheries management
practices. Through this convergent research, the investigators will develop
generalizable principles that can lead to harmonious management of the health of
fisheries and seafood-dependent people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
identify the environmental and economic factors that lead to the decline in
reef-based food systems. In addition to filling key gaps in our understanding of
the human health impacts, this project will advance social-ecological trap
theory by empirically testing the extent to which certain feedbacks produce trap
dynamics and estimating critical drivers of transitions. To accomplish this, the
investigators will dovetail their research efforts with a scheduled socio-
economic survey. This project offers a unique quasi-experimental design to study
roughly independent and isolated yet culturally similar sites, along a gradient
of reef health, market access, and fisheries management strategies. Researchers
will collect data on fisheries management approaches and the current status of
reef fish and conduct clinical health surveys to determine levels of anemia,
obesity, diabetes, and other nutritional disorders that can arise from lacking
seafood in one's diet. This award will address pressing questions about the
thresholds for reef transitions; the feedbacks between the diversity and
abundance of reef-based fisheries; and fisheries activities, management, and
consumption. Collectively, this project will illuminate the pathways by which
healthy reefs translate into healthy people and the opportunities to maintain
healthy and sustainable reef-based food systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.