* 1826270
* Collaborative Research: Mechanical Characterization of Bio-Interfaces by Shear Wave Scattering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mehmet Kurt, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,989.00

The normal mechanical properties of the tissues of the human body are often
different from those of cancerous tumors. A goal of this research project is to
create a new approach to measuring the mechanical properties of body tissues in
living patients. An existing method to measure mechanical properties called
"magnetic resonance (MR) elastography" is attractive because it does not use
damaging radiation. However, it is not now sufficiently accurate to measure the
interface properties between tumors and normal tissue. One of the problems to
overcome is that MR elastography is accurate when tissue is uniform, but it is
inaccurate at the interface between normal tissue and tumor. This interface
inaccuracy makes it more difficult to see small tumors, exactly those that need
to be detected for early treatment. This research project will determine
experimentally why the image is degraded at an interface, and then create a
theory to improve the images. The new method will be tested using real data
collected from patients to determine if it improves imaging not only for the
experimental system, but also for the patients. The research will support NSF's
mission of promoting progress of science and contribute to the goal of advancing
national health by enabling advances in medical technologies. This project will
provide outreach, training and mentoring opportunities as well for a diverse
group of K12, undergraduate and graduate research students. The research team
will also collaborate with the national and international media to disseminate
the findings to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
novel methodology for relating mechanical strength and compliance of bio-
interfaces to noninvasive wave scattering data, and thus provide safe means for
diagnostics of physicochemical nature of such interfaces. In particular, wave-
propagation across cohesive-frictional interfaces will be modeled, and a wave-
scattering-based characterization methodology will be developed to identify the
mechanical properties of the interfaces. Moreover, an advanced laser vibrometry
technique (multipoint laser vibrometry) will be utilized to measure shear wave
scattering across soft synthetic interfaces. Those measurements will serve as
validation datasets for the characterization methodology. Lastly, the efficacy
of the methodology will be tested with MR Elastography measurements. This final
step will reveal the current limitations in practice, and provide guidelines for
the next-generation of MR-based diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.