* 1826540
* Statistical Learning for Innovative Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jingchen Liu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 358,991.00

This research project will develop statistical methods for modern cognitive
assessment. With the increasing use of computer-based testing, a variety of
high-dimensional and complex structured data sets have been collected. The
project will focus on statistical modeling and inference for large-scale data
sets of complex structures. Specific topics to be addressed include the analysis
of process data, adaptive learning through a reinforcement learning framework,
and the development of computational methods for the models to be developed. The
results of this research will provide a deeper understanding of the complex data
structures collected in technology-rich interactive tasks. The project will shed
light on items in learning and assessment environments that are delivered online
both in client-server constellations and in stand-alone applications. The
project will provide guidelines to improve item quality with a focus on more
innovative item types, such as those in scenario-based and simulation-based
environments for the assessment of students' knowledge and skills in the STEM
fields. Educational researchers will be provided with tools to identify patterns
in high-dimensional data and sequence data. Students in instructional and
interventional programs will benefit from this research, especially in the STEM
fields that are increasingly defined by digital media and technology-based
interaction and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent large-scale computer-
based assessments have developed a number of interactive problem-solving items
and collaborative problem-solving items. The investigators will develop
statistical methods for the analysis of these new items. The investigators will
concentrate on several aspects that are very challenging in the analysis of
modern computer-based assessment; specifically, they will focus on: 1)
predicting human behavior by means of modern machine learning techniques; 2)
extracting latent structure and graphical structure for process data collected
by interactive problem-solving items through event history analyses; 3)
providing personalized learning material through a reinforcement learning
framework; and 4) developing numerical methods to optimize high-dimensional
functions either stochastically or deterministically. The models to be developed
will combine latent variable and graphical approaches as well as deep-learning
techniques for high-dimensional data. For modeling process data, the
investigators will employ recent advances in modeling and segmenting techniques
for natural language processing. For computation, the investigators will develop
adaptive Robbins-Monro stochastic approximation. Optimization algorithms will be
developed using recent advances in numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.