* 1826803
* ERA-CAPS: Mechano-purino signaling in abiotic stress
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Gary Stacey, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 586,005.00

To survive, plants must maintain an upright stem in the face of wind, while
their roots must forage for water and nutrients despite soil hardness and
compaction. Wind induces adaptive, structural changes in stems, such as
secondary thickening. Roots penetrate hard substrate and modify their growth and
architecture as obstacles are sensed. Despite this ability to adapt, mechanical
stresses contribute significantly to annual crop loss and decreased yield,
problems likely to worsen with changing climate and increasingly stormy and
erratic weather. Therefore, identifying the components of mechano-sensing and
signaling is a priority for crop improvement. This project explores the role of
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), generally known as an intracellular energy source,
as an extracellular signal in response to mechanical stress (e.g., wind). The
three groups involved have specific expertise in studies of plant signaling,
especially related to extracellular ATP, as well as studies of how plants
respond to mechanical stress. This project is relevant and timely regarding
sustainable agricultural; better adapted crop plants are needed urgently but
there is little information on how plants withstand mechanical stress. The
research will identify new components of how stems and roots respond to wind and
soil hardness, respectively, helping crop improvement programs for lodging, wind
resistance and penetrative root growth. In addition to aiding water and nutrient
uptake, deeper roots with more lateral outgrowth improve soil structure, thus
improving water and nutrient retention. Wind damage also inflicts losses on
forestry and urban landscapes. This project will provide foundational
understanding on the adaptability of plants to mechanical stress and for
improving crop yield for the increasing global population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence points to an intersection between
mechanobiology and purinergic signaling in plants. Purinergic signaling is the
transduction of signals elicited by extracellular purine nucleotides, such as
ATP. Specifically, extracellular ATP (eATP) has been found to increase as cells
expand (a process that generates intrinsic mechanical stress) and eATP also
increases in response to extrinsic mechanical stress. Moreover, eATP affects
root development and governs the transcriptional response to wounding as the
most severe mechanical stress. The recently discovered plant purino receptor,
Arabidopsis DORN1, provides a unique opportunity to explore at the molecular and
whole plant levels the relationships between purino- and mechano-signalling.
Critically, the structure of DORN1 indicates it serves as a reporter of cell
wall state. In this project, two, cross-disciplinary purino-signalling groups
(Stacey and Davies) and a mechanobiology group (Moulia) will delineate the DORN1
mechano-purino signaling system using molecular, biochemical and biophysical
approaches. Structure-function relationships of DORN1 will be probed to
determine how its attachment to the wall can regulate its eATP binding activity.
The cell membrane Ca2+ channels mediating the DORN1-dependent Ca2+ increase in
roots and stems will be characterized. Phenotyping mutants will determine the
impact of DORN1 and downstream Ca2+ channels on stem posture control, adaptive
response to wind, root Ca2+ response and mechano-regulated growth. Outcomes of
the research is important to agriculture and society because the results
obtained in Arabidopsis can be translated to crops. Understanding how plant
walls cope with mechanical stresses will provide a platform to overcome crop
lodging and increasing crop resilience to environmental challenges. Combined
with training students in interdisciplinary science, the project outcomes will
contribute to food and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.