* 1826988
* RCN-UBE:  The Research on STEM Education Network: Improving Research Inclusivity through a Grassroots Culture of Scientific Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Trent Sutton, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,424.00

Less than half of the students who begin their university careers in STEM majors
ultimately graduate with a STEM degree, and this number is even lower for
underrepresented minorities (URMs). Educational approaches that employ active,
inquiry-based activities have been shown to improve persistence in STEM majors,
but these methods are rare in introductory STEM classes, especially in the
satellite colleges (e.g., community colleges and technical schools) where many
URM and lower income students start their university career. The ROSE Network
will seek to address this deficiency by creating a social network of faculty
from both research universities and satellite colleges who share an interest in
STEM education reform. ROSE will specifically work to introduce active learning
and research-driven coursework to introductory biology courses at satellite
colleges, and to increase the professional development opportunities for
satellite college faculty. By implementing these reforms in areas with high URM
populations, ROSE will seek to improve academic outcomes for these groups as
well as to increase the proportion of URMs who choose graduate school or
research careers after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ROSE Network will
undertake three primary tasks in its first five years of existence. First, it
will organize meetings linking STEM-education interested faculty from 3
research-intensive, URM-serving universities as well as a number of satellite
colleges associated with them. These meetings are expected to nurture STEM
education reform collaborations as well as to provide a critical support network
for satellite college faculty looking to reform their courses. Second, ROSE will
create a website and social media presence designed to increase awareness of
STEM education research and resources available for faculty who wish to reform
their courses. Finally, a ROSE postdoctoral fellow will be appointed who will
provide critical assistance to satellite college faculty who submit proposals to
design and implement active learning reforms in their classrooms. By seeding a
culture of STEM education research and reform at the "grassroots" level of
satellite college faculty, ROSE hopes to create a growing and persistent impact
on undergraduate biology education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/). Co-funding
was provided by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.