* 1826152
* Structure-preserving Numerical Methods for Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Craig Woolsey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2021
* USD 236,059.00

This project involves fundamental research that will lay the groundwork for
computational analysis tools that can improve our understanding and prediction
of the behavior of complex dynamic systems, as wide-ranging as astrodynamics,
particle physics, geophysical fluid dynamics, plasma physics and molecular
dynamics. The research involves geometric numerical integration (GNI), which
involves numerical methods that respect the fundamental physics of a problem by
preserving the geometric properties of the governing mathematical equations.
Beyond the direct impact of the research outcomes, the project also has
significant broader impact through various educational and outreach activities
for students at all levels including a camp for middle school students to teach
them about mechanical systems and the importance of accurate numerical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past efforts in the field of geometric
numerical integration have mainly focused on developing numerical algorithms for
low-dimensional, time-invariant mechanical systems subject to conservative
forcing. The esearch effort will develop a theoretical framework to understand
and extend the capabilities of existing geometric numerical methods with regard
to explicit time-dependence, non-conservative forcing and constraints and
investigate their numerical performance for dynamical systems of practical
interest with many degrees of freedom. Specifically, the research program will
(i) develop structure-preserving methods for time-dependent mechanical systems
with external forcing and extend these methods to systems that are constrained
or that evolve on non-Euclidean manifolds, (ii) provide a thorough, quantitative
comparison of structure-preserving integration schemes with traditional methods
for a selection of specific engineering problems including discretization of
infinite-dimensional problems, and (iii) create and disseminate a well-
documented toolbox that features a variety of structure-preserving numerical
methods developed using software familiar to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.