* 1826215
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maternal early life adversity, maternal care, and offspring survival
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Matthew Zipple, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 28,800.00

Adverse environmental conditions during growth and development can affect
physiological function and well-being later in life. This dissertation project
will investigate, in a primate model system, whether early-life adversity in
primate mothers additionally influences traits in their offspring. Using
longitudinal and newly collected data for a natural population of long-lived
primates allows researchers to investigate intergenerational effects that may
inform evolutionary theory and human health research without having to obtain
multi-generation life history data from humans. The project will support
international research collaborations, public and K-12 science outreach, and
scientific training and mentoring for students from groups underrepresented in
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Amboseli baboons have been under near-
daily observation since 1971, resulting in extensive longitudinal demographic,
environmental, and behavioral data. The investigators will use these existing
data in conjunction with newly collected data on maternal care to test the
hypothesis that mothers who experienced adversity during their developmental
period provide relatively low quality maternal care to their offspring, leading
to deficits in offspring survival. The research will therefore advance knowledge
about proximate mechanisms of intergenerational transmission of
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.