* 1826982
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Support Research Projects from C-H Bond Oxidation to Engineered Molecular Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Duy Hua, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 416,212.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Duy Hua from Kansas State
University and colleagues Daniel Higgins, Stefan Bossmann, Jun Li and Emily
McLaurin have acquired a hybrid 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with solution and
solid-state capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts researchers across Kansas, particularly those
primarily undergraduate institutions in the region. The team has cyber-
infrastructure available to users to receive, manipulate and analyze the spectra
remotely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this hybrid NMR spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
areas such as catalytic asymmetric C-H bond oxidation of alkanes and the
synthesis of oligopeptides and fluorescent dyes. The spectrometer is used
tocharacterize single molecule fluorescence of aldol condensation on
heterogeneous catalysts and rapidly profilling protease using a multiplex
method. In addition, it aids microwave-assisted ionic liquid etching of
colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals and the synthesis of dye derivatives for
studies of heterogeneous nanostructures. The instrument also serves researchers
studyingf A- and B-class dye-decolorizing peroxidases lignin degradation
mechanism and applications and supramolecular chemistry of chalcogen/halogen or
hydrogen bonding. Finally, the instrumentation is also used to identify bio-
inspired metal-organic-framework (MOFs) for applications in nanotheranostics,
and for mechanistic investigations of olefin methathesis
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.