* 1826695
* Collaborative Research: The Onset of the Galapagos Plume as a Window Into the Deep Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Glenn Gaetani, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2022
* USD 142,916.00

Large igneous provinces (LIPs) are the record of the most voluminous volcanic
eruptions on Earth. These events were so large that they triggered environmental
change leading to catastrophic mass extinctions and oceanic anoxic events. The
magmas comprising LIPs are our only direct samples from the deep Earth, having
ascended to the surface in deeply rooted upwellings known as mantle plumes.
These samples from regions that have been isolated deep within the Earth for
billions of years provide information that is crucial for gaining a better
understanding the links between geochemical cycles operating on the interior and
exterior of our planet. For example, the effect of crustal materials carried
into the mantle by subduction (crustal recycling) on the long-term oxidation
evolution of the mantle, the effect of volatiles such as water on the generation
of LIP primary magmas, and the potential preservation of primordial domains in
the lower mantle remain major unknowns in the understanding of the evolution of
our planet. This team proposes to shed new light on these questions by studying
ultramafic lavas from the west coast of Costa Rica (Tortugal) as well as the
islands of Curacao and Gorgona, comprising three distinct localities remnants of
Caribbean LIP that are related to the onset of the Galapagos Plume ~89
Ma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental question to be answered in this study is
whether volatile species recently reported in komatiites and LIPs are the result
of deep recycling processes or if they reflect primordial, volatile-rich domains
within the deep Earth. In the proposed study, researchers provide a systematic
approach to answering this question. They will determine the isotopic
compositions of helium, osmium, and tungsten on the same samples on which they
will perform melt inclusion and mineral studies to constrain volatile contents
and oxidation state. These terranes are ideal for this study as they formed by
high-degrees of partial melting (thereby resembling the composition of their
source), record high crystallization temperatures, high mantle potential
temperatures, and the samples rapidly quenched at submarine conditions
potentially minimizing the effects of diffusive loss of hydrogen from the
inclusions. The volatile budgets of magmas related to the onset of the Galapagos
Plume will help quantify the budget of volatiles released at Earth's surface
during LIP eruption events, further clarifying the effects of LIPs on mass
extinctions. This project will support a graduate student at Cornell, as well as
provide independent research opportunities to undergraduate students. Results
from this project will be incorporated in outreach and teaching activities of
the PIs. This proposed research will enhance collaborations among Cornell, Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, and the University of
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.