* 1826788
* Trapping and separating objects in free solution by exploiting conformation-dependent electrophoretic mobility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Patrick Underhill, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 348,987.00

The molecular structure of DNA gives rise to its twisting, ladder-like, double
helix structure. Charged chemical groups link along the length of the ladder,
forming the backbone for the sequence of base pairs that encodes genetic
material. The double helix is folded and looped to fit within a cell, and the
folded shape is dependent upon the sequencing of base pairs. Both the charging
and shape of DNA provide a means to isolate and identify DNA. The response of
DNA to an electric field (electrophoresis) has enabled laboratory isolation,
sequencing, and unlocked the genetic code. To enable more rapid diagnostics,
isolation can be accelerated by using the response of DNA to flow through
microchannels, which is highly sensitive to shape, and thus sequencing. This
project will develop and validate the theory necessary to simultaneously use
charge and flow to isolate biomarkers, such as specific DNA sequences and
viruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charged objects have an electrophoretic mobility
that depends on their conformation. Conformation of folded molecules, in turn,
is influenced by flow. This project will use computational methods to explore
the fundamentals for isolation of deformable charged molecules in flow fields.
Straight channels will be used to study cases in which separation occurs by
different residence time through the device. Cross-slot channels will be used to
study cases in which some molecules are trapped at the center of the device.
Experiments with double-stranded DNA will be performed with the best device
designs as validation of the mechanism for deformable polymers. Rigid orientable
rods can resist compressional forces from the flow and electric field, which
leads to an additional mechanism for trapping and separation. Simulations of
rods with different flexibilities (from very rigid to very flexible) will
determine how stiff the rods must be for this other mechanism to be present. The
project will train two graduate students and two undergraduates, and incorporate
the research into courses and online interactive tools that highlight
application of mathematical modeling to biological separations. The project is
the first step in developing next generation diagnostics for rapid
identification of biological markers in a portable, small, and rapid device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Molecular Separations
program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems, and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.