* 1826693
* I-Corps:  Fluorescent Dyes and Pigments by Small Molecule Isolation Lattices, SMILES
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Amar Flood, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is related to
the development of fluorescent materials. Commercial potential is expected to
emerge when replacing costly existing technologies (like quantum dots) with
inexpensive materials able that can be embodied as highly fluorescent organic
solids. Such materials are expected to create new value and have commercial
potential in several markets in which either aesthetics, brightness, or color
transmission is critical for performance. Our primary markets of interest are
colorants in paints and polymers. Fluorescent brighteners represent an important
segment of the global dyes and pigments market (a &gt;$30B per year industry).
We believe our technology can expand this segment by streamlining the
formulation and processing of fluorescent materials, and by broadening the
available color palate. Immediate applications would arise in creation of new
fluorescent paints and coatings for construction and safety applications, and
may also provide new user-friendly color options to the growing market for 3D
printing materials. We anticipate additional downstream applications to arise in
customized biolabeling technologies and solar power generation. If successful,
the broader impacts also include the training of scientists in the process of
commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides a
universal tool to address the outstanding intellectual challenge of
understanding how to reverse loss of fluorescence from solid-state formulations
of organic dyes. The intellectual merits will derive from new synthetic
preparations of fluorescent dye and pigment technology by a method called small
molecule isolation lattices, or SMILES. This project derives from research that
has provided a way to insulate the color-carrying dye molecules from one another
allowing their fluorescence to be rescued. A wide range of proof-of-principle
experiments shows how to prepare the SMILES materials simply by mixing a
proprietary compound with existing fluorescent compounds. The results show
fluorescence in solids, as films, crystals, dyes, and particles under identical
conditions that render conventional fluorescent dyes non-
emissive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.