* 1826446
* Collaborative Research: Geometrically Optimal Gait Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ross Hatton, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 266,000.00

Animal locomotion is difficult to model accurately from first principles, and
idealized mathematical approximations often neglect potentially significant
physical effects. Yet these mathematical descriptions are the most powerful
tools available to understand natural movement, and to replicate its
effectiveness in engineered robotic systems. This project combines a powerful
mathematical analysis and design framework with a data-driven method for
developing predictive relations that reflect observed behavior. The geometric
control approach allows the construction of motions that optimize certain
beneficial attributes, such as the efficiency of travel, but requires
comprehensive mathematical models of the dynamics. On the other hand, Data-
Driven Floquet Analysis (DDFA) allows modeling of the dynamics of repetitive
motions based on observations, but provides only a narrow portrait of the system
behavior. This project will apply DDFA to construct geometric models, which will
then enable use of the methods of geometric control to find desirable gaits. By
building locomotion models from the observed outputs of the system's physical
processes, this project will allow the complexities of real motions to be
accommodated into powerful geometric design frameworks, with an efficient use of
measurements. The results will advance the nation's prosperity and welfare by
enabling robots that walk, swim, or crawl robustly and efficiently, for missions
such as search-and-rescue or environmental monitoring. The project will also
give insight on the locomotion strategy of animals. The project includes a
student outreach component, with modules that provide hands-on learning about
gaits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project combines two paradigms which consider
whole-body interaction between a system and its environment from a rigorous
mathematical perspective. One approach, based on gauge theory and geometric
mechanics, looks at how the system dynamics vary across the configuration space.
This global perspective allows for optimal gaits to be defined and their
characteristics studied, but relies on detailed system models. The second
approach, rooted in Floquet theory, views the gait cycle as fixed and analyzes
perturbations away from its cyclic motions. In this perspective, a gait is a set
of coupled oscillations in body shape and velocity. This body of work seeks to
understand the nature of the coupling through empirical observation, but
provides only local views of the system dynamics near fixed gaits, and does not
provide clear vectors along which to optimize those gaits. This project unifies
the geometric and data-driven Floquet paradigms in a way that combines their
strengths while mitigating their weaknesses. It brings geometric notions of
optimality into Floquet analysis and data-driven modeling techniques from the
Floquet paradigm into the geometric modeling approach. Experiments on a range of
systems with different body topologies and environmental interactions will play
a key role in both the development and evaluation of this new
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.