* 1826216
* Manufacturing USA: High-Resolution Flexography for Printed Electronics Using Nanoporous Carbon Nanotube Stamps
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Anastasios John Hart, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

For centuries, innovations in printing technologies have gone hand-in-hand with
advances in communication, education, and industrialization. Even though digital
media has replaced a significant fraction of print media, further breakthroughs
in printing technologies are now essential for scalable manufacturing of
electronic devices in new formats, for example, on windows, contact lenses, and
product packaging. However, the inability to print electronic materials with
micron-scale resolution at high throughput is a major roadblock to realizing
printed electronics. This award supports research to advance a new printing
process as a state-of-art manufacturing platform for low-cost printed devices.
The recently invented printing process, which uses nanoporous stamps, can
produce features with micron-scale lateral dimensions (less than 10
micrometers), fine-edge roughness (less than 1 micrometer) and highly uniform
thickness in the less than 100 nanometer range, at industrial scale printing
speeds (greater than 0.1 meter per second). The practical significance of
advances in printed electronics and the relevance of this topic to industry
partners and the NextFlex Flexible Hybrid Electronics Manufacturing Innovation
Institute suggest a pathway for transition of fundamental research in printed
electronics to the commercial marketplace. Therefore, this activity directly
enhances the nation's prosperity and security. In addition, the project
emphasizes mentorship and outreach not only to graduate and undergraduate
students in research, but to broad audiences through initiatives such as
promotion of nanomaterials using artistic imagery, and a new nanomanufacturing
teaching module for a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) on Fundamentals of
Manufacturing Processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new printing process uses
engineered nanoporous stamps composed of polymer coated carbon nanotube (CNT)
forests, which are highly porous (&gt;90 percent), retain the ink within their
volume rather than on their surfaces only, and can transfer highly uniform ink
layers under mechanical contact. The project focuses on the following three main
thrust areas: (1) investigation of the ink transfer mechanics and precision
process control, by combination of analytical and experimental approaches; (2)
roll-to-roll printing and reliability studies, wherein the nanoporous stamps are
fabricated on rollers and high-speed roll-to-roll printing is studied using a
desktop apparatus; and (3) demonstration of printed devices for three high-value
applications that leverage the unique capabilities of nanoporous flexography
process, namely quantum dot (QD) filters for imaging spectrometers, high-
resolution thin-film transistors, and optical metasurfaces. Understanding from
these efforts enable precision control of lateral and vertical dimensions of
printed features, and scalable nanoporous stamp materials that resist both
mechanical degradation and loss of print quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.