* 1826221
* An Integrated Computational-Experimental Approach to Three-dimensional Fracture in Polymer-Ceramic Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jing Du, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2024
* USD 545,418.00

Composite materials are used in spacecrafts, aircrafts, automobiles, and naval
vessels for their unique property to provide high strength- and stiffness-to-
weight ratios. They are also used in bioengineering and electronic devices; and
concrete is a composite that is one of the most widely used materials today.
Understanding their behavior is important to advance the design of these
materials, as measures taken to further strengthen or stiffen them can sometimes
yield counterintuitive or even counterproductive results. This award supports
fundamental research on understanding the material properties of composites by
examining the three-dimensional mechanics and failure evolution on the
microstructural level. An integrated combination of experiments and simulations
will be used to study their behavior, with a focus on polymer-ceramic
composites. This project will answer fundamental questions about the competing
mechanisms on the microscale that lead to the counterintuitive relations between
microstructure and resulting composite properties. The new knowledge and tools
will lead to advances in the design of composites, and significantly impact the
broad range of applications in which these materials are used, thereby impacting
national health, prosperity, and welfare; and securing the national defense. The
outreach and educational activities in this project will broaden the
participation of undergraduate and graduate students, particularly women and
from other underrepresented groups, in STEM subjects through research in the
PIs' labs. The outreach activities with visiting students from Africa also
intends to inspire interest of African-American students in STEM
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new computational approach called the continua-
discontinua particle method (CDPM) is proposed which combines the strengths of
traditional continuum-based methods in fundamental mechanics and mathematically
grounded principles, with the strengths of discrete methods in simulating
arbitrary complex three-dimensional fracture. The method allows the transition
under failure from a meshfree particle discretization based on continuum
mechanics, to that of a discrete fracture network similar to discrete particle
methods. An approach using micro X-ray computed tomography (micro-CT) and an in-
situ mechanical tester is proposed, which yields 3D full-field mechanical
measurements. Other material characterization methods, such as tensile testing,
nanoindentation, and scanning electron microscopy will also be employed to
compliment the in-situ experiments. The experiments and simulations will be
closely integrated to both formulate and validate the numerical models for
prediction of composite stiffness, strength, and toughness of polymer-ceramic
composites with varying filler morphology, as well as illuminate the underlying
causes of the structure-property relationships in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.