* 1826202
* Impact of Perlecan Mimics on Cartilage Pericellular Matrix Biomechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Michele Marcolongo, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2022
* USD 447,951.00

Osteoarthritis, which results from the degradation of the articular cartilage,
is a condition that affects a significant portion of the population in the US,
with increasing occurrence as individuals age. The pericellular matrix, a
structure that surrounds cartilage cells (chondrocytes), has been shown to
transmit information about mechanical loading in cartilage to the cells. If
proteoglycans, a type of macromolecule, in the pericellular matrix degrade, this
can lead to early onset osteoarthritis. However, the precise role of these
macromolecules in the mechanical properties and response of articular cartilage
is unknown. This project will use a molecule that mimics the behavior of an
important proteoglycan molecule, perlecan, to determine its effect on the
mechanical behavior and response of chondrocytes, the pericellular matrix, and
the extracellular matrix. By increasing knowledge in this area, new directions
of investigation will be opened up regarding cartilage degeneration and
potential therapies to minimize the impact of osteoarthritis. The research team
will involve undergraduates and underrepresented students in the research as
well as participate in STEM summer camps that support the Philadelphia K12
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is organized around three
objectives. First, the diffusion kinetics and distribution of perlecan mimics
will be confirmed in normal and osteoarthritic human articular cartilage.
Second, the in situ nanomechanical behavior of the chondrocyte, pericellular
matrix, and extracellular matrix will be determined using Atomic Force
Microscopy for both normal and osteoarthritic articular cartilage, both in the
presence and absence of the perlecan mimics. Finally, the molecular interactions
of the perlecan mimics with naturally occurring pericellular and extracellular
matrix biomolecules will be determined. An improved understanding of the role of
perlecan in articular cartilage response could lead to the ability to engineer
the pericellular matrix or extracellular matrix to support tissue regeneration
and as an augmentation to cellular tissue engineering. The techniques developed
in this study for articular cartilage will be appropriate for other
musculoskeletal tissues as well as other soft tissues that are compromised
through degeneration and aging, such as the skin or
urethra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.