* 1826220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dietary and sociocultural change and the human oral microbiome
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Siobain Duffy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 22,243.00

The emerging field of ancient microbiome research is providing crucial baseline
data for understanding the role of agriculture and social organization in
shaping the human oral microbiome over the past several thousand years. However,
additional transitional historical data are needed to enhance our understanding
of how oral microbial ecology has responded to recent sociocultural change in
the last 125 years. This dissertation project will investigate changes in the
human oral microbiome from 1890 to the modern day, to provide insights into
recent evolution and diversity of the oral microbiome, and sociocultural
influences on microbiome structure and function. The project will support
training and mentoring of students, including those from groups underrepresented
in STEM research, and may also inform clinical microbiome research. Research
findings will be shared across disciplines through peer-reviewed publications
and presentations, and communicated to the public through outreach at
participating natural history museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through both wet
and dry laboratory methods, our research objectives are to 1) characterize the
oral microbiome of diverse early 20th century Americans and 2) investigate
ecological changes in microbial communities and their metabolic functions over
time. To achieve these objectives, dental calculus (tartar) will be collected
from geographically and ethnically diverse Americans housed in natural history
skeletal collections and living populations residing in the NY metropolitan
area. Microbial DNA recovered through shotgun sequencing will be used to
reconstruct taxonomic and functional diversity of the oral microbiome. Providing
this historical context to the modern microbiome will contribute to our
understanding of microbiome ecology, human health and disease in the modern
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.