* 1826915
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Building a Friction-free High-speed Science Network and DMZ to Support Data-intensive Research and Education at The College of New Jersey
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Jeffrey Osborn, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 499,987.00

This project proposes a program of high-speed network upgrades at The College of
New Jersey (TCNJ) to support cutting-edge computational research and education.
Insufficient access to TCNJ's High Performance Computing cluster previously
created a bottleneck that limited scientific research and training. These
enhancements to TCNJ's science network will expand research capacity and
efficiency, particularly in computationally intensive fields, including
biochemistry, astrophysics, phylogenomics, high-resolution microscopy, and
undergraduate science education, and will provide students with greater access
to research opportunities in laboratories and classrooms while contributing to
the preparation of a computationally literate workforce. The upgrades enable
faster data acquisition and propagation and enhancing the research and external
collaborations of the College's many computationally intensive researchers,
including both faculty members and undergraduate students. Finally, as part of
this project, a new data visualization short course is exposing a greater number
of undergraduate students to TCNJ's computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project implements a new high-speed science network and DMZ at
The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) to support cutting-edge computational research
and education where insufficient access to TCN's High Performance Computing
cluster previously created a bottleneck that limited scientific research and
training. This project directly connects TCNJ's science buildings to its High
Performance Computing cluster via a new 80 Gigabit per second (Gbps) backbone
and 10 Gbps connections to targeted labs, classrooms, and offices. A new Science
DMZ that uses the SciPass OpenFlow application is also being implemented.
SciPass supports friction-free interconnectivity by automatically allowing
"good" data flows to bypass the Science Network firewall in real-time. Network
performance is being assessed and nationally benchmarked using perfSONAR, and a
new collaboration with Open Science Grid is allowing TCNJ to connect directly to
this distributed computing federation's national
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.