* 1826181
* RFE Design and Development: Framing Engineering as Community Activism for Values-Driven Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Virginia Davis, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 342,502.00

Several southern states, including Alabama, are transitioning to a more
manufacturing-focused economy that requires a larger engineering workforce. The
results of this research will provide a framework for interventions that
encourage more students from minority, urban, and low-SES contexts to pursue
engineering career pathways. It will also provide insights into how to motivate
and increase retention of undergraduate minority engineering students, and
increase the number of socially engaged engineers. The goal of this research is
to understand how framing engineering as an altruistic (pro-social) profession
affects the career identity development of students from low-socioeconomic
status and African American families who are enrolled in 8th - 10th grade in an
urban area within a predominantly rural Southern state. An additional goal is
understanding of how serving as a mentor in the program affects the engineering
career identity of undergraduate engineering students from similar backgrounds.
The focal population of students offer the largest untapped source of future
engineers available in this region. In an iterative process, the career identity
of students from this demographic participating in an existing informal science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education program will be explored.
These findings to develop a yearlong "Help Your Community and Your World program
that highlights the societal impact of engineering and provides undergraduate
engineering student mentors/role models from similar backgrounds. Designing and
implementing this program will lead to improved understanding of how career
identity develops for these students. This work has the potential to impact the
number and diversity of U.S. students entering the engineering workforce and
facilitate a manufacturing and STEM workforce development and economic base in
states that have historically had agricultural economic base and/or lower STEM
workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use a mixed methods
design with a heavy emphasis on qualitative data collection in the form of video
(or other multimedia) reflections, and interviews. Quantitative data will be
collected through surveys of student attitudes towards STEM, beliefs about their
ability in STEM, and intentions to study STEM in the future. For the qualitative
approach, we will use the Consensual Qualitative research approach with its
emphasis on team-built understandings of interview data. A student-centered
approach will be taken in order to understand how students make sense of and
come to understand their intersecting, and socially constructed identities. For
the newly developed summer camp, the data will be analyzed in three stages:
before the camp, during the camp, and after the camp. This will be done to
create a snapshot of the students' career identities and perceptions of
engineering at each time point. This will also help the researchers examine and
compare how their definitions, goals, and identities altered throughout the
camp. Then the findings from each snapshot will be collapsed together to
identify the larger overarching themes from the data. This method allows us to
gain a deeper understanding of the students' own meaning making about their
career identities as they progress through the program, and what aspects of the
program were salient for the students, and how interventions can better support
identity development in students. The interview and survey data will be
qualitatively analyzed and triangulated to identity underlying themes and
repeated patterns in the data. The results will be disseminated in hands on
workshops of regional teachers and out of school facilitators as well as through
traditional mechanisms such as publications and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.