* 1826407
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Evacuation Behavior for Rapid Onset Disasters such as Flash Floods and Tsunamis in the Cascadia Subduction Zone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Haizhong Wang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2022
* USD 325,920.00

This project advances the fundamental understanding of household responses to
rapid onset disasters such as flash floods and near-field tsunamis in the
Cascadia Subduction Zone. Specifically, this project will address two often-
neglected fundamental issues in evacuation research. First, although there has
been extensive research on evacuation rates and the factors that affect
household evacuation decisions, there has been little research on evacuation
logistics. In particular, recent research on evacuations from rapid onset
disasters has revealed that few studies have addressed the timing of warning
diffusion and household mobilization, let alone the predictors of these
variables. This poses a significant impediment to transportation researchers who
require accurate estimates of the time dependent rates at which evacuees enter
the evacuation route system because time is critical to the likelihood of
surviving tsunami waves or inland flooding. Second, there has been little
research on evacuees' transportation mode choices (vehicular vs. pedestrian)
from mountainous coasts where both modes are feasible. Transportation mode
choice is closely related to households' choice of evacuation routes and
destinations. These issues are addressed by conducting a behavioral expectations
survey of a representative sample of residents in three communities on the
Oregon coast. The behavioral expectations survey is supplemented by surveys of
people who participate in tsunami evacuation drills. Data from these sources are
integrated into an agent-based evacuation model. This project will develop a
tsunami interactive multi-touch exhibit to transform hazard literacy education
at the Hatfield Marine Science Center Cyber-Learning Laboratory. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare with benefits by identifying
critical needs for household and community evacuation planning in advance of
rapid onset disasters such as tsunamis and flash
floods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates the multiple disciplines of
social science, hazard science, and engineering through an interdisciplinary
agent-based modeling framework to investigate household's response to rapid
onset disasters such as tsunamis and flash floods. The research objective is to
systematically compare experiential evacuation drills to prior research on
people's responses to the earthquakes and tsunami threat in Christchurch,
Tohoku, and American Samoa, complemented by data from a tsunami evacuation
expectations survey on the Oregon coast. These data will underpin a validated
interdisciplinary agent-based modeling framework that advances the theoretical
understanding and practical utilization of scientific findings regarding
household response to imminent threats. Specifically, this project will achieve
the following four objectives: (1) conduct systematic comparisons of
experiential drills to actual events to uncover ways they differ; (2) identify
and validate the critical decision-making factors that facilitate or inhibit the
implementation of protective actions; (3) characterize the behavioral outcomes
of tsunami vertical evacuation and unplanned infrastructure disruptions; and (4)
establish an experiential cyberlearning platform to enhance tsunami literacy
education. The results from this project will provide disaster planners and
managers with a strong evidence-based framework to create effective evacuation
strategies and evacuation route system mitigation plans. This project will also
underpin improved understanding by STEM students, policy makers and planners,
agency/industry professionals, and the general public, of tsunamis and measures
that can lead to improved life safety and community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.