* 1826469
* Operationalizing Downstream Product Data for Improved Early Design Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Robert Stone, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 425,000.00

The design of new products and systems often requires focused and tailored
design approaches that improve specific aspects of product performance. Some of
these design aspects of interest are design for improved environmental
sustainability, design for reduced manufacturing complexity, and design for
increased reliability. These methods, called Design-for-X (DfX) approaches, are
typically applied at the end of a traditional design cycle, after a chosen
concept has been detailed. In this sense, DfX objectives are traditionally
considered after-the-fact additions to the design process, requiring potentially
costly iteration and further design refinement. This represents a drag on
industrial competitiveness. This research will enable DfX decision making early
in a design process by operationalizing data from these downstream DfX
approaches. The resulting data-driven design approach will yield smarter early-
design-phase design processes that result in higher-quality, better-performing,
more-economical and environmentally sustainable engineered products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish the
relationships between design decisions, product function, and downstream DfX
data of interest, and to use these relationships as a foundation for new data-
driven design processes, thus encouraging smarter design processes. Objectives
will be achieved by enabling the assessment of product functionality, creating
both a methodology for automating functional modeling, as well as generating
functional data for all products in Oregon State University?s Design Engineering
Lab Product Repository. When Research Thrust 2 is completed, designers will be
able directly quantify the downstream impact of design decisions made early in
the design process. This will reduce costly and time-consuming iteration and
provide insight into design choices that would not have been otherwise known.
Research Thrust 3 will test our method by using a Design for the Environment
dataset, and assess how well providing informed, upfront design decisions will
reduce downstream environmental impact. Through adherence to open science
doctrine, resources will be made widely available to increase their potential
impact, including open-access/publicly accessible journal and conference papers,
digital media, repository access, and data and code sharing. This work will
advance fundamental knowledge of design by developing and applying design
automation techniques to overcome a significant shortcoming in this relatively
new area of research: the lack of knowledge about how quantifiable information
related to DfX impacts (e.g., sustainability metrics) can be used throughout the
early design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.