* 1826514
* Capacity-Building Workshops for Competitive S-STEM Proposals from Two-Year Colleges in the Western U.S.
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Krupczak, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 457,004.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. It accomplishes this goal by
funding two-year and four-year institutions of higher education, that use these
funds to give scholarships and academic support to undergraduate STEM students
pursuing associate-, bachelor-, or master-level STEM degrees. Increasing the
ability of two-year colleges to obtain S-STEM funding would increase
participation of students served by these colleges. To this end, this project
will provide two annual capacity-building workshops focused on preparing
competitive proposals for submission to the S-STEM program for 24 teams from
two-year colleges. The specific focus will be on developing proposals for
submission to the Institutional Capacity Building track of the S-STEM program.
Each participating two-year college will send a two-person team composed of the
STEM faculty member who will serve as the principal investigator of the proposal
and a STEM administrator or education researcher. It is expected that working in
these teams can improve proposal quality, increase the number of S-STEM grants
to two year colleges, and most importantly, add new students to pathways toward
becoming STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will be held in
the western United States. Recruitment will be conducted through venues such as
associations for two-year colleges (e.g., American Association of Community
Colleges), and discipline-specific associations. The two-and-a-half day
workshops will feature experts in different areas to advise community college
personnel, and provide time for the team to work together on the proposal. Prior
to the workshop, the participants will interview stakeholders to better
understand their institution's needs and resources, thus building the framework
for their proposal's activities and budget. Research and evaluation of the
workshop's effectiveness will measure participants' experiences at the workshop
and their subsequent work to develop their proposal. This information will
provide insight into the constraints and affordances that workshop participants
face in applying what they learned at the workshop to build capacity for
research at two-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.