* 1826122
* Collaborative Research: Nanoengineering of Resilient Lightweight Concrete Mesostructures for Thermally Efficient Building Envelopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Mohammad Javad Abdolhosseini Qomi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 196,489.00

Cement-based materials are known for their load-bearing capacity and ability to
be shaped into large complex forms, while ensuring cost-effectiveness. However,
concrete is a poor thermal insulator. According to the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, energy loss through inefficient building envelopes inflicts
excessive financial burden on homeowners. In this research, heat transport will
be studied in a novel lightweight concrete that possesses superior intrinsic
thermal resistance. If successful, the results will benefit our society with a
new multifunctional building material that can lower heating and cooling energy
consumption, while maintaining structural performance, with a collateral benefit
that it is lightweight. The acquired knowledge can be utilized by industry and
academia in development of highly needed energy efficient and resilient building
envelopes. Furthermore, this new material can bolster our national energy
security, as well as offering positive socioeconomic and environmental impacts.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be offered unique multidisciplinary
learning experiences across fields of heat transport, atomistic simulation,
materials synthesis and characterization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to nanoengineer high efficiency scattering mechanisms into the
molecular structure of calcium-silicate-hydrate (C-S-H) using short-chain
organosilanes molecules to achieve a novel lightweight concrete with high
thermal resistance and load bearing capacity. This research combines materials
synthesis and characterization methods with atomistic simulations to study
fundamentals of heat transport and cohesion in C-S-H crosslinked with size-
specific organometallic molecules. Molecular simulations will be performed at
University of California, Irvine, to scientifically-inform the experimental
synthesis efforts carried out by researchers at the University of Houston.
Multi-scale methods of materials characterization will be applied to assess
thermo-mechanical properties of novel lightweight cement composites
incorporating C-S-H organo nano-laminates and micro-
cenospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.