* 1826715
* RII Track-2 FEC: A Multiscale, Multiphysics Modeling Framework for Genome-to Phenome Mapping via Intermediate Phenotypes
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Armando McDonald, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 5,999,995.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of stalk lodging
(breakage of plant stems prior to harvest) reduces United States grain yields by
approximately 20% annually. Despite the opportunity to greatly improve food
security, the mechanisms that cause stalk lodging have not been established.
This RII Track-2 FEC FY 2018 project entitled "Understanding the relationship
between genome and phenome" brings together a unique team from mathematics,
engineering, chemistry, genomics, and biology to provide a unique approach to
solving this complex problem. Three interjurisdictional Universities, the
University of Kentucky, University of Idaho, and Clemson University have
leveraged their research expertise to create the Kentucky/Idaho/Clemson Plant
Biomechanics Consortium (KIC-Consortium). This consortium will combine
mathematical modeling with innovative technology designed to test stem strength
on large populations of plants to predict the underlying features that both
cause, and may be used to overcome, stem lodging. These features will be
systematically used in the future to improve grain crop varieties; thus, aiding
in both food and energy security. The project will provide early career
opportunities and exposure to interdisciplinary research for seven early career
faculty and build a robust intellectual infrastructure in this field through
several training programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on stalk-lodging, a
problem that has faced agriculture (maize and sorghum in particular) for decades
and limits food security nationally and globally. Stalk lodging is the breakage
of plant stems prior to harvest and may reduce worldwide grain yields by up to
20% annually. Improving stalk lodging by a mere 1% in maize would lead to a
production increase of 20 billion pounds (~$2 billion) each year. The genetic
regulation of stalk lodging resistance has proven to be elusive. While currently
available state-of-the-art genomics approaches like genome wide association
(GWAS), gene co-expression networks, and expression quantitative locus (eQTL)
analyses have been successful in linking specific genes/variants/transcripts to
specific phenotypes, they tend to either underestimate (missing heritability),
or overestimate genome-to-phenome interactions. A more flexible
mathematical/statistical framework capable of capturing complex multiscale,
nonlinear interactions and functional relationships will provide a comprehensive
picture of genome-to-phenome relationships. The proposed interjurisdictional
plant biomechanics consortium involving the University of Kentucky, the
University of Idaho, and Clemson University (KIC-Consortium) is focused on the
hypothesis that the relationship between a genome and phenotypic traits is
governed by complex functional relationships and nonlinear interactions existing
at multiple temporal and spatial scales. To pursue this hypothesis, the KIC-
Consortium will develop a multiscale, multiphysics modeling framework that is
flexible enough to account for sophisticated nonlinear interactions and that
utilizes advanced statistical methods, finite element methods, and intermediate
phenotype data typically excluded from genome-to-phenome mapping efforts. The
team has developed integrated workforce goals and education/early career
recruitment and training goals to accommodate and advance each jurisdiction?s
research future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.