* 1826078
* Experimental and Theoretical Study of Femtosecond Microscale 3D Light Field Projection and Its Application in Multiphoton 3D Light Field Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Sy-Bor Wen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2023
* USD 386,273.00

Meta materials are periodic materials that allow microstructure design and are
able to provide unique optical, physical, chemical and bio properties that do
not exist in natural materials. The meta-materials considered in this project
are 3D, where their geometry is described in three dimensions, or 2.5D, where
the geometry is defined in a plane, but the plane can stack to make a 3D
structure. There is a great desire to have a microfabrication technique that can
provide high speed, high resolution fabrication of these structures over large
areas. Existing fabrication techniques can provide either sufficiently high
resolution to fabricate the 2.5D/3D features, or sufficiently high throughput to
cover large areas, but not both simultaneously. An advanced manufacturing
process capable of both is critical for the commercialization of the meta-
structures. This award will support research on using femtosecond laser enabled
3D virtual object projections into a photoresist (a polymeric material that
experiences property changes when exposed to light) as a method to achieve high
speed, high resolution fabrication. This is potentially feasible as a
femtosecond laser, which can realize over 10,000 focal spots in one 3D light
field projection, can enable higher speed processing. Knowledge gaps regarding
the complex, non-linear interactions between the 3D projections and the
photoresist will be addressed using computational and experimental approaches.
If successful bio-sensing/inspection and emission/absorption controlled surfaces
may be realized and contribute to U.S. defense and health related interests. The
award will also facilitate training of the future workforce as students across
all levels will gain exposure to, and experience in 2D and 3D micro fabrication
technologies. Additional educational outreach activities include engaging high
school teachers in the research, and disseminating the findings through research
websites, conference participations and journal publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this research is to establish a
new 3D lithography method based on femtosecond compressed 3D light field
projection. If successful it will realize the high-speed (compared with single-
spot multiphoton lithography), high-resolution (equal or better than half of the
wavelength) fabrication of complicated 2.5D/3D microstructures over a large
area. The technical scope of this research includes; 1) a hybrid wave analysis
approach combining general astigmatic Gaussian beam tracing and full wave
simulation to enable high accuracy wave type analysis of light focusing in large
optical systems using minimum computational power, 2) determination of
stress/strain fields and the associated deformation of cured photoresist from
multiphoton 3D light field lithography, 3) specification and fabrication of a
femtosecond compressed 3D light field projector test bed to verify the
theoretically predicted size and shape of cured photoresist patterns from
femtosecond voxel projections. This proposed research will significantly advance
the fundamental understanding in the following areas; non-linear femtosecond
light transport/focusing/absorption in photoresists; 3D virtual object
reconstructions with femtosecond pulsed light; and the feasibility of
femtosecond 3D light field projection in 3D microfabrication of each type of
2.5D/3D microstructures over a large area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.