* 1826662
* Training workshop on genomic methods and analysis for early-career invertebrate systematists
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Heather Bracken-Grissom, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 19,200.00

Invertebrates represent 95% of animal diversity, yet few genomic resources exist
for the group, leaving a great deal of information on gene diversity and
function to be discovered. Coordination among limited research efforts is
lacking, limiting comparability among projects and in some cases resulting in
duplicated efforts. The Global Invertebrate Genomics Alliance (GIGA) is a
network of diverse scientists working to coordinate and advance invertebrate
research using advanced techniques to shed light on this genomic diversity and
guide scientific discoveries. This workshop, hosted at the 3rd bi-annual GlGA
Conference, will provide a much-needed training opportunity for graduate
students and early-career researchears in the latest cutting-edge approaches for
comparative genomics and bioinformatics in systematic biology. The workshop will
also get participants actively involved with developing best practices in
invertebrate genomics. Workshop participants will be recruited from diverse
levels of expertise with a specific effort to target underrepresented
minorities. Information from this workshop will be shared with students and the
community at large through publicly available learning exercises and tutorials,
facilitating information access to minority groups. Material from this workshop
will also be showcased through several media outlets to emphasize the link and
importance of invertebrate animals to society as well as the power of genomics
in studying marine resources and habitats.

The few invertebrate genomes that have been fully sequenced reveal major
structural differences with vertebrates, unusual frequencies of transposable
elements and genomic innovations among other features. Presently, research
coordination among scientists carrying out non-model invertebrate genomics
research remains sparse or scattered. Additionally, as a whole, the invertebrate
systematics community is inadequately trained to work broadly at the genomic
level, thus hampering progress elucidating the evolutionary history for most of
the life on earth. This workshop will work to position invertebrate systematists
at the leading edge of phylogenomics methodology and begin the process of
catching up to their vertebrate systematics counterparts. Primary objectives of
this workshop are to 1) provide bioinformatics training and support to the
community; 2) promote the sharing of data, resources, and future collaborations;
3) disseminate knowledge on the best practices for laboratory protocols and
techniques; and 4) inform and support student researchers in the field of
invertebrate genomics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.