* 1826834
* RII Track-2 FEC: Insect Cryobiology and Ecophysiology (ICE) Network: Integrating Genomics, Physiology, and Modeling
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Brook Milligan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 5,684,002.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Insect Cryobiology and
Ecophysiology (ICE) Network is to understand how bees overcome harsh winter
conditions to successfully emerge and reproduce in spring. North American bees
spend most of their lives overwintering in a physiological state that protects
them from the damage caused by low temperatures and conserves resources
necessary for reproduction during the growing season. Regulation of this
overwintering state determines key elements of bee lifecycles, including when
these critical pollinators are available in natural and agricultural ecosystems.
Many aspects of overwintering physiology have been studied in diverse insects,
however a deeper understanding of overwintering has been hindered by complex
interactions among gene expression, physiology, and environmental context. Bees
are an excellent group in which to study overwintering because we already know
much about their overwintering physiology, and we have genomic resources in
multiple closely related species. Furthermore, using bees facilitates modeling
of population responses to changing environments. The ICE Network brings
together experts in genomics, gene regulation, physiology, and ecological
modeling. The ultimate goal of the model will be to predict how each of the
three species will respond to changes in temperature. Faculty from land-grant
universities will collaborate with scientist from the USDA Agricultural Research
Service establishing close connections in three states, North Dakota, Wyoming,
and New Mexico. The results will make it possible to predict and manipulate
overwintering phenotypes in three agriculturally-relevant bee species, setting
the stage for improved management of those species and more accurate forecasting
of wild and agricultural bee populations. The proposed work will support the
development of early-career faculty members, and will involve students from
diverse backgrounds, including students from Hispanic Serving Institutions and
Tribal colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Complex
phenotypes frequently have shared physiological mechanisms, but determining the
underlying genetic regulation continues to be a challenge. The long-term
research goal of the Insect Cryobiology and Ecophysiology (ICE) Network is to
understand the genetic and physiological regulation of the overwintering
phenotype in solitary and social bees. Overwintering, also called diapause, is
hypothesized to be regulated by a shared genetic ?tool kit.? Identifying this
tool kit has been hindered because insects have diverse overwintering strategies
and there are few opportunities for close comparisons between species with
sequenced genomes. Using three species of bee that use different ecological
approaches to overwintering and combining expertise from genetic to ecological
levels, the ICE Network is uniquely poised to successfully investigate the
genome to phenome trajectory of overwintering. The goal of this proposal is to
determine the relative contributions to overwintering phenotypes of standing
genetic variation, organismal physiology, and maternal effects. In Aim 1, the
genomic contributions to overwintering phenotypes will be examined, including
maternal effects through methylation. Obligate overwintering species are
predicted to have SNPs associated with geographical variation in the timing of
overwintering. In contrast, facultative overwintering species are expected to
have maternally-regulated epigenetic signatures. In Aim 2, metabolomics and
oxidative stress assays will be used to characterize the physiological effects
of low temperature stress during overwintering. The balance between oxidative
damage and antioxidant production, and increased lipid metabolism are expected
to be significant predictors of overwintering success. In Aim 3, a model will be
developed using the findings of Aim 1 and 2 to predict success of overwintering
bees in response to changing environmental conditions. The proposal will support
the development of two early-career faculty, three postdoctoral fellows, eight
graduate students, and 24 undergraduates. The ICE Network will recruit students
from NMSU, a Hispanic-serving university, and tribal college students affiliated
with existing EPSCoR Programs in North Dakota and Wyoming. Infrastructure
improvements include core facility equipment for metabolomics and respiration
and improvements to an organismal rearing facility. The proposed research will
improve management practices for three bee species that are used in agricultural
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.