* 1826765
* Collaborative Research: Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Students in STEM Education Using Nanotechnology
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Stout, Tidewater Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 230,805.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. Louis Stokes Regional Centers of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSRCEs) are designed to serve as
regional testbeds for outreach, knowledge-generating and diffusion activities or
other activities that contribute to successful practices in STEM education.
LSRCE activities may also be concentrated in the development of disciplinary
research institutes. Norfolk State University, Tidewater Community College and
Pennsylvania State University (lead collaborators) and other partner
organizations that include the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Langley Research Center (NASA-LaRC), Jefferson National Research Laboratory
Applied Research Center (JLab-ARC), and Eastern Virginia Medical School (EVMS),
all active members of the broader nanoscience and engineering research
community, will collaborate as part of the Southeastern Coalition for Engagement
and Exchange in Nanotechnology Education (SCENE), a regional Louis Stokes Center
for Excellence in Broadening Participation.

SCENE utilizes nanotechnology and its many applications as a conduit for
engaging and inspiring talented students from traditionally underrepresented
minority populations. Through guided mentoring and opportunities for research
and hands-on training experiences, students will (1) pair student participants
with accomplished research professionals to seed and motivate continuing
research activities; (2) sponsor student-centered research and training
activities to achieve cohorts of students who are prepared and competitive for
opportunities in advanced STEM environments; and, (3) utilize its unique
resources and established collaborative connections to deliver and disseminate a
suite of digitally prepared products and services to users. The program design
augments an extensive summer training and internship component, with an
aggressive strategy to prepare and mentor talented students as they generate
portfolios and generate competitive profiles for research opportunities at
national labs and federal research agencies (e.g. NSF GRFP and NASA Graduate
Student Fellowship Program (GSFP) applications).

The center will be led by multiple institution types including a historically
black university, a community college, and a research I institution that houses
the Center for Nanotechnology Education and Utilization in addition to federal
and private sector organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.