* 1826891
* Global Mathematics in the Twentieth and Twenty-first Centuries
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Kenneth Alder, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 54,577.00

This award supports a two year postdoctoral research and training project to
advance an interdisciplinary program of scholarship on the origins and
consequences of globalization in modern mathematics from the early twentieth
century to the present. By examining and promoting new understandings of the
origins and consequences of today's global mathematical discipline, this project
offers numerous broader impacts. Better accounts of mathematicians' social
organization may improve participation in mathematics by drawing attention to
hidden social and structural barriers, while increasing mathematicians'
awareness of the origins and legacies of current disciplinary norms and
institutions. Public engagement activities from the project will offer resources
for science and mathematics educators and policymakers and increase public
appreciation of mathematics, its history, and its ongoing societal relevance,
especially in contexts where such historical materials are not readily
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A century ago, the world of professional
mathematics was cloistered and narrow, limited by geographic, political,
institutional, and intellectual divisions. Now, leading mathematicians regularly
travel the globe and collaborate across great distances. The proposed training
and research will help define newly emerging scholarship in the global history
and sociology of mathematics, developing connections within a nascent scholarly
community for the subject and offering one of the first comprehensive accounts
of the mid-century emergence of mathematics as a continent-crossing enterprise.
This work contributes to multiple open topics in historical and sociological
studies of the discipline, including the history and sociology of mathematical
collaboration, the institutional shaping of mathematics, the intellectual
consequences of changing social structures in mathematics, the politics of
language and socioeconomic inequality, and the course and effects of
globalization in mathematics and related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.