* 1826978
* IRES Track-1: International Research Experiences for Students in Renewable Energy and Environmental Sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 284,361.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will provide
international research experiences for at least 12 undergraduate and/or graduate
students to carry out international collaborative researches at the School of
Renewable Energy of North China Electric Power University (NCEPU) in Beijing,
China for 8 weeks. The objective of the IRES project is to provide the future
American engineers a global perspective and opportunities for their professional
growth through meaningful international cooperative research training,
networking and mentoring in the fields of renewable energy and environmental
sustainability in general, and biomass processing technology and wind turbine
aeromechanics, in particular. This project will bring together IRES
participants, involved professors, Chinese faculty members, and their
graduate/undergraduate students with multi-cultural background in a multi-level
learning experience infused with the excitement of discovery. It will train
participants conduct research in an international research environment to remain
at the forefront of world science and technology, making them more proficient in
the technical subjects. The program will provide opportunities for their
professional development to build their future collaboration network and expose
them to Chinese culture and tradition, applicable technological trends and
business practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research themes of this IRES
program are wind turbine aeromechanics and pyrolysis-based biomass
thermochemical conversion. By leveraging the unique research facilities and
instruments/equipment available at NCEPU and under the supervision of the
Chinese faulty mentors, the IRES students on "biomass track" will investigate
the effects of blended biomass feedstocks and catalytic co-pyrolysis of biomass
and plastic wastes for synergistic production of high quality biofuels and
value-added chemicals, while the IRES students on "wind energy track" will
conduct comprehensive experimental investigations to quantify surface wind
characteristics and evaluate their effects on the aeromechanic performance and
wake interferences of wind turbines sited over various complex terrains for
higher total power yield and better durability of wind turbines operating on
onshore and offshore wind farms. In addition to working in the laboratory to
conduct innovative research, the IRES students will also participate in various
social and cultural exchanging activities in order to enhance student-faculty,
student-mentor and student-student interactions to enable the IRES participants
to build their personal friendship and professional connections with
participating Chinese mentors and students as well as among the IRES
participants themselves on which to build networking for their future
professional development and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.