* 1826790
* MRI: Development of an Ultrafast Photoluminescence and Transient Absorption Microscope in Ultrahigh Vacuum for Studying Electronic Properties of 2-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* John Asbury, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,334.00

The ability to control the growth and doping of semiconductors such as silicon
enabled the development of electronic materials that revolutionized modern
society in the digital age. Two-dimensional materials such as transition metal
dichalcogenides are a new class of electronic materials that have the potential
to open new technological advances on a similar scale. Major advances in the
growth of two-dimensional materials have occurred in recent years. However,
there remains a fundamental need to develop doping and processing chemistries
that enable the control of the electronic properties of two-dimensional
materials. The instrument developed in this project combines an ultrafast
photoluminescence and transient absorption microscope, to characterize the
electronic properties of two-dimensional materials, with an ultrahigh vacuum
system that controls doping chemistries. It significantly expands the research
infrastructure for users of the NSF Materials Innovation Platform focused on
two-dimensional materials by enabling correlative measurements at the same
locations in the samples using multiple characterization methods. The instrument
serves a user-base of researchers both at Pennsylvania State University and in
the broader national two-dimensional materials community. Graduate students and
post-doctoral scholars using the instrument gain important professional
development experience by facilitating workshops and associated training modules
that are offered and advertised through the Materials Research Institute at
Pennsylvania State University and the Center for Atomically Thin Multifunctional
Coatings, which is an Industry-University Cooperative Research Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the ultrafast photoluminescence and
transient absorption microscope in an ultrahigh vacuum system opens the ability
to probe both emissive and non-emissive states with ultrafast time resolution in
an imaging platform. It also enables the control of the sample environment and
doping chemistry for characterization of the electronic and transport properties
of two-dimensional materials. These capabilities are critical because two-
dimensional materials are single- or few layer-structures with electronic
properties that are strongly influenced by surface interactions. Furthermore,
many of the electronic states involved in charge transfer and transport in two-
dimensional materials are weakly- or non-emissive with diffusion properties and
lifetimes that depend sensitively on the epitaxial alignment and growth of the
materials. The ultrafast microscopy capability of the instrument combined with
an ultrahigh vacuum sample transfer system and attached preparation chamber
enables the dynamics and transport of excitons and charge carriers to be
spatially and temporally resolved and correlated with their growth and doping
chemistries. The electronic and transport properties of the same regions of the
samples can be investigated using scanned probe and electron microscopy
measurements and photoemission studies for complete characterization and
development of design rules that will guide the development of two-dimensional
materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.