* 1826924
* RAPID: Reconstruction of Atmospheric Observatory at Pico Este, Puerto Rico, After the Impact of Hurricane Maria
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Olga Mayol Bracero, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This project will enable the restoration of the atmospheric measurement program
at the Pico Este Cloud Station. The Pico Este Cloud Station is located in a
tropical montane cloud forest, one of the most sensitive and vulnerable of the
world's ecosystems to climate change. The station is frequently above cloud
base, thus facilitating the study of clouds without the need for aircraft and
the related complexity and costs. The station was lost in its totality due to
Hurricane Maria, a category four hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson wind scale.
This hurricane passed across Puerto Rico on September 20, 2017 and greatly
affected the island and its residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurements
carried out at Pico Este and its companion Cabezas de San Juan Atmospheric
Observatory since 2004 are a cornerstone of cloud-based research in Puerto Rico
because they have been continuous and long-term, enabling the evaluation of
trends in aerosol and cloud properties, and providing a context for process-
oriented short-term field campaigns. These two sites are unique in the world, as
they have been the only locations that provided long-term measurements of dust
aerosols in the marine boundary layer that can be linked to chemical and
microphysical properties of clouds above and downwind of the sites. Research
activities at Pico Este are focused on aerosol, cloud, and precipitation
studies, with a particular emphasis on aerosol and cloud interactions and
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.