* 1826642
* Understanding the antimicrobial mechanism of metal nanoparticles using super resolution fluorescence microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Jingyi Chen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2022
* USD 498,983.00

Antibiotic resistance of bacteria has become one of the biggest threats to
public health in the United States and all over the world. Among the alternative
antimicrobial agents, metal nanoparticles have attracted broad interests and
attention due to their capabilities for suppressing the growth of bacteria and
killing bacteria. However, the exact mechanisms for the antimicrobial effects of
metal nanoparticles remain poorly understood. This project will establish the
fundamental mechanisms of the antimicrobial behavior of metal nanoparticles as
alternatives to commonly prescribed antibiotics. The research team will develop
and use advanced imaging tools and techniques with superior spatial and temporal
resolution to investigate the interactions between individual live bacteria and
silver nanoparticles and obtain knowledge of silver nanoparticles' antimicrobial
effects. Results from this research will provide guiding principles on the
design and production of metal nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications in
food safety and hospital infection-treatments, thus improving U.S. public health
and benefiting society. Furthermore, comprehensive education and outreach
activities will be implemented to cultivate the interests of America's next
generation of scientists and engineers, and provide them with experience in and
knowledge of nanomaterials and their applications. This will reinforce and
improve the United States' future competitive strengths in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to obtain a
quantitative understanding of the antimicrobial mechanism of silver
nanoparticles and their interactions with live bacteria at the single-cell
level. This will be accomplished by developing methodologies using super-
resolution fluorescence microscopy, which will allow the studies of individual
biomolecules (e.g., proteins, DNA, and lipids) and their dynamics with a spatial
resolution of 20 nanometers and a temporal resolution of 10-30 milliseconds. The
goal of the research will be achieved by (1) identifying the effects of silver
nanoparticles on spatial organization and function of nucleoid-associated
proteins; (2) quantifying how bacterial membrane is damaged by silver
nanoparticles; and (3) measuring the dependence of silver nanoparticles?
effectiveness on particle shapes, charges, and surface modifications. The
results from super-resolution fluorescence microscopy will be validated and
complemented by conventional biological techniques and assays. This research
will address the current existing controversies surrounding the antimicrobial
mechanisms of metal nanoparticles, which are due in part to the lack of both
temporal and spatial resolution on single live bacteria. The result will be a
better understanding of the nano-bio interface at the cellular and molecular
levels. This research will provide valuable, quantitative information necessary
to guide the rational design and fabrication of metal nanoparticles for
antimicrobial applications. The methodologies developed in this research are
expected to be applicable to other nanostructures and different types of
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.