* 1826797
* Mentoring Effectiveness in Undergraduate Research: An Examination of Its Impacts on Minority Students? Self-Efficacy and Persistence in STEM Fields
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Conrad Ingram, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,971,561.00

GEORGIA ALABAMA LOUIS STOKES ALLIANCE FOR MINORITY PARTICIPATION (GA-AL LSAMP)
STEM PATHWAY AND RESEARCH ALLIANCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Georgia-Alabama LSAMP STEM Pathways and
Research Alliance is comprised of the nine partner institutions, namely, Clark
Atlanta University (Lead institution), Atlanta Metropolitan State College,
Georgia State University, J.F. Drake Community and Technical College, Lawson
State Community College, Morehouse College, University of West Georgia, Paine
College and Spelman College. The alliance will provide transformative leadership
in the education and preparation of underrepresented minority students by
replicating the most successful strategies from our model institutions (Georgia
State university and Spelman College) among the rest of our alliance partners.
Through a combination of mentoring in undergraduate research, technology
enhancement, academic advising, professional development programs, scientific
presentations and new pathways for transfer from 2-year to 4-year colleges and
universities, students will improve their performance and their progress towards
earing BS degrees in STEM fields and will be prepared for pursuing graduate
studies in these areas. This will in effect increase the number of qualified and
diverse professionals available for the STEM workforce. A significant component
of the program is the mentoring of students by faculty. We will assess the
mentoring capacity of faculty at the 4-year institutions within the alliance and
examine the impact of faculty development on mentoring competence and on
students? outcomes, such as science-self efficacy, persistence, degree
completion in STEM fields, and enrollment in graduate programs in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (GA-AL LSAMP) is
comprised of nine partner institutions, namely, Clark Atlanta University (Lead
institution/HBCU), Atlanta Metropolitan State College (community college),
Georgia State University (GSU/MSI), J.F. Drake Community and Technical College
(MSI) Lawson State Community College (MSI), Morehouse College (all male/HBCU),
University of West Georgia, (UWG), Paine College (HBCU), and Spelman College
(all female/HBCU). Through a combination of mentoring in undergraduate research,
technology enhancement, academic advising, professional development programs,
scientific presentations and new pathways for transfer from 2-year to 4-year
colleges and universities, the alliance will increase the number of
underrepresented minority science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) students, in this case predominantly African Americans, who graduate with
BS degrees. The alliance will work collaboratively to accomplish the following
goals: 1) Progressively increase the number of minority students recruited into
STEM majors by 10 % over five-years, 2) Progressively increase persistence and
progression of minority STEM students in the alliance to an average of 85% over
five-years, 3) Progressively increase the number of minority STEM students
transferring from alliance two-year community colleges to four-year
baccalaureate institutions by 10% over five- years, 4) Progressively increase
the number of minority STEM baccalaureate graduates from the academic year 2016
-2017 baseline total of 629 by 10% over five years, 5) Progressively increase
the number of minority STEM baccalaureate graduates who compete successfully for
entry into graduate degree programs from over five-years, and 6) Conduct
educational research to access the impact of mentoring in undergraduate research
on GA-AL LSAMP scholars' persistence, progress and graduation as minority STEM
majors. The program will in effect, increase the number of qualified and diverse
professionals available for the STEM workforce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.