* 1826550
* Collaborative Research: Measuring the Composition and Structure of Rocky Extrasolar Bodies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Zuckerman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2023
* USD 17,548.00

White dwarf stars collected leftover rocky material from planetary systems that
orbited their host stars until the stars reached their end of life and caused
their planets to break apart. These "polluted" white dwarf stars can be studied
using telescopes that measure their light broken down into different
wavelengths. The signatures of different chemical elements appear at different
wavelengths. The chemical elements found telescopically give information about
the bulk chemical composition of rocky material in those disintegrating planets.
The types of rocks present in the planets can be reconstructed from the bulk
chemical composition. The scientists propose studies that will use spectral
observations to find more polluted white dwarf stars and assess the water and
rocky content of the planetary bodies that orbited the white dwarf stars,
looking for signs of earth-like plate tectonics in the planetary bodies, and
studying pathways for material to travel from the planetary bodies to the host
stars. This project supports the mission of the NSF by promoting our
understanding of the composition of planets orbiting other stars. The
investigators will include students who participate in the UC San Diego STARS
program and other institutional initiatives aimed at underrepresented groups in
their research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
continue spectroscopic observations of candidate white dwarf stars to identify
those that are most heavily polluted. Estimates of the water content for all
parent bodies polluting white dwarfs will be made in combination with an
assessment of the water content in white dwarfs being polluted by substantial
quantities of hydrogen. From a sample of nearly 100 white dwarfs, they will
estimate the occurrence rate for water-rich rocky bodies in other planetary
systems. For the subset of white dwarf stars that are being polluted by rocky
crust and mantle material, they will conduct a deep search for the chemical
signature of plate tectonics. Detections or deep limits on Ba and Sr will inform
the possibility of plate tectonics for massive differentiated rocky bodies
outside the Solar System. Dynamical simulations will examine the ability of
collisional processes to strip massive differentiated rocky bodies of their
outermost crust and mantle layers, and then track this ejecta and the body it
originated from to explore how white dwarfs get polluted by material from
specific regions of a rocky body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.