* 1826886
* JSU-UCSB Partnership For Research and Education in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Dorothy Pak, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,870,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jackson State University (JSU)
Partnership in Research and Education for Materials (PREM) project with the
University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC), will provide opportunities for underrepresented
minority (URM) participants to become next generation materials scientists
through innovative research and education in emerging research areas via JSU-
UCSB PREM. African-Americans represent 98 percent of the minority population in
Mississippi and 37 percent of its citizens, giving it the highest concentration
per capita of this minority group in the nation. Partnership will bring unique
resources to address scientific issues of national and global priority through
pioneering research and education in materials science. The JSU-UCSB PREM will
develop a multi-institutional, interdisciplinary research team to solve daily
life problems by creating innovative materials and using smart nanomaterials-
based technology. The partnership will provide minority participants from JSU
and other local Mississippi universities, community colleges, and K-12 schools
the opportunity to acquire a comprehensive STEM education with components
ranging from materials research experiences at UCSB or JSU to formal and
informal lessons, conferences with world renowned scientists and nano-
exhibitions. An anticipated far-reaching and lasting effect of the current PREM
project is its impact on training and mentoring African American students in
areas of research that have excellent long-term job
prospects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will focus on the development and application of new materials. JSU-
UCSB PREM will provide intellectually stimulating research and educational
experiences for underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students in the
collaborative materials science projects by bringing together a group of
interdisciplinary faculty members from JSU and UCSB. The proposed partnership
will foster innovation by creating cognitive models, facilitation techniques and
smart technologies through theory-experiment-coupled research and development of
new materials, addressing societal and environmental concerns. Specifically, the
focus will be on three research subprojects, characterized by cutting-edge world
class research and a highly collaborative research environment: 1) Bio-inspired
3D Nanocomposites with Superior Mechanical Strength and Toughness, 2) Air Stable
All-Inorganic Perovskites Based Optoelectronic Materials and 3) Transition Metal
Dichalcogenides (TMDs) Based Mixed-Dimensional Heterostructures Materials.
Research groups will be composed of JSU and UCSB faculty members who, with their
students and postdoctoral associates, form a highly cohesive team of researchers
able to investigate fundamental scientific questions and pathways to reach
significant technological goals that can only be properly explored in a
collaborative, multidisciplinary mode. The partnership will allow the
development of JSU as a center of excellence in advanced 2D and 3D materials
research while significantly impacting the diversity and educational and
outreach activities at UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.