* 1826632
* Coordinating Curricula and User Preferences to Increase the Participation of Women and Students of Color in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yingtao Jiang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

For several decades, academic institutions have received financial resources to
broaden participation in engineering programs. Despite these funded recruitment
and retention efforts, most engineering programs have achieved little
improvement in the participation of women, students of color, individuals with
disabilities, and other underrepresented groups. One hypothesis to explain this
discrepancy is that the low representation of women and students of color in
engineering results from the lack of accessibility of engineering curricula. To
test this hypothesis, this project seeks to study engineering curricula and
student preferences. Based on those results, it aims to develop a set of
curriculum guidelines and models that may increase the alignment between
engineering curricula and students' expectations and preferences for learning.
These results have the potential to broaden participation of women and students
of color in engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project uses an exploratory
sequential mixed methods design, which begins with exploratory activities and
builds to more systematic testing of research questions concerning how
particular user preferences influence student participation. Investigators will
engage in data mining of syllabi, course content, public spaces, and instructor
materials to aggregate information about curricula presented in different
representational forms, such as equations, images, narratives, simulations, and
videos. From these data, it is anticipated that qualitatively and quantitatively
distinct profiles of course representations will be generated. The investigators
will track longitudinal persistence of students in STEM, in relationship to
course structure and individual learner preferences. Understanding the
intersection between learner preferences and engineering curricula has the
potential to improve engineering education and broaden participation in the
field of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.