* 1826885
* Workshop: Advancing data management and sharing practices in the anthropological sciences: Milwaukee, WI - October 2018
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Trudy Turner, American Association of Physical Anthropologists
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2021
* USD 48,300.00

The anthropological sciences study human culture and biology using a range of
methods that have been developed within and outside of anthropology. These
methods result in many different types of data, including not only digital
records and measurements, but also bones and fossils, environmental samples, DNA
and other biomarkers, and field notes. This award will support a workshop for
researchers in biological anthropology and closely related fields to address
this diversity of data and discuss best practices in data management and
sharing. The workshop will build upon available reports and best practices from
other disciplines, including cultural anthropology and archaeology, and cover
issues that may be particularly salient in anthropological disciplines. Workshop
outcomes will be shared with the academic community and will suggest a path
forward for addressing specific data issues in greater detail. Improvements in
data sharing in biological anthropology will allow for expanded collaborations
within and across disciplines, and promote expanded access to scientific data
and findings generated in federally- and privately-funded research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this data workshop, approximately 30 participants from
anthropology departments in the United States will convene in Milwaukee, WI, to
address issues that impede more extensive data sharing and to identify resources
that support sharing of the various data types generated within the subfields of
biological anthropology. Research in biological anthropology generates a wide
range of data and physical collections on the form, physiology, and behavior of
humans and non-human primates. Such data include, but are not limited to,
biological data stored digitally and/or as biosamples, fossil and skeletal
measurements and images and the specimens themselves, paleoenvironmental data
associated with human and non-human primate sites, and ethnographic and
behavioral notes and records. Data may be linked to individual, short-term
projects or long-term field sites that have been collecting waves of data over
several decades, and may come with ethical and logistical limitations related to
issues such as human subjects research, international collaborations, and
preservation of physical collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.