* 1826820
* RII Track-2 FEC:  Building Field-Based Ecophysiological Genome-to-Phenome Prediction
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Stephen Welch, Kansas State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2023
* USD 4,000,000.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;It is widely agreed that agricultural crop
production is not growing to meet the needs of the increasing human population.
This project brings together researchers from the Kansas State University,
Oklahoma State University, and Langston University (a Historically Black
University), to develop a new way to model and predict important crop production
traits in wheat. One of the greatest challenges of current crop trait prediction
is that it falls in an underpopulated borderland between plant physiology,
biological engineering, genetics, computational biology, mathematics,
statistics, and computer science. Therefore, to bridge this gap, mathematical
models will be produced that combine both observational data using Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles and robots, and genetics data. These new models are expected to
simplify crop modeling for farmers, and will aid in farm management, and can
easily be applied to other crops and in other environments. Many additional
benefits will also accrue. First, commonalities between these mathematical
models will mean that results will readily transfer to many other crops.
Moreover, the benefits of combining genetic and observational data in this way
to predict crop traits will aid on-farm crop management, enhancing food
security. Educational programs for undergraduates, graduate students, and
faculty in these disciplines will enlarge a globally competitive workforce.
Involvement of key corporate partners will also speed research transfer to the
private sector both directly and by creating a market for project trainees.
Finally, the sensing/measuring devices to be bought or built will enhance the
ability of partners to conduct a wide range of related, data-intensive research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;It is widely agreed that
agricultural crop production is not on track to meet the production doubling
needed by 2050 for humanity to avoid major food security disruption. Farmers
need genetically-informed analytics to predict the outcomes of management
options amongst which they may choose and apply in their unique field
environments. This project brings together researchers from the sity of Kansas
State University, Oklahoma State University, and Langston University (a
Historically Black University), and presents new genetically- and
physiologically-informed proof-of-concept wheat physiologically-based crop
models (CMs). These CMs will link to state-of-the-art field monitoring
technologies with genomic data, thus rebalancing direct monitoring vs. indirect
model calculation. The data will include: (1) airborne imagery to extract
morphological features, canopy temperatures, and light interception. (2)
Multivariate soil profile data will be collected by robots at 2-30 cm
(horizontal/vertical) and three-day temporal resolution. (3) Gene expression
data on selected double haploid lines over 64 combinations of locations, dates,
and years will aid in model building. (4) CM and quantitative genetics
integration will also be aided by expanding the number of genotyped wheat lines
within the Kansas and Oklahoma breeding programs. Such large data sets
ordinarily pose computational challenges for models as complex as CMs. In
contrast to extant CMs, the new models will efficiently combine differential
equation solvers, maximum entropy and Bayesian methods, and high-performance
computing. The results will be methods able to predict the traits of novel
genotypes in novel environments not used to construct the models. Many
additional benefits will also accrue. First, commonalities between CMs will mean
that results will readily transfer to many other crops. Moreover, increased
genome to phenome prediction accuracy will aid on-farm crop management,
enhancing food security. Educational programs for undergraduates, graduate
students, and faculty in these disciplines will create and enlarge a globally
competitive workforce. Involving key corporate partners will also speed research
transfer directly and by creating a market for project trainees. Finally, the
sensing/measuring devices to be bought or built will enhance partner ability to
conduct a wide range of related, data-intensive
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.