* 1826508
* Collaborative Research:  Deciphering upper plate deformation and faulting processes in Central America with integrated geodetic and seismic analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 241,222.00

In subduction zones, where one tectonic plate descends into the Earth beneath
another, a portion of the upper plate called the fore-arc sometimes moves
horizontally in a direction that is nearly orthogonal to the direction of
convergence between the two plates. For such fore-arc migration to occur, a zone
of deformation must exist in the upper plate where movement on faults
accomodates the motion of the fore-arc. However, the locations and orientations
of faults in the zone of deformation, and their relationship to volcanoes in the
upper plate, differ from one subduction zone to the next. This study will
improve a global understanding of the processes that enable fore-arc migration
by studying them in Nicaragua where the Cocos plate subducts to the northeast
beneath the Caribbean plate, and the Caribbean plate fore-arc is moving to the
northwest. In particular, this work will test whether the volcanoes in Nicaragua
create weak zones in the upper plate that concentrate faulting and earthquakes
in the stronger parts of the plate that lie between volcanoes. GPS data will be
used to measure where shearing related to fore-arc motion is localized. The
locations of large earthquakes and their aftershocks will be improved and used
to determine the orientations of active faults. Seismic waves will be used to
probe the structure of the upper plate and determine where partial melt rising
up to the volcanoes has weakened the upper plate. In addition to improving
understanding of fore-arc transport processes, this work will help in assessing
where earthquake faults pose hazards to the population of Nicaragua. The project
will contribute to the education and career development of graduate students at
Penn State and Brown. At least one undergraduate will work on this project
through the Leadership Alliance (Brown), and the PA Space Grant (Penn State),
programs that recruit students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields. The
project will also reach a broader group of students and postdocs at Penn State
and Brown through research group meetings and courses, and will be featured in
outreach with elementary schools in Providence, RI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strain
partitioning and the formation of migrating fore-arc terranes due to oblique
convergence have been documented in numerous subduction zones around the globe,
yet major questions remain regarding how the motion of these terranes is
accommodated in the upper plate. Studies in different subduction zones have
reached varying conclusions about the impact of arc magmatism on upper plate
faulting associated with fore-arc transport, and whether and why the apparent
geometry of deformation and faulting varies between subduction zones, and in
some cases along the strike of a single fore-arc sliver. This project will
address these global questions by testing the hypothesis that fore-arc transport
in Nicaragua represents an end-member case where crustal weakening due to magma
beneath volcanic centers strongly mediates the geometry of faulting and
deformation. Along-arc changes in upper plate deformation are revealed by a
dramatic rotation in the direction of interseismic velocities from margin-normal
in central Costa Rica to margin-parallel in Nicaragua where fore-arc sliver
transport is most pronounced. In Nicaragua, evidence for bookshelf faulting and
the rotation of fore-arc blocks about vertical axes is provided by margin-normal
faults with large earthquakes. However, the distribution of bookshelf faulting
versus arc-parallel strike-slip faults, their roles in accommodating fore-arc
transport, and the relationship of faulting to a rheologically weak arc, remain
uncertain. This project will use geodetic and seismic data to test the
hypothesis that zones of rheological weakness associated with magmatic centers
significantly alter the mode of upper plate deformation and faulting. Four
predictions of this hypothesis will be tested: 1) deformation associated with
fore-arc transport is localized in the arc; 2) faulting is localized in zones of
strong crust between volcanic centers; 3) deformation is accommodated by
bookshelf faulting and margin-parallel strike-slip faulting, where fault
orientation is partially controlled by the spacing of volcanic centers; and 4)
fore-arc transport is partially accommodated by magmatism. Integrated geodetic
and seismic analyses will test the four model predictions. The analysis of new
and existing GPS data will indicate the location of the maximum strain gradient
(1) and anomalous regions of shear and dilatational strain rates (2-4). GPS-
derived coseismic displacements combined with earthquake relocations and
analyses of source directivity will indicate fault geometry (2-3). Joint
analyses and inversions of surface wave and converted body wave data will
improve models of upper plate structure and crust and mantle rheology, including
constraints on the distribution of partial melt in the crust (i.e., weak zones
associated with the arc). The investigators will work with colleagues at INETER
(the agency that monitors earthquakes and volcanoes in Nicaragua) to improve
hazard assessment from upper plate earthquakes in relation to population. New
GPS network installations will expand the utility of the COCONet GPS network.
Another outcome will be software and a workflow to enable the seismologists at
INETER to independently carry out double-difference relocation of earthquake
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.