* 1826826
* Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: Center for Promotion of Academic Careers through Motivational Opportunities to Develop Emerging Leaders in STEM (LS-PAC MODELS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Don Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,499,999.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. Louis Stokes Regional Centers of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSRCE) are designed to serve as regional
testbeds for outreach, knowledge-generating and diffusion activities or other
activities that contribute to successful practices in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a stronger, more diverse STEM
workforce is a clear national need to promote economic prosperity and maintain
global leadership in science. Work toward that end is in accord with the
National Science Foundation's mission to promote the progress of science. To
address this need, the Louisiana State University (LSU) Office of Strategic
Initiatives proposes a Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence in Broadening
Participation, entitled "LSRCE: Center for Promotion of Academic Careers through
Motivational Opportunities to Develop Emerging Leaders in STEM (LS-PAC MODELS)."
Specifically, the vision for this Center is to create a successful, data-driven
model for increasing underrepresented minority (URM) preparation for academic
careers (i.e., an effective model with well-tested strategies). This Center will
cement an alliance between LSU and IBM, with IBM assisting in data management,
organization, and strategizing focused data collection to aid in early promotion
of best practices. The goals of this alliance are to (1) increase the quality
and quantity of URM STEM students pursuing doctoral degrees within the LSAMP
collaborating institutions through mentoring of undergraduate and graduate
students; (2) increase retention to graduation rate of underrepresented STEM PhD
students; (3) develop a national model and platform for increasing the number of
URM minority STEM PhD recipients, and (4) develop a model for increasing
placement of URM PhDs into the professoriate and to minimize attrition once they
get there. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With data and use of IBM consulting and
software, the Center's social science researchers will examine the strength of
social network connections and how those strengthen URM students' learning
experiences, and whether corresponding increases in career resources occur. This
will contribute scientific knowledge to the theoretical understanding of how
social capital in the form of mentorship can be acquired in computer-supported
collaborative learning environments. Data gathered with assistance from IBM will
also allow members of the alliance to examine cognitive and personality
characteristics of URM students that predict success along with the development
of intellectual and intra- and interpersonal skills and wellbeing. The aggregate
of these data will be used for iterative processes during the creation of the
mentoring platform in collaboration with IBM. Ultimately, an interactive App and
website will be created, manuscripts will be published in top-quality journals,
and a book of best practices in mentoring URMs to the professoriate will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF INCLUDES which
focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.