* 1826729
* RAPID:Impact of unpredictable population-wide disturbances on evolutionary processes -- honey bees in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Tugrul Giray, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 235,000.00

Large-scale, unpredictable disturbances such as storms can alter the
environment, eliminating or evolutionarily changing plant and animal life, with
potentially long-lasting effects. The goal of this project is to understand the
role of foraging and aggressive behavior in determining hurricane survival in
the honey bees of Puerto Rico. Africanized bees invaded Puerto Rico in the
1950's, initially creating highly aggressive populations as has occurred
elsewhere. Since their introduction, the Africanized bees of Puerto Rico have
uniquely become less aggressive over time, as evidenced by a wealth of pre-
hurricane genetic and behavioral data. This project addresses the hypothesis
that storms, such as Hurricane Maria that hit Puerto Rico on September 20, 2017,
select against more aggressive colonies and favor bees that invest more in
foraging and food hoarding. The researchers will test this hypothesis by
sampling the remaining post-hurricane populations and comparing them with the
pre-hurricane data. RAPID funding will provide the opportunity to study both
genetic and behavioral traits of survivors and their offspring within the months
immediately following the storm. The study of a population's response subsequent
to major environmental and anthropogenic disturbances is of importance to the
understanding of processes that shape natural and agricultural ecosystems. This
project will also support Puerto Rican students to maintain research
productivity in a lab severely damaged by the hurricane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genomes of bees from post-Hurricane Maria wild
populations and domestic populations will be sequenced and analyzed to determine
signatures of selection or genetic bottleneck by comparing them with pre-
hurricane genotypes. Polymorphic markers across the genome will be used to test
a larger number (&gt;1500) of specimens over a greater geographic area (i.e.
Puerto Rico) to examine evolutionary trends and processes. Comparisons of
genetics, genomics and behavior of pre- and post-hurricane, feral and
domesticated populations will test hypotheses on role of large disturbances such
as hurricanes or anthropogenic influences on reducing aggressive behavior in
Africanized honey bees. Untangling the effects of chance and selective processes
on honey bee genomes may identify a novel and general role of environmental
disturbance in the evolution of aggressive behavior in colonial
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.