* 1826239
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Native American Lifeways on the Grand Ronde Reservation, Oregon, USA
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Ian Kretzler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 24,069.00

Historical and anthropological scholarship on Native American reservations has
provided insight into Native experiences in numerous spatial, environmental, and
temporal contexts. Largely absent from this research, however, is an
understanding of reservation materiality, that is, how federal policies and
Native activities were made manifest in reservation homes, tools, foods, and
other objects associated with daily life. Archaeology is well-suited to fill
this gap. Unlike written and ethnographic sources, which on reservations were
composed primarily by non-Native outsiders with clear political agendas, the
archaeological record preserves evidence of Native practices in multiple
settings, including those that existed out of sight of federal officials. This
project combines archaeological and archival research to document the
experiences of Native communities living on the Grand Ronde Reservation in
northwestern Oregon. Conducted as part of two community-based research
initiatives, this project will provide archaeological field and laboratory
training to undergraduate and graduate students. It will also extend
opportunities to Grand Ronde tribal members to participate in all aspects of the
research, accomplishing the dual goals of increasing the participation of Native
people in archaeology and enhancing the capacity of the community to identify
and protect tribal heritage. Results will be made available through university
data repositories and public presentations at local museums, academic
conferences, and Grand Ronde events. Situated at the intersections of
archaeology, history, and Native American studies, this work will lend new
insight into American colonialism, Native American history, and the value of
community-based research in the social sciences. In collaboration with the Grand
Ronde Historic Preservation Office, the project's Principal Investigators will
examine the interplay between federal policies aimed at terminating Native
lifeways and Grand Ronde survivance, a process of preserving, adapting, and
creating cultural traditions. The project focuses on a reservation habitation
area used by tribal members from the 1850s through at least the 1920s.
Cartographic evidence suggests that this site was part of a larger settlement
strategy through which the Grand Ronde community reiterated historic
relationships between different Native groups. Archaeological survey and
excavation will be used to assess whether similar attempts to maintain pre-
reservation practices influenced interior house organization, especially the
construction of hearth boxes and sub-floor storage areas, and diet composition.
Comparing recovered artifacts to pre-reservation archaeological sites and
archival material will reveal the strategies employed by the Grand Ronde
community to remake a foreign and often hostile landscape into a culturally
familiar home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.