* 1826532
* Collaborative Research: Florida-Caribbean Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Stefanie Waschull, Santa Fe College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2022
* USD 974,191.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. Louis Stokes Regional Centers of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSRCEs) are designed to serve as
regional testbeds for outreach, knowledge-generating and diffusion activities or
other activities that contribute to successful practices in STEM education.
LSRCE activities may also be concentrated in the development of disciplinary
research institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Santa Fe College, a two-year
institution and the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI), a historically black
university (HBCU) will implement activities of the Florida-Caribbean Louis
Stokes Regional Center of Excellence in Broadening Participation (FL-C LSRCE),
in conjunction with Columbia University and the Stanford Interventions Lab,
Stanford University over the next three years. Administrators and faculty from
several LSAMP projects, including the Florida-Georgia and University of Puerto
Rico and Alabama alliances will participate as implementers of the research to
practice activities and serve as consultants to the center. The FL-C LSRCE will
enhance the success of students from traditionally underrepresented minority
populations in STEM by developing, testing and disseminating intervention
practices to reduce the impact of stereotype threat and enhance growth mindset
in the face of academic challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center activities will
include: (1) hosting an annual conference on psychosocial interventions that
provides faculty access to the research-based STEM-focused interventions and
training on the importance of faculty feedback and&lt;br/&gt;interaction on
student success; (2) utilizing the STEM-Central hub (https://stem-central.net/).
This hub will feature presentations on the impact of interventions at
participating institutions and webinars that spotlight successful interventions
in the K-20 STEM community to promote widespread dissemination of successful
work. (3) provide internships for STEM faculty to increase their research
expertise; (4) conduct rigorous assessment on the interventions to meet
standards for publication in peer-reviewed journals, and (5) assist
participating institutions in data analysis and
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This LSRCE builds on the success of UVIs
NSF funded Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program's
Achieving Competitive Excellence (ACE) Implementation Project, the UVI Growth
Model, integrating growth mindset training into the STEM undergraduate
programming and Santa Fe College's NSF-funded IUSE projects in geosciences.
Through existing collaborations with the Stanford University Interventions Lab
and the Lab of Intergroup Relations and the Social Mind at Columbia University,
the FL-C LSRCE will develop easily deployed STEM mindset interventions and
training on the impact of STEM faculty feedback on student mindset. The
comprehensive evaluation findings and interventions will be widely disseminated
through the STEM Central portal, AAAS Open Forum portal and other collaborative
STEM networking platforms, the institutions' websites, and other venues
(conference presentations and production of scholarly
research).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF INCLUDES which
focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.