* 1826775
* Embodying Emotion in Interaction:  A Biocultural-Linguistic Study of Communication and Physiology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Jason DeCaro, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 315,859.00

Personal relationships are often a source of comfort and support, but they can
also be a source of stress and conflict. Previous laboratory and self-report
research indicates that communication between partners is predictive of
relational satisfaction and well-being. It also demonstrates that relational
behaviors are linked to physical responses in the body that impact both short-
and long-term health, and suggests that everyday emotion-laden communication
between intimate partners influences physical outcomes and that, in turn,
physical responses concurrently influence communication. We only have limited
understanding, however, of what this relationship between communication,
emotion, and the body looks like on a day-to-day basis, and on how this process
differs in relation to racial, socioeconomic, and other cultural pressures
influencing different couples. Therefore, understanding the multi-directional
processes through which culture, communication, and physiological regulation co-
emerge, outside of the laboratory and in specific emotion-laden interactions
between intimate partners at home, can lead to more developed scientific
understanding about how interpersonal behavior and physical wellbeing are
connected. Findings from this research will provide insight into how
communication between partners functions as a mediator of both intermediate and
long-term effects on wellbeing. Ultimately, this research has implications for
individual, relational, and societal health and wellbeing. At the University of
Alabama, the project also contributes to the development of a new
interdisciplinary program, and the training of both graduate and undergraduate
students, including underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Sonya
Pritzker, Jason DeCaro, and Joshua Pederson of the University of Alabama at
Tuscaloosa will develop innovative theoretical and methodological models for
understanding how the human body affects and is affected by everyday
communication in the context of culture. The purpose of this research is to
provide evidence for the ways that regular co-constructed patterns of emotion
communication relate to physiological outcomes, ultimately affecting
psychosocial wellbeing among couples in everyday life. The research thus takes
an ethnographic approach to the study of relating among adult partners in the
Southeastern U.S., emphasizing naturalistic observation, video-recoding, in-
depth interviews, and close monitoring of physiological activity over multiple
days. The researchers aim to collect anthropologically sound evidence for the
reciprocal ways moment-to-moment physiology is affected by and affects emotion
communication in everyday life, and how this process impacts indicators of
psychosocial wellbeing among partners. The overarching intellectual merit of
this research is the development of theoretical frameworks and methodological
tools for innovative research programs examining intersections between language,
culture, and the human body in multiple settings. This project thus brings
together disparate subfields of anthropology and related disciplines,
contributes to psychological understandings about the dynamics of emotions, and
provides unprecedented insight into the ways in which everyday communication
among intimate partners is linked to physiological processes. Building on the
findings from laboratory studies, this project further addresses the complex
layers of culture and communication in relationships within everyday lived
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.