* 1826900
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: California Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Star Lee, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The California Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP) program was established in
1991 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce.
That need still exists and is particularly acute in the State of California.
Participating institutions include the University of California (UC) Berkeley,
UC Davis, UC Irvine, UC Los Angeles, UC Merced, UC Riverside, UC Santa Cruz, UC
Santa Barbara and UC San Diego. The goals for the CAMP STEM Pathways and
Research Alliance are to: (1) steadily and substantially increase the quality
and quantity of minority students enrolled in STEM majors, (2) increase and
sustain baccalaureate degree production, (3) expand undergraduate research
opportunities, (4) increase enrollment in STEM graduate education programs, and
(5) document the effectiveness of CAMP through robust evaluation and assessment.
These goals support the National Science Foundation's strategic goal to
"cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce,
and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens." The goals will be
accomplished by enhanced student recruitment, selection and orientations;
providing transfer students with additional academic and social support;
faculty-mentored research programs; science writing through critical thinking;
enrichment through attendance at symposia and travel to conferences; GRE
preparation and guided graduate school applications; and organized annual
conferences to showcase student research and inform students about STEM
internship and job opportunities. The said activities will produce higher rates
of retention and graduation; and moreover, lead to a more talented and diverse
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge generating research study
will elucidate how faculty mentoring and the shared experience of presenting
research at conferences impacts persistence and graduation rates in STEM fields
as well as underrepresented minority student social-emotional parameters. The
research project will provide a valuable data set that can be shared across
California and the nation to further increase the impact of LSAMP on increasing
the diversity of STEM professionals in the workforce. An external evaluation
team will implement both quantitative and qualitative instruments to assess the
overall quality of the programs on the individual campuses as well as the entire
alliance related to the overall goals of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.