* 1826884
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Designing Hierarchical Edge Cloud for Mobile Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Wei Gao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2019
* USD 86,193.00

Cloud computing can be leveraged to bridge the gap between the increasing
complexity of mobile applications and the limited capabilities of mobile
devices, by remotely executing mobile applications at the cloud. However, the
efficiency of such remote execution is hindered by excessive network latency
accessing data centers and significant overhead of provisioning and managing
large amounts of Virtual Machines (VMs). Traditional solutions reduce the cloud
access latency by deploying servers at the network edge, but ignore the impact
of mobile users' workload patterns on the efficiency of cloud operation.
Instead, this project aims to design the edge cloud as a tree hierarchy of geo-
distributed servers, so as to efficiently exploit the cloud resources for
handling the peak load from mobile users. This research will benefit end users
with various mobile devices by facilitating practical integration of these
devices into the cloud. The results from this research are likely to foster new
research directions on edge cloud design and mobile cloud computing. The project
will engage under-represented students in the research activities, and the
scholarly discovery of this project will be disseminated broadly to the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to satisfy the performance
requirements of remote program execution by designing the edge cloud in a
hierarchical manner and hence ensuring efficient utilization of cloud resources.
More specifically, this project consists of three closely intertwined research
thrusts: (i) developing algorithms and systems to optimize the placement of
mobile workloads among edge cloud servers and efficiently serve the mobile peak
load; ii) mitigating the impact of user mobility on the performance of remote
program execution, by developing efficient mobility-aware VM migration
techniques; iii) developing an experimental testbed, as a unique research
facility, to emulate and investigate the impact of mobile workload peak on edge
cloud operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.