* 1826341
* GOALI: Debonding of Interfaces in Thermal Spray Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Bruce Geist, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2022
* USD 374,126.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will
support research that will contribute new knowledge related to a manufacturing
process, which will advance the progress of science and enhance national health
and prosperity. This research program studies thermal spray coatings, which are
a thin layer of metal that is melted and sprayed onto a surface in order to
improve the durability and performance of the part or component. These coatings
have numerous benefits and applications, in particular in the automotive
industry. Thermal spray coatings have the potential to replace lead-based liners
in engines and chromium-based plating materials used in a number of
applications. To move this technology to commercial applications, however,
fundamental scientific knowledge about the coating performance and its linkages
to processing conditions is needed. This GOALI award supports fundamental
research to provide the needed knowledge for the optimum design and manufacture
of thermal spray coatings. The new knowledge which will result from this
research will enable the design of coatings for a variety of applications,
reducing cost, weight, and environmental impact over current technologies. This
work is performed in collaboration with an industrial partner, Fiat Chrysler
Automotive, and Sandia National Laboratories, further enhancing the economic
impact of the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
discover fundamental knowledge pertaining to the delamination of thermal spray
coatings in built-up systems. Results from novel experimental insights will be
used to formulate a new model to predict delamination of thermal spray coatings.
A fracture mechanics-based model informed with a statistical description of the
microstructure will be developed and used to predict the debonding of thermal
spray coatings. The researchers seek to quantify the strength of adhesion, the
fatigue life of the coating itself, and the stresses necessary to initiate
delamination of the coating from coated surfaces. The university-industry-
national laboratory collaboration will provide unique capabilities as well as
valuable educational experiences for the students involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.