* 1826439
* Collaborative Research: Nanodiamond Particle Fabrication by Confined Laser Shock Detonation for Drug Delivery and Other Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Qiong Nian, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,992.00

Nanodiamonds, or nanosized diamond particles, have been widely explored as drug
delivery vehicles and bio-imaging agents for biomedical treatments ranging from
oncology to infection to regenerative medicine. However, the manufacture of
medical quality nanodiamonds is difficult, costly, and energy intensive. The
existing methods for nanodiamond fabrication often rely on a chemical detonation
process, which suffers from poor controllability, complex experimental set-ups,
and safety issues. This award supports fundamental research to provide knowledge
required for the development of a simple and cost-effective nanomanufacturing
process to fabricate nanodiamonds under ambient conditions. Using this easy and
viable route for nanodiamond fabrication, many complex nanodiamond-based devices
for biomedical, electronics, and optics applications can be built at low cost.
Such a capability impacts key U.S. industries thus enhancing national prosperity
and security. The research results will be integrated into a comic book --
Nanodiamond Nora and Neal -- targeted to engage K-12 students. In addition, this
project provides an integrated training platform for undergraduate and graduate
students, and promotes broadening participation of women and underrepresented
students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish a new
nanomanufacturing strategy for nanodiamond fabrication. It is hypothesized that
the laser-induced plasma in the nanosecond pulsed laser shock processing, can
provide sufficient energy input and duration to promote the graphite-to-diamond
phase transition. To test this hypothesis, a confined laser shock detonation
approach is planned to realize the scalable nanomanufacturing of nanodiamonds at
room-temperature and in open air, through utilizing high-energy laser-matter
interaction phenomena. The major research objective is to establish a
fundamental understanding of mechanisms involved in the confined laser shock
detonation process that are responsible for the growth of nanodiamonds. First-
principles modeling and molecular dynamics simulations performed at ASU and UNR,
help understand the laser-graphite interactions and the plasma dynamics that
lead to the graphite-to-diamond phase transition. Biocompatibility of laser-
fabricated nanodiamonds is evaluated through collaboration between ASU and UCLA
to demonstrate potential applications in drug delivery and bio-imaging. This
project contributes to advances in laser-based nanomanufacturing and innovations
in nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.