* 1826173
* Designing Structural Alloys Through Interphase Boundary Segregation Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Srikanth Patala, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2021
* USD 428,582.00

Structural alloys are crucial for the infrastructure and energy sectors, and
have applications in the automotive, aerospace and nuclear industries. These
alloy systems are usually metallic materials with certain impurity atoms added
to improve their mechanical strength and thermal stability. One of the most
commonly used strategy of improving mechanical strength, called precipitation
hardening, relies on adding elements that form compounds, and impart excellent
high-temperature strength. While a successful strategy, the temperature range at
which these alloys can be utilized is limited. In particular, at high-
temperatures, the strength degrades during the life-time of the component. This
award supports research that will help increase the operating temperatures and
thermal stability of precipitation-hardened structural alloys. New scientific
knowledge about the behavior of these alloys during processing will enable the
design of high-performance materials. The research approach combines
computational simulation-based tools and machine-learning algorithms, and
focuses on a model alloy system based on lightweight Magnesium, which has the
potential to improve energy efficiency in the automotive industry. The broader
impacts of this project thus combine commercial advances in structural
materials, with a range of educational benefits in training secondary school
teachers and graduate students involved with the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on the development of a novel
automated framework for simulating interphase boundaries using a machine
learning approach to calculate interatomic potentials. The researchers will use
the ternary Mg-Sn-Zn alloy for validating this framework but the approach can be
generalized for screening potential ternary solute systems in any binary alloy
system. This capability is crucial for designing precipitating systems with
unprecedented thermal stability. This award also provides research opportunities
to students from underrepresented groups, and the training of the next
generation of secondary school teachers. Students from the NC State Education
Department will participate in the scientific process through collaborative
research projects on the themes of machine learning and atomistic
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.