* 1826993
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: North Dakota Internet Leadership Level Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Marc Wallman, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 495,524.00

This project creates data networking and storage infrastructure dedicated to
scientific research and education at North Dakota State University (NDSU) and
the University of North Dakota (UND). These network upgrades prioritize science
data movement, allowing both institutions to more effectively participate in
collaborative research across the globe. The project also prepares both schools
for much higher capacity connectivity through North Dakota's research and
education (R&amp;E) state network. The networking upgrades enhance efforts to
provide a strong and stable workforce equipped with the skills and knowledge
necessary to support contemporary advanced research. Examples include the
current North Dakota state EPSCoR Track I project, collaborations between
researchers at NDSU/UND and the other North Dakota institutions and Tribal
College schools, and student internship programs using the research computing
facilities on each campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;100Gbps connectivity is
established from campus HPC systems to the campus network border. Science
drivers for this project include Precision Agriculture and Digital Agriculture
initiatives studying crop and livestock data collected using drone and satellite
technologies; multi-campus research collaboration on 100TB class datasets used
by UND?s Center for Regional Climate Studies; and predictive design of materials
based in NDSU?s Materials and Nanotechnology program. These enable
collaborations between researchers in chemistry, biochemistry, computer science,
coatings and polymeric materials and mechanical engineering across the globe.
The networking upgrades follow the scienceDMZ model and include perfsonar based
end-to-end testing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.