* 1826864
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Islands of Opportunity Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Patrick Tellei, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,824,364.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Islands of Opportunity
Alliance (IOA) program was established in 2006 in response to the need for a
more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the State of Hawaii. IOA is composed of 11 university and
community college partners across the western Pacific, spanning nine distinct
language-speaking communities. As a LSAMP STEM Pathways and Research Alliance,
the goals of the IOA are to: 1) increase the overall number of Native Hawaiian
and Pacific Islander students graduating with baccalaureate degrees in STEM and
pursuing graduate degrees or entering a STEM career; and 2) investigate how
Pacific culture-normed understandings of belonging, motivation, attainment, and
success can enculturate western STEM education initiatives. These goals support
the National Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class,
broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific
literacy of all citizens." In support of the goals, the alliance-wide activities
consist of culture-based STEM curricula enhancements; intrusive academic
advising; organized student learning communities; peer tutoring and gateway
course support; student recruitment, retention, and culturally-based outreach
activities; summer bridge programs; research experiences; and conference and
workshops. The research study to design more efficacious STEM programs will
contribute to cross-cultural understandings of belonging, motivation,
attachment, and success in STEM in the U.S. affiliated Pacific. This can be used
as the basis for enhanced dialog with other indigenous cultures in the U.S.
Native American/Alaskan Natives share similar customs and values centered on
family and community, geographic isolation, histories of colonization, and
contemporary revitalization movements. Sharing views of STEM success across the
cultures of the IOA and other indigenous cultures within the U.S. will
strengthen the well-being of these communities and contribute to the nation?s
scientific progress; and moreover, lead to a more talented and diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.