* 1826545
* Standard Grant: Digital Platforms and the Mediation of Technological Change
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Torin Monahan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 116,444.00

This award supports a research project that studies emerging platform economics;
three platforms are to be studied, those operated by Uber, Airbnb, and Amazon
The project will contribute to theoretical understandings of emerging platform
economies by bringing to light the ways that local environments mediate platform
capitalism and to what effect. More broadly, it will contribute to NSF's
research-focused Big Idea, "Work at the Human-Technology Frontier: Shaping the
Future." Digital platforms provide the fundamental infrastructure for
independent contractors working in the "gig economy" as well as for workers in
the warehousing and shipping organizations that handle distribution for
companies like Amazon. By generating findings about local mediation of platform
capitalism, this study will produce recommendations for regional governments and
firms looking to navigate these market shifts intelligently. The results of this
project are to be disseminated via separate reports for regional governments,
logistics and shipping organizations, independent contractors, and labor unions;
accessible publications in popular outlets; an undergraduate course on platform
economies; and the training and support of a doctoral student working in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze how local environments
mediate platform capitalism through an empirical inquiry that focuses on the
translation of digital platforms into urban regions in the US. Surveillance is
key to these translations; all platform-mediated commercial interactions are
designed to generate data that can be harnessed for building consumer profiles,
mapping and predicting trends, and manipulating individual and group behavior.
The platforms to be studied are those operated by Uber, Airbnb, and Amazon.
Three primary research questions will guide this inquiry: (1) How are local
organizational forms and functions altered in response to platform capitalism?
(2) What resistances and affordances are presented by existing technological
infrastructures? and (3) How does local cultural practice mediate the deployment
and use of digital platforms? To address these questions, the researcher will
use multiple qualitative methods including content analysis of industry, media,
and government documents; 30 semi-structured interviews with key informants; and
spatial mapping of platform densities and flows across selected urban regions.
The exploration of the socio-spatial implications of large-scale digital
platforms will draw upon, synthesize, and contribute to surveillance studies,
science and technology studies, and human geography
literatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.