* 1826251
* GOALI: Ultra-Low Wear Plasma Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposited Nitride Thin Films: Exploring Processing, Structure, Properties and Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Nicholas Strandwitz, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 659,788.00

Friction and wear of materials accounts for enormous losses in performance and
lifetime of materials, devices and structures, at considerable cost to the US
manufacturing, energy, and infrastructure sectors. Approaches to mitigate
friction and wear are thus beneficial to the US economy. This Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
scientific research to understand mechanisms of friction and wear in metal
nitride coatings. Preliminary studies revealed metal nitride coatings are among
the most wear-resistant materials ever discovered, showing promise for
significantly reducing the financial and environmental impacts of wear. In this
research project, thin layers of metal nitride compounds are synthesized and
their friction and wear properties are investigated. The aim of this work is to
identify the relationships between how the films were created (processing) and
their wear behavior (properties). Understanding these relationships allows for
enhanced control of the mechanical behavior, and can lead to high-performance
wear-resistant materials for coatings. The new materials developed are of broad
importance for increasing efficiency and lifetime of mechanical systems, on both
large and small scales. The work is performed in collaboration with an
industrial partner, Veeco CNT. The industry team is integrally involved in the
studies, which provides both educational opportunities for students involved in
the research and a path to commercialization for high-performance wear-resistant
coating materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the fundamental
relationships among processing, microstructure, and mechanical behavior in a
class of transition metal nitrides deposited using plasma-enhanced atomic layer
deposition. The high degree of synthetic tunability in this deposition technique
allows for tailoring of the film composition and microstructure. Specifically,
the fundamental role of composition on wear mechanism is investigated to
determine the role of solid solution strengthening versus the formation of a
lubricious wear-generated film in films with both vanadium and titanium cations.
The impact of crystallite size on mechanical properties is determined for
crystallite sizes in the 1-30 nm range using four independent synthesis
parameters that control crystallite size. Adhesion and interface chemistry
between the nitride films is investigated and related to macroscopic mechanical
behavior, such as delamination, that is relevant to applications. Taken
together, these studies reveal fundamental wear mechanisms of this highly
promising material that can be related directly to the synthesis and processing
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.