* 1826458
* Collaborative Research:  GEER Post Disaster Reconnaissance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 74,600.00

Documenting and learning from observations after "extreme events" is central to
advancing the state-of-art in multi-hazards infrastructure engineering. Recorded
observations serve as benchmarks of the effects of these events, their
underlying causative mechanisms, and for validation of design procedures.
Capturing key lessons learned from extreme events constitutes an important task
for advancing research in geotechnical engineering since many design procedures
are based on empirical methods that require continuous re-evaluation as
important new case histories emerge. The NSF-sponsored Geotechnical Extreme
Events Reconnaissance (GEER) Association organizes and supports the
reconnaissance efforts of geotechnical researchers and develops techniques to
capture perishable data to learn from these events. The scope of GEER
reconnaissance activities includes earthquakes, landslides, and debris flows,
and associated impacts such as liquefaction, and fault rupture, building and
bridge foundation failures, as well as dam, levee and retaining structure
collapses. The primary objectives of GEER include: documenting geotechnical
effects of important extreme events to identify important topics in need of
research; employing innovative technologies for post-event reconnaissance; and
advancing the capabilities of individuals performing research based on field
observations. Much of the data generated during extreme events is perishable and
therefore must be collected soon after the event. The challenge is to develop
the most effective approaches for documenting the results of "full-scale
experiments" that often occur with limited advance warning, if any. Since 2015,
GEER has successfully documented the geotechnical effects of 18 extreme events,
including hurricanes Irma and Harvey, floods in South Carolina, Illinois, and
Texas, and earthquakes in Mexico, New Zealand, Equador, Nepal and USA, amongst
others. Many GEER efforts have led to follow-on funded projects, reflecting that
GEER reconnaissance efforts are identifying important research issues that can
lead to advancements in science and engineering. Many of the innovative
techniques employed in reconnaissance efforts over the past decade or so, such
as the utilization of GoogleEarthTM, GPS devices, remote sensing, and LIDAR,
were initiated by GEER members. GEER is well positioned to continue making
similar advancements with respect to the use of new technology and data
communication and sharing approaches for field reconnaissance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funds for continuation of GEER
activities to enable rapid, responsive geotechnical investigations after natural
and human-induced disasters. It is expected that two to four investigations
after moderate-sized events will be conducted each year. An important aspect of
the work is to leverage the benefits of the recently established NSF NHERI
initiative and to enhance the interactions between GEER and the other existing
and future elements of the NHERI initiative. In particular, a strong focus to
coordinate interactions between GEER and the NSF RAPID facility at the
University of Washington has been identified as a priority. To ensure that this
important interaction is accomplished, the PI will assume direct responsibility
for coordinating these critical activities including development and delivery of
training efforts. If a larger event occurs, GEER will recommend submission of a
RAPID proposal to NSF by an identified GEER team leader to respond effectively
to the event. Unfortunately, extreme events will continue to happen. It would be
even more unfortunate if the engineering profession did not capture the
perishable data that enables it to understand which design procedures result in
good engineering performance and which procedures still need improvement. GEER
with its engaged and expert geo-professional participants will continue to help
"turn disasters into knowledge".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.