* 1826911
* Examining the Effects of Work on Personality Trait Change in Young Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christopher Nye, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 563,096.00

Work plays a substantial role in many individual lives and influences adult
personality development. We know that the most substantial changes in adult
personality occur when individuals enter the workforce; these changes are
consistent with the reward structure and expectations of the work environment.
But we do not know much about the specific mechanisms that link experiences in
the workplace with personality trait change. This project will evaluate the
complex effects of work, including the absence of regular or meaningful work, on
personality trait development in young adults. The results of this research will
show what skills are needed to find a job and to succeed in the workplace, and
provide valuable information about the effects of unemployment and
underemployment on personality development. This information will help policy
makers identify potential interventions that can aid underemployed workers in
becoming more competitive for full-time permanent positions. Results from this
project may be especially helpful to colleges and universities as they strive to
promote successful transitions from college to the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a multi-wave longitudinal study
of close to 1,000 graduating seniors from a large Midwestern university who are
entering the workforce. Participants will be solicited from all available majors
on campus and baseline data will be collected during their final semester in
college. Subsequent surveys will be administered every six months for the first
two years of the study to obtain detailed information about transitions to the
workforce. Annual surveys will then be administered for two additional years to
obtain longer-term information about personality trait change, workplace
experiences, and the effects of unemployment or underemployment. Personality
traits will be assessed at each time point using both self- and informant-
reports. In addition, information will also be gathered about participant work
experiences, perceived fit and engagement with their jobs, and investment in
family and community activities. Structural equation modeling will be used to
examine the effects of work experiences on adult personality trait development
while controlling for other life events. The results of these analyses will
enhance theoretical understanding of how work is related to psychological and
social development in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.