* 1826454
* GOALI: Projection Stereolithography of Gradient Viscoelastic Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Robert McLeod, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 415,199.00

Polymer reinforced composites are materials that combine reinforcement materials
such as carbon or glass fiber, or glass particles with a polymeric base material
to produce a material with enhanced mechanical properties. Utilization of these
materials has revolutionized industries involved in aerospace, automotive, and
sporting goods manufacture. Increasingly, industry is turning to additive
manufacturing, or 3D printing, to realize customized components with complex
geometries. However, stereolithography, an additive manufacturing process that
uses light to locally cure (harden) a liquid polymer resin in layers to build up
a solid part, cannot successfully produce polymeric reinforced composites. Nor
can the process easily incorporate material property gradients within a single
build. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project seeks to overcome these limitations by understanding the material
processing interactions occurring during a modified stereolithography printing
process capable of combining polymers and nanoparticles to produce printed
polymer composite materials. Success will advance the performance and range of
polymeric materials that can be printed via stereolithography, and in doing so
will realize the 3D printing of high performance, customizable, functionally
graded components. This has the potential to advance the competitiveness of core
US industries involved in the manufacture of aerospace, automotive, and medical
components. As Align Technology, a manufacturer utilizing stereolithography in
their custom-made orthodontics fabrication process, is a collaborator on this
project the students involved in the project will not only be exposed to
advanced material science and manufacturing technologies but will also gain an
understanding of industrial challenges and drivers. Extended online courses will
be made available to students and practicing engineers, providing flexible
learning opportunities to keep informed of new developments in materials science
and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
elucidate the structure/property relationships of gradient composite polymers
printed by gray scale stereolithography of a matrix polymer followed by swelling
with a reactive filler containing nanoparticles. A secondary goal is to reduce,
control or eliminate the large internal stresses caused by polymerization
shrinkage and solvent swelling of stereolithographic parts. The latter will be
achieved by employing covalent adaptable matrices, e.g. addition-fragmentation
chain transfer backbones that rearrange to relax stress in the presence of
radicals. To achieve these goals the following tasks will be conducted; 1)
precise, macroscopic characterization of matrix monomer-to-polymer conversion as
a function of processing conditions and how this partial conversion controls
swelling of the filler, 2) validation of the macroscopic predictions on the
micron scale via gray-scale stereolithography of the matrix followed by swelling
and polymerization of the filler, 3) validation of the predicted viscoelastic
behavior of inhomogeneous printed nanocomposites, and 4) demonstration that
reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer chemistry can be leveraged to
provide local stress control in bulk composites. If successful the knowledge
gained will be used to print and verify the predicted properties of a printed
trinary nanocomposite with photo-induced plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.