* 1826696
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: NYC LSAMP Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Gilda Barabino, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,977,118.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New York City
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in STEM (NYCLSAMP) has
significantly contributed to the City University of New York's (CUNY) system
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) baccalaureate degree
production among traditionally underrepresented minority groups through
curricular and experiential initiatives. Under new leadership at CUNY Lehman
College, the alliance consists of 8 participating senior colleges, three
community colleges and on honors college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018-2023
NYCLSAMP program activities will provide evidence-based interventions, such as
faculty engagement, professional development, advising, curricular design and
research experiences to stimulate learning and strengthen academic and research
skills to attract, engage, recruit and retain community college and four-year
undergraduate students in STEM to degree completion. Evidence-based strategies
include interventions emanating directly from published STEM interventions.
Students will receive training in research methods, critical thinking, and
scientific reading and writing skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigorous broadening
participation research will be conducted by an educational psychologist and
team, including graduate students, to study the LSAMP model through
methodological and theoretical constructs at CUNY Hunter College. The
implementation of the project and accompanying research and evaluation has the
potential to increase the number of traditionally underrepresented minority
students completing STEM undergraduate degrees, pursuing STEM graduate studies
or directly entering the STEM workforce. Research and evaluation activities have
broad potential for replication to other institution
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.