* 1826320
* Collaborative Research: Real-Time Stochastic Matching Models for Freight Electronic Marketplace
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sanjay Shakkottai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 333,333.00

This grant will support research investigating how a real-time marketplace might
be constructed to match freight shipments with available carriers. In such a
system, freight shippers make a request to the system manager, and an automated
service will match shipping jobs to carriers who are likely to accept them. The
benefits of such a system include more efficient use of freight capacity (fewer
empty miles) and reduced shipping prices, resulting in economic benefits,
reduced fuel consumption and emissions, and reduced congestion. These benefits
will directly contribute to economic prosperity in the nation. This award
supports the basic research needed to design and implement such a system,
particularly focusing on the matching mechanism between shippers and carriers,
and methods for quickly estimating the additional cost carriers will incur
should they agree to a match. More specifically, the research work involves
developing new algorithms in these areas, and testing and validating these
algorithms with real-world freight data. In addition to benefits in the trucking
industry, broader economy, and reduced urban congestion, the education and
outreach activities will provide benefits to diverse K-12 and university student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach further extends
traditional algorithms and heuristics for stochastic multi-armed bandit problems
and the vehicle routing problem. A freight match problem is characterized by the
arrival of stochastic demands that are queued for service and the need to
estimate the costs a match would impose on a carrier, which serves as reserve
prices for carriers for particular requests. The model represents this by
extending the traditional multi-armed bandit problem to allow the set of "arms"
to vary over time, as carriers enter and leave the system. Different from a
traditional vehicle routing problem, efficiently and robustly estimating changes
in routing costs from incorporating freight jobs is more important in the
freight matching problem than deriving detailed routing plans at a fine-grained
level. The research team will investigate new algorithms in both of these areas,
implementing them in a simulation framework and testing them with real-world
data, to test the hypothesis that the queueing bandit approach can outperform
auctions and alternative market mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.