* 1826410
* Control of Energy Efficient Powertrain for Autonomous and Connected Vehicles in a Mixed Autonomous and Human Driving Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Alireza Talebpour, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2022
* USD 431,372.00

In the near future, human drivers will share the roadways with fleets of
autonomous vehicles. Significant energy savings might be achieved in autonomous
vehicles if vehicle control systems integrate models of human driver behavior.
Such savings would beneficially impact the economics of transportation, thereby
increasing national prosperity. This project considers control of autonomous and
connected vehicles in an on-road environment where both autonomous and human
driving vehicles exist. The project will integrate novel models of human driver
behavior into autonomous vehicle motion and powertrain control, thereby enabling
simultaneous optimization of energy efficiency and driver safety. Experiments
also examine the co-adaptive interaction between human drivers and autonomous
vehicles on a closed-course proving ground, wherein system performance can be
tested and verified safely. The project will involve an educational component
that provides training to graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
conducting research. The project also develops animation software to help
students understand the working principle of connected and autonomous vehicles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates new control methodologies that
promise improved autonomous vehicle powertrain efficiency by integrating a novel
model of human driving behavior, which is capable to predict the movement of
human-driven vehicles and autonomous vehicles over long time periods. Methods
include: a hazard-based modeling framework and rolling horizon mechanism that
ensures accurate modeling of vehicle movements while considering driver and
vehicle heterogeneity; experimental evaluations of how human driving behavior
will impact the energy efficiency of autonomous vehicle control, and how changes
in autonomous vehicle control strategy will impact human
driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.