* 1826558
* LSAMP BD: UNIVERSITY OF PUERTO RICO, PUERTO RICO LOUIS STOKES ALLIANCE FOR MINORITY PARTICIPATION
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Eduardo Nicolau, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,058,802.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM&lt;br/&gt;disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska
Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity
is to increase the number and competitiveness of STEM&lt;br/&gt;graduate
students from historically underrepresented minority populations, with emphasis
on STEM doctoral matriculation and completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2018-2020 Puerto Rico LSAMP BD (PR-LSAMP-BD) program will recruit twelve (12)
alumni from the Territory and LSAMP institutions nationwide for STEM
postbaccalaureate studies at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras (UPR).
UPR's BD program will provide multidisciplinary training in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines at the graduate level to enable a
seamless transition from the STEM baccalaureate degree to STEM doctoral
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will receive intense STEM mentoring
through participation in faculty mentored research in disciplines such as
biological sciences, math and physical sciences, computer science, environmental
sciences, engineering and geological sciences. Activities also include STEM
professional development activities such as national and international research
and conference attendance. In addition, UPR's BD program will implement
activities that develop mentoring and teambuilding skills. The Role Model
Seminar series will bring the BD Fellows into contact with successful nationally
and internationally recognized researchers thereby creating a mentoring
environment that further equips the Fellows. A BD Council has been established
to strengthen advisement, counseling and mentorship to the participants as well
as address continued sustainability of the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student support in the form of stipends and cost of
education are provided for two years for each student. The institution commits
to assisting the students financially through completion of the STEM doctoral
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluative activities will assess outcomes of
students' accomplishments relating to retention, degree completion, and career
progress. Social psychological outcomes related to career goals and expectations
related to STEM identity development will also&lt;br/&gt;be assessed. Outcomes
will be disseminated broadly through the institution's website, scholarly
journals, and presentations at STEM professional conferences. These efforts will
increase the diversity of STEM academic leadership and contribute to the
growing&lt;br/&gt;literature on broadening participation in STEM at the graduate
and post-graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will continue to
coordinate its activities with other NSF-funded projects that are managed by
the&lt;br/&gt;Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and by
pertinent UPR graduate programs. The activities implemented will increase the
number of Puerto Rican STEM undergraduate students who apply and are admitted to
STEM PhD programs, and&lt;br/&gt;increase the number of these students who
obtain STEM doctoral degrees. Since 2003, forty-seven BD fellows have earned
STEM doctoral degrees and 140 students have participated in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.