* 1826738
* Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: LSAMP - NSF International Center of Excellence (NICE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Zakiya Wilson-Kennedy, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 629,245.00

The Louis Stokes Regional NSF International Center of Excellence (LSAMP-
NICE)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Louis Stokes Regional NSF
International Center of Excellence (LSAMP-NICE) is to create a collaborative
framework for Lewis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation institutions to
leverage resources, establish partnership and support from dozens of other NSF
programs and countries, and to further strengthen the NSF Broadening
Participation initiative through international research experiences in STEM.
Specific and measurable objectives are, Objective 1: Dissemination and
professional development through the establishment of a virtual portal,
Objective 2: Organization of an annual LSAMP-NICE Conference for dissemination
and professional development, Objective 3: Development of a dynamic archive of
information or dissemination, exposing as many as 100 LSAMP undergrads and 20
LSAMP BD grad students to collaborative international research opportunities
annually, Objective 4: Develop, implement, and assess faculty co-mentor award
process, and Objective 5: Tracking the successful publication of peer-reviewed
journal articles co-authored by LSAMP undergrad and BD grad students resulting
from collaborative international research.&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit
associated with LSAMP-NICE derives from facilitating collaboration among LSAMP
alliances and dozens of complementary NSF programs with significant
international research opportunities. International partners within LSAMP-NICE
will make major contributions to expanded participation of underrepresented
students in meaningful international research experiences. The Center will
implement and assess co-mentor awards for US faculty who remain scientifically
engaged with their students as they do research abroad. The benefits to
students? research progress associated with simultaneous engagement of both US
and international co-mentors will be explored. LSAMP-NICE activities will also
lead to dissemination of research results across the worldwide STEM community
and public networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This LSAMP Regional Center of
Excellence - NSF International Center of Excellence is co-funded by NSF
INCLUDES, which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively
work for inclusive change."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively few
students in the NSF LSAMP program are given the opportunity to perform
meaningful research outside the United States. This project serves the national
interest via NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
prosperity and welfare. LSAMP-NICE is led by a coalition of a Tribal College
(Salish Kootenai College), a Hispanic Serving Institution (the University of
Illinois at Chicago), a Historically Black College (Jackson State University),
and a large public research university (Louisiana State University). LSAMP-NICE
aspires to broaden exposure of international research opportunities to the LSAMP
community, particularly Native Americans enrolled in a diverse range of
institutions with different sizes and support resources, across LSAMP
coalitions. Because science and engineering are increasingly global, and toward
a globally engaged workforce, LSAMP-NICE seeks to ensure that U.S. institutions
and researchers (established and in-training) are able to advance their research
through international collaboration to help to maintain U.S. leadership within
the global scientific community. Adapting the NSF model of collaboration, LSAMP
NICE acts as an interface for the LSAMP community at large with NSF PIREs and
ERCs, international science organizations, as well as ministries and
institutions of higher learning across the world. This interface activity is
accomplished through the establishment and maintenance of international
partnerships for linkage to the LSAMP community, communication of best practices
in collaborative research and professional development, broad communication of
student success via annual conferences and digital dissemination of information
to domestic and international constituencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This LSAMP
Regional Center of Excellence - NSF International Center of Excellence is co-
funded by NSF INCLUDES, which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to
collaboratively work for inclusive change."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.