* 1826938
* A 750,000-yr Leaf Wax Biomarker Record to Assess Environmental Change Across the Plio-Pleistocene Boundary in Tropical East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 302,472.00

About three million years ago, the Arctic cooled dramatically, and northern
hemisphere glaciers expanded and began to wax and wane in 41,000-year glacial
cycles. Around the same time, parts of Africa became drier, and our human
ancestors underwent a set of evolutionary shifts including the appearance of the
genus Homo. Many studies have suggested that these changes are linked, wherein
global cooling causes drying over Africa, which in turn triggers human
evolutionary responses. This project will reconstruct environmental changes
occurring in Africa between 3.3 and 2.5 million years ago to test the
relationships between global climate transitions, African environmental change,
and human evolutionary events. This research will provide an outstanding
platform to train a diverse set of students and young researchers in
interdisciplinary research in the Earth Sciences, including Brown University
graduate students and undergraduate students from historically underrepresented
groups. We will further develop new middle-school educational modules on
environmental change and human evolution in collaboration with teachers from the
Providence public schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
new, high-resolution records of African environmental change through organic
geochemical analyses of a recently recovered, exceptionally well-dated
~750,000-year-long drill core from the Baringo-Tugen-Barsemoi (BTB), in the
Eastern Kenyan Rift that spans the Plio-Pleistocene boundary. We will analyze
the hydrogen and carbon isotopic composition of terrestrial leaf wax biomarkers
in this core to detect changes in rainfall and vegetation between 3.3 and 2.55
Ma. These data will be used to test the relationships between East African
climate and vegetation and the onset and intensification of northern hemisphere
glaciation, as well as other global and regional climate forcings. Our new data
will be further compared to mammalian and hominin fossil datasets to test
whether changes in the trend, variability, and rate of environmental change can
be related to hominin evolutionary events. These state-of-the-art analyses will
provide research training opportunities for a diverse set of graduate and
undergraduate students and provide a framework to develop new middle-school
educational modules on environmental change and human evolution that meet Next
Generation Science Standards. Project results will refine our understanding of
the connections between high and low latitude climate and the impacts of long-
term vs. orbital-scale changes in global climate on African climate, ecosystems,
and hominin evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.