* 1826990
* An Optimization Approach for Nonlinear Optimal Feedback Control Design and Uncertainty Propagation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Puneet Singla, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2019
* USD 317,761.00

The multi-resolution articulation abilities of the next-generation autonomous
systems, used in advanced robotics, rehabilitation, tele-operation,
manufacturing and infrastructure applications are made possible by unique
designs and complex mechanisms. These next generation robotic systems can
benefit greatly by the development of computationally efficient tools to
synthesize optimal feedback control laws to achieve specified output signal
statistics in presence of model and sensing uncertainties. To support commercial
applications such as package delivery, it is imperative that the robotic systems
operating in uncertain environments negotiate specific waypoints with prescribed
tolerance. This unique challenge of routing the vehicles operating in uncertain
environments involves a strong coupling between the uncertainty propagation and
control. Successful negotiation of this challenge is contingent on the
development of stable optimal feedback control laws, while accounting for the
uncertainties that pervade dynamical systems. The fundamental formalisms that
underpin this research are widely applicable to the control of next generation
robotic systems and unmanned vehicles. The project includes plans to integrate
research into educational efforts involving graduate and undergraduate students,
including expanding efforts to reach under-represented populations in science
and engineering. Outreach activities include the technical interchange meetings
with local school teachers and instituting robotics related tutorial courses to
motivate middle and high school students.

The focus of the research is to investigate a unified approach to stable optimal
feedback control laws and uncertainty propagation methods by developing
computationally efficient solutions to the Hamilton Jacobi Bellman (HJB) and
Fokker-Planck-Kolmogorov (FPK) partial differential equations (PDEs),
respectively. Recent advances in sparse approximation and non-product quadrature
rules are exploited to solve the HJB and FPK equations. The intellectual merits
are drawn from advancing the state of knowledge in uncertainty quantification,
optimal control theory, and numerical analysis, and integrating them effectively
to realize a scalable framework for study of dynamical systems. The Conjugate
Unscented Transformation (CUT) technique in conjunction with sparse
approximation methods forms an enabling tool to drive the uncertainty
propagation and optimal feedback control realization processes. This research
culminates in the development of nonlinear stable feedback control laws for
uncertain dynamic systems, impacting various estimation and control problems in
engineering. The proposed research will be demonstrated on several benchmark
problems, along with two key applications involving optimal momentum transfer in
control of gyroscopic systems and surveillance of a ground region with the help
of unmanned vehicles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.