* 1826547
* Neural mechanisms for phonological alternation with high and low productivity - a case study on tone sandhi
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Gang Peng, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 439,770.00

Of the 7,000 or so languages spoken in the world today, a conservative estimate
of around half of them are tonal, in that the use of pitch itself may change the
meaning of a word. This list includes languages that play key roles in the
economy and national security of the US such as Chinese and Vietnamese as well
as many Native American languages such as Navajo and Cherokee. A better
understanding of the linguistic properties of these languages is a meaningful
first step in increasing the communication efficiency with speakers of these
languages and the development of better learning materials for these languages
for native speakers of English. This project investigates the linguistic
patterns of tone in two Chinese languages--Mandarin and Taiwanese--using state-
of-the-art neurolinguistic techniques to shed light on how words with tones are
represented in the speakers' brains. It contributes methodological innovations
that will allow the different stages of the production processing of tone to be
tracked by neurological measures. Moreover, this project involves international
collaboration between a US institution and two prominent neurolinguistic
laboratories in Hong Kong and Taiwan. The established connections will provide
educational opportunities for students both in the US and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on tonal alternation
patterns whereby a tone takes different phonological forms in different
contexts, also known as "tone sandhi." Behavioral studies have shown that tone
sandhi patterns extend to novel words in different ways, i.e., have different
productivity, depending on the phonological nature of the pattern. This suggests
that different mechanisms may be involved in the processing of this type of
phonological alternation. This project uses event-related potentials (ERPs) to
examine the time-course of the encoding of a number of tone sandhi patterns in
Mandarin and Taiwanese in speech production. It is hypothesized that
unproductive sandhi patterns are primarily subserved by a lexical mechanism that
engages neural activities in an earlier time window of lexical retrieval
(approximately 150-225 ms after the initiation of production), while productive
sandhi patterns are primarily subserved by a computation mechanism that engages
neural activities in a later time-window of phonological encoding (400-600 ms).
It is also hypothesized that the neural activities of the lexical mechanism are
sensitive to lexical frequency, while those of the computation mechanism are
less so. This project will be the first to investigate the neural activities
underlying the putative computation vs. lexical mechanisms associated with
productive and unproductive phonological alternations. The increased
understanding of the neural encoding of phonological alternation will inform
both the theoretical models of speech production and formal models of
phonological competence. Findings of this project can also be linked to issues
of morphological decompositionality such as regularity and semantic transparency
to achieve a fuller understanding of the neural bases of linguistic
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.