* 1826011
* Fault Detection and Diagnosis for Uncertain Nonlinear Systems Using Set-Based State Estimation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Joseph Scott, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 10/31/2019
* USD 287,827.00

This project will contribute to the economic prosperity and safety of the nation
by advancing automated methods for detecting and diagnosing component
malfunctions and other abnormal events (such as, faults or failures) in complex
engineering processes. Many key US industries are increasingly reliant on
complex, integrated, and highly automated systems, including manufacturing,
chemicals, energy, transportation, and even medicine. Failures in such systems
are inevitable, and those that go undetected or misdiagnosed can be responsible
for massive economic losses, catastrophic environmental damage, and loss of
life. This project will develop methods for detecting the occurrence of faults
and determining their root causes with significantly increased speed and
accuracy, thus enabling rapid corrective actions. The educational component of
the project will include undergraduate curriculum development and inclusion of
undergraduate researchers in implementation of the developed methods on the
South Hinson Chiller plant at Clemson University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to develop and experimentally validate
advanced set-based fault detection and diagnosis (FDD) algorithms with greatly
enhanced detection speed and accuracy for uncertain nonlinear systems, by
combining state-of-the-art set-based FDD algorithms for linear systems
previously developed by the principal investigator with a powerful new approach
for bounding the reachable sets of nonlinear systems under uncertainty. Current
industrial fault detection systems most often operate by comparing process
measurements to historical data. Consequently, their ability to distinguish
faults from normal disturbances, and to identify root causes, depends critically
on the applicability of the historical data to the current conditions. Thus,
these methods are susceptible to false alarms and misdiagnoses when confronted
with frequent transients, highly variable or uncertain inputs, nonlinear
dynamics, or first-of-a-kind faults. The developed methods will exploit process
models to characterize the process outputs consistent with normal operation and
to provide a rigorous basis for fault detection and diagnosis. This project
specifically considers methods that furnish a guaranteed enclosure of these
outputs using set-based state estimators, which eliminates the possibility of
false alarms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.