* 1826727
* The Origins And Spread Of Millet Cultivation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Frachetti, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 312,494.00

Dr. Xinyi Liu, of Washington University in St. Louis, along with colleagues in
US, China, UK and India, will undertake research to study the origins and spread
of millet cultivation. This project considers two of the ecologically hardiest
of cereal crops: broomcorn (Panicum miliaceum) and foxtail millet (Setaria
italica). Today, these two minor cereals are consumed less frequently, thereby
attracting little scientific attention, however they were once among the most
expansive food crops in geographical terms, with a center of origin in northern
China and spreading to India and Europe in prehistory. Using a multidisciplinary
approach, we seek answers to two questions: (1) when did millet first become a
staple food for human consumption? and (2) when and how did millet cultivation
expand from its place of origin in north China to Central and South Asia? The
ecological merits of the two millets under investigation make them particularly
important in the context of food security in modern systems in their capacity to
grow in marginal areas. Understanding the history of these two drought hardy
species can also raise awareness of their capacity for future
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to test hypotheses about the consumption
and spread of millet, Dr Liu and the research team will undertake three types of
analyses: (1) bulk carbon and nitrogen isotope analyses of archaeological animal
bone collagen and plant materials; (2) compound specific carbon isotope analyses
of archaeological human and animal bone collagen; and (3) direct radiocarbon
measurements of archaeological millet grains from across Central and South Asia.
These data are built on significant improvements in sample preparation and
methodological refinements in the recent decade. In taking a multidisciplinary
approach, this project provides insight into not only the two specific crops,
but the communities who utilize them. Why were these crops chosen as primary
targets of food production? Why are communities situated in a recurrent
landscape (foothills / edges of the mountains) seemingly always interested in
these plants? Why do people seemingly consume a lot of crops but not a lot of
meat? Early discussions on East-West contacts have primarily focused on the
inter-continental exchange of material goods. This project will however shift
the focus to emphasize the role played by the primary agents of agricultural
production, the ordinary farming communities themselves, who do not always own
much material goods, but pioneered the globalization process in the ancient
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.