* 1826666
* CNH-S: Exploring the history of coupled climatic and human influences on ecosystem changes during the last one million years
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* David Braun, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 741,821.00

This interdisciplinary project will examine the ways in which climate and human
activities influence natural ecosystems over the immense timespans reflected in
the geological and archaeological records. Scientists increasingly recognize
that the insights provided by such long-term records can play a valuable role in
sustaining biodiversity in future, yet it is exceptionally difficult to tease
apart human-driven versus natural ecosystem changes in the deep past. This
project will develop a new approach that integrates computer modelling with
collection and analysis of archaeological and geological data spanning the last
one million years. Computer-generated models will test hypotheses about how
various human activities and climatic processes influence environmental changes
that can be detected in archaeological and geological data. This project will
help with conservation and management decisions concerning people and the
environment that can be applied anywhere in the world. This project will also
develop high school curricular materials to explore how the natural world is
shaped by climatic and human-driven processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geological
and archaeological archives afford the opportunity to explore coupled human-
natural systems over evolutionary timescales. The challenge is to disentangle
natural and human systems, and their coupling, in the deep past. This project
outlines an innovative approach for studying ancient human-environment
interactions by integrating empirical geological and archaeological data with
generative modeling. The latter provides a framework for understanding how
processes that occur over ecological or ethnographic time-scales are reflected
in time-averaged fossil archives. This approach, which can be applied virtually
anywhere in the world, will be implemented in a study the Cape Floristic Region
in southern Africa, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and biodiversity hotspot of
global significance. Although this exceedingly diverse ecosystem is under
increasing threat from modern development, the legacy of human impact stretches
back hundreds of millennia. This project aims to resolve the extent to which
climatic and anthropogenic impacts have shaped the evolutionary history of this
unique ecosystem, including the degree to which ecological functions provided by
people are important to maintaining biodiversity. This will be accomplished
through a program that includes primary data collection in the field and
laboratory, and the integration and modelling of existing datasets to connect
archaeological, paleoclimatic, paleontological, paleoecological, and geological
archives that span the last one million years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.