* 1826506
* Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future March 26th &amp; 27th 2018 Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,997.00

Non-technical description: This grant funds a workshop to bring together
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) grantees and program managers from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Department of Energy (DOE), along with
those from other federal agencies including the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) and the Department of Defense (DoD). As NSF's response to
the President's Materials Genome Initiative, the Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program seeks to foster tight
collaborations between materials researchers in experiment, theory, and
computation. These collaborations are founded on highly iterative feedback loops
in which experimental results directly inform theory and computation, and vice
versa, with the goal of accelerating the discovery and development of new
materials. The workshop provides researchers a forum to share their research
results and discuss cross-cutting topics related to establishing and sustaining
research collaborations, managing digital data, and supporting long-term
simulation software development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Researchers that are participating in Material Genome Initiative projects
provide leadership to the broader materials research community by implementing
strategies to achieve the goals set out by this Initiative, including reducing
both the cost and time it takes to bring a new material to market. The goals of
the workshop are to: 1) Identify successes of the MGI, 2) Promote data-driven
research, artificial intelligence, and machine learning for materials discovery
and development, 3) Transition fundamental research along the Materials
Development Continuum toward eventual deployment, and 4) Identify mechanisms for
MGI principal investigators (PIs) to partner with those at other laboratories.
Overarching themes identified through presentations, break-out sessions, and
discussions will be presented in a report for dissemination to the broader
materials research community. MGI projects are developing tools that are made
available to aid research of the larger community and this workshop presents the
most effective ways to implement this task. The workshop, which will be held in
College Park, Maryland on March 26-27, 2018, follows in a series of successful
workshops, the latest being held in Bethesda, Maryland January 11-12, 2016.