* 1826149
* QRM: Hybrid Adversarial-Training Methods for 3D Virtual Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yunzhi Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2022
* USD 590,421.00

This grant will support research that will develop a rigorous scientific method
in quantifying the internal structure, or microstructure, of engineering
materials, advancing the frontiers of science and benefiting the US economy.
Microstructure determines the properties and performance of engineering
materials, but is often described in qualitative rather than quantitative terms.
This award supports fundamental research to build the scientific tools to
quantify microstructure, and enable the creation of digital representations of
microstructure that can be used for computational simulations to predict
material performance in structural and functional applications. This project
uses state-of-the-art data science and machine-learning (ML), to build
quantitatively accurate, high-fidelity virtual microstructures, and combines
these tools with physics-based computational models to predict how materials in
service respond to extreme environments. The resulting capabilities allow for
the design of high-performance materials for manufacturing, infrastructure, and
aerospace, and have the potential to transform how materials are brought from
the laboratory to commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses state-of-the-art data science and machine-learning to build virtual
microstructures with bounded uncertainty. The approach builds upon "shape-
optimizers" existing within the DREAM.3D synthetic microstructure software, and
the nascent capabilities of generative adversarial networks (GAN). These methods
will be statistically coupled to experimental data for gains in quantitative
representation accuracy. The virtual microstructures represented in phase-field
simulations will serve as one quality metric for the ML prediction. The hybrid
method explores and exploits use of the GAN methods to offset weaknesses within
shape-optimizer and phase-transformation methods. The goal is to obtain
complete, realistic, and accurate virtual structures. To demonstrate the gains
from the new hybrid method, uncertainty quantification (UQ) techniques will be
concurrently developed using both virtual "materials phantoms," and evaluations
of material descriptors from both synthetic structures and experiments. The
effort builds from open-source software and public datasets in the Materials
Engineering and Machine Learning fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.