* 1826258
* Achieving Autonomy by Learning from Sensor-Assisted Control in a Wheelchair-Based Human-Robot Collaborative System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Rajiv Dubey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 576,383.00

Individuals with sensorimotor impairment must often rely on others to help them
perform common activities of daily living. The goal of this project is to
improve independence and quality of life by creating an adaptive human-robot
collaborative system (a wheelchair mounted robotic arm) that learns from example
to assist its user perform instrumental activities in a way that requires
minimal user guidance. The project has a novel intention recognition framework
that learns user goals despite imprecision of telemanipulation cues provided by
the user during object interactions. The project also implements and tests a
novel form of shared control authority that adaptively allocates workload
between the human and robot to optimally leverage the physical capabilities and
cognitive resources of the user. By doing so, this project will improve the
independence of individuals with sensorimotor impairment and increase the
autonomy of a wheelchair mounted assistive robot, thereby advancing NSF's
mission by promoting the progress of science and advancing the national health
and welfare. The project will involve an educational component that provides
training to graduate students in conducting research. The project also develops
a hands-on exhibit in collaboration with the Tampa Museum of Science and
Industry, allowing visitors to explore the field of rehabilitation
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates new control
methodologies that promise improved autonomy in the control of a wheelchair
mounted robotic arm operated by individuals with sensorimotor impairment. The
project addresses key steps in the dexterous telemanipulation of objects: object
detection, classification, and affordance modeling; user intention estimation;
user / robot workload distribution; and algorithm training through
teleoperation. Methods include computer vision, machine learning, probabilistic
graphical modeling, and human subject experimentation to develop and test the
collaborative human / robot system during performance of activities such as
opening/closing doors with pull and knob style handles, and fetching objects in
an unstructured populated environment. Effective application of the technology
promises persons with physical disabilities opportunity to achieve a high level
of independence, dignity, and quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.