* 1826388
* Research: Workplace Preparation in the Aerospace Engineering Profession
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Cassandra Rutherford, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,161.00

Every year newly graduated engineers enter the workforce to begin their
engineering careers. Although they may be well trained in technical matters,
they still have significant learning to do in order to participate effectively
in the workforce, such as understanding their roles and responsibilities,
determining their companies' culture and norms, and developing relationships
with coworkers. They must adjust to the workplace, which is a critically
important developmental task. Failure to adjust may lead to struggles with the
work environment, leaving workforce, and even to leaving the profession. This
study aims to examine how recently hired engineering graduates enter and adjust
to their engineering profession. In particular, this study focuses on new
engineers in aerospace field for four key reasons: (1) there is a mismatch
between traditional methods for training aerospace engineers and the needs of
the modern engineering workplace, (2) the profession needs to increase retention
of women and members of underrepresented minorities, (3) current higher
education programs and company training in aerospace need to be modified to more
fully open the profession to diverse groups of engineers, and (4) a large supply
of diverse new engineers will be needed to fill the positions that will open in
ever-increasing numbers with the coming retirement of baby boomers from the
aerospace field. These make it urgent for aerospace engineering programs to
graduate engineers who are prepared for the challenges of entering the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to (1) identify
how recently graduated aerospace engineers accomplish tasks that govern their
adjustment to working at engineering companies, (2) determine their experiences,
challenges, and supportive mechanisms during socialization, (3) determine how
engineering students can prepare during their college years to succeed at
workplace tasks, and (4) identify how engineering education programs and
engineering companies can train diverse groups of engineers to accomplish those
tasks. The theoretical framework for this study involves the four socialization
task domains, defined by the socialization literature: task mastery, role
clarification, acculturation, and social integration. Using a multiple-case
research design, this study will interview a diverse group of recently hired new
engineering graduates (N = 30) who are working full-time in preeminent
U.S.-based aerospace companies. The findings are expected to expand engineering
educators' knowledge about how to prepare engineers for the workforce by
uncovering key socialization factors for demographically diverse groups of
engineers. Dissemination of the study findings via websites, online learning
modules, and peer-reviewed publications will help recent engineering graduates
to improve their entry into their workplaces and enable universities to better
prepare students for the workforce. Additionally, study findings will inform
companies to help diverse new engineers get up to speed quickly and launch
themselves into successful career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.