* 1826921
* MRI: Acquisition of a Noble Gas Multi-Collector Mass Spectrometer for Geochronology and Geochemistry Research
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Timothy Swindle, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,055,666.00

This project will establish a laboratory with state-of-the-art instruments for
measuring noble gases in rock, mineral, and water samples, for geochronologic
and geochemical studies in Earth, planetary, and environmental science. The
facility will enable a wide variety of scientific studies by researchers and
students at the University of Arizona and collaborating institutions. Some of
the primary goals of these studies will be: 1) to investigate the timing and
rates of geologic events and processes using radioisotopic dating, including
faulting, magmatism, and erosion, 2) to characterize the behavior of noble gases
in minerals to understand the material properties of natural crystals, and 3) to
trace the movement and evolution of groundwater and other fluids in the Earth's
subsurface. This project will also enable hands-on research training for
students who will use the instruments and laboratory, helping them develop the
quantitative and technical skills and experience for Earth, planetary, and
environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of the laboratory
will be a new multi-collector gas-source sector mass spectrometer and sample
introduction equipment including devices for extracting gases using resistance
(furnace) and laser heating, crushing of fluid-inclusions, and exsolution from
fluids. State of the art high-resolution, high-sensitivity, and multi-collection
capabilities of the mass spectrometer will enable simultaneous measurement of
all isotopes of argon and neon, and helium will be measured by peak-hopping.
Important research foci for the instrument will include 1) geo- and
thermochronology using the 40Ar/39Ar system for applications in tectonic,
detrital, volcanic, and fault-systems; 2) low-temperature 4He/3He
thermochronology and understanding helium mobility in minerals; 3) cosmogenic
and nucleogenic 21Ne dating for geomorphic applications and for dating secondary
minerals like iron oxides; and 4) isotopic compositions and concentrations of
noble gases for tracing the fluxes and evolution of subsurface fluid-rock
systems. In addition to serving researchers and students at the University of
Arizona, Utah State University, and University of Texas El Paso, the facility
will also provide analytical services and research experience opportunities for
collaborators at a variety of institutions, including universities and liberal
arts colleges, through analyses and workshops for diverse cohorts of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.