* 1826966
* PFI-TT: Development of high-performance nanostructured polarizers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Robert Magnusson, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 02/28/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is grounded in
transformational new ideas for high-performance polarizers. These types of
optical components are widely applied in practice, for example, in
telecommunication systems, laser technology, medical sensor systems, television
screens, and imaging instrumentation. The project lays a foundation for a
pioneering device technology with new operational regimes and applicability.
Simultaneously, the project enhances scientific and technological understanding
by elucidating the optical properties and utility of lossless nanostructured
resonant films on which the device concept is based. These research and
development activities will strengthen US competitiveness in nanophotonics and
metamaterials. Moreover, this project establishes partnerships between industry
and academia. An academic team will provide device design specifications and
prototype fabrication. A primary industrial partner will potentially distribute
polarizes meeting specifications via existing sales and marketing platforms. The
project provides excellent analytical and experimental experience for both
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The project is likely to have high
commercial impact, as the proposed patent-pending lossless polarizers with the
predicted performance attributes do not currently exist in the market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project delivers new polarizer technology
based on original ideas in photonic device engineering. The intellectual merit
of this technology lies in the novelty of our discovery that a sparse grid of
dielectric nanowires is nearly completely invisible to one polarization state
while being opaque to the orthogonal polarization state with this property
existing over significantly wide spectral bands. It is scientifically extremely
important that the high-efficiency, wideband spectra presented can be generated
in these minimal resonance systems. Based on this discovery, our research
objectives focus on design, fabrication and testing of compact, low-loss,
dielectric polarizers for deployment in key spectral regions. Accordingly, we
will design and fabricate simple single-layer elements as well as nanogrid
multi-module lattices that provide excellent performance using a variety of
practical materials. We plan complete spectral verification of the fabricated
devices and comparison with theoretical predictions. We will measure
polarization performance including bandwidth and extinction ratios in reflection
and transmission of individual two-grating modules and of concatenated
multilayer modules. Technical goals include high polarization extinction ratios
of 1,000,000:1 and insertion loss below 1%. Manufacturing strategies involving
high-resolution UV-laser interferometric patterning and carefully chosen
materials will accomplish the goals of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.