* 1826104
* Understanding How Aluminum Moves Around a Friction Stir Welding Tool in order to Prevent Welding Defects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Michael Zinn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 10/31/2022
* USD 411,964.00

This award will support fundamental scientific research that will investigate
how aluminum moves around a friction stir welding tool and how this movement
influences the formation of sub-surface defects (voids). Due to its many
advantages over other welding processes, friction stir welding has rapidly
gained popularity in numerous manufacturing industries. However, certain
limitations have slowed its mass implementation. This research seeks to address
a lack of knowledge about two limitations in friction stir welding: (1) the need
for costly post weld inspection of sub-surface defects in high-reliability
applications (for example: defense and aerospace industries), and (2) the desire
to increase processing speed to allow for high-volume production (for example:
automotive industry). Faster welding speeds increase the likelihood of defect
formation. A fundamental understanding of the precise mechanisms of material
flow around the friction stir tool and its role in sub-surface defect formation
is currently lacking. This research will generate the knowledge necessary to
help U.S. manufacturers predict defect formation, hence allow them to design a
friction stir welding process that produces defect-free welds. Addressing the
aforementioned limitations will greatly expedite the mass implementation of this
joining method, which will have a positive impact on U.S. manufacturing, the
U.S. economy, and National Security. The award will also facilitate training of
the future workforce as students across all levels will gain exposure to and
experience in advanced joining technologies. Knowledge generated from this
project will be distributed publicly through conference presentations, journal
articles, industry tours, and open house engineering
expositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to generate a
fundamental understanding of the physics behind the intermittent movement (an
extrusion-like process) of metal around the friction stir tool once per tool
revolution. This phenomenon has been widely reported in the manufacturing
engineering community by means of force measurements and by studying weld cross-
sections after completing the weld. However, an understanding of why this
intermittent material movement occurs and direct in-process observations do not
exist. One leading hypothesis is that a cavity opens up in the wake of the
advancing tool and that material is subsequently extruded into this cavity
during each rotation of the tool. In a good welding condition, this cavity is
completely filled. However, when there is a breakdown in the material flow, the
cavity is not filled completely and a defect (void) remains. This hypothesis
will be tested by means of novel, in-process proton radiography of the friction
stir welding process of an aluminum alloy. Proton radiography at the Los Alamos
Neutron Science Center provides the capability of producing a series of
radiographic images (like x-rays) of the weld zone that will show whether or not
a cavity is forming and filling. The knowledge gained through this physical
experimentation, combined with other experiments conducted at the University of
Madison-Wisconsin, will drive the numerical simulation of the intermittent flow
phenomenon. Simulation of this phenomenon is largely absent from the published
literature. In this work, the complex material flow and cavity formation and
filing processes will be modeled and simulated using advanced Lagrangian based
numerical techniques. Ultimately, this will provide the means to predict defect
formation, and design measures to avoid it during
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.