* 1826758
* STEM Pathways and Research Alliances: New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Laura Crossey, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,042,336.00

The New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation (NM AMP), part of the nation-
wide Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, is a mature Alliance of
seven public universities and seven public 2-year colleges. Collaborators
include industry partners; two National Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering
Research Center (ERC) projects; the NSF-funded New Mexico EPSCoR project; the
New Mexico Math, Engineering, Science Achievement program (New Mexico MESA,
Inc.); and the Arizona-based LSAMP, the Western Alliance to Expand Student
Opportunities (WAESO). The NMAMP provides support services and funding
opportunities for Under Represented Minority (URM) students pursuing careers in
STEM fields in the state of New Mexico. In Phase VI of the program, which will
be years 26 through 30 of the program, NM AMP will include a social
science/educational research component will seek to better understand the roles
and interactions of students and faculty mentors in the development of
scientists and engineers, and to better inform the design, execution, and
assessment of such programs. Over the lifetime of NM AMP, the number of STEM
B.S. degrees awarded annually to URMs in New Mexico has increased from 253 in
1992-93 to 858 in 2015-16. During the same time period, the percentage of B.S.
STEM degrees awarded to URM students increased from 24% to
48%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase VI on NM AMP will accomplish the following: 1)
Sustain proven strategies and activities, 2) Implement enhancements to further
improve students' educational experiences and prepare them for the STEM
workforce and/or graduate studies; 3) Contribute to the development of
institutional contexts that support URM student achievement through an
innovative new faculty development workshop, and 4) Conduct social science
research to further understand and disseminate findings on the challenges for
URM students in STEM. The NM AMP Pathway supports URM students at partnering
two- and four-year institutions and provides them with multiple opportunities to
explore STEM programs and careers, engage in undergraduate research, and
participate in additional programs and opportunities that support early career
exploration, the development of STEM identity, and foster self-efficacy and the
self-directed pursuit of academic and career goals. The Pathway rejects deficit-
based thinking that assumes students lack either qualities or abilities for
achievement and, instead, embraces a strengths-based approach that recognizes
the unique contributions and interests of individual students and provides them
with guidance and experiences that enable each student to achieve his or her
full potential. Evidence-based activities along the Pathway include
undergraduate research experiences (domestic and international), professional
development events, and skills-building workshops. The alliance will also
support changes in institutional climate to increase learning and retention of
URM students in STEM. New activities and priorities include the following: 1)
Implement a rigorous, mixed methods social science research project focused on
better understanding the factors that shape students' scientific identity and
STEM retention, including dissemination of outcomes in quick turnaround mini-
studies and peer-review articles; 2) Enhance student support activities with the
addition of entry level stipends that provide opportunities for students to
explore research options early in their college careers, a Professional
Development Webinar Series, and an E-Portfolio option; and 3) Pilot a new
Context Diversity Faculty Development Workshop to promote effective change in
learning environments to better support URM student
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.