* 1826784
* The Development of Chance and Statistics in Evolutionary Biology
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Charles Pence, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 98,716.00

This award supports a research project in the history of evolutionary biology.
Specifically, the project will provide an account of how statistical methods
came to be used in evolutionary theory, along with the notion of chance which
supported the use of these methods. Darwin's own theory of evolution by natural
selection was a non-mathematical, non-statistical theory of the unfolding
history of life on earth. The research supported by this project will eventually
be published as a scholarly book that captures these developments in a clear and
rigorous manner. This grant will also fund a one-day workshop with the PI and
secondary education teachers, designed to produce publicly accessible, free-of-
charge curricular materials which bring the results of the historical and
philosophical work developed here to science
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This history of science project will capture
one of the most remarkable developments during the first few decades following
Darwin's publication of the Origin of Species; namely, the rapid diffusion of
statistical methodology and the multifaceted roles for the concept of chance
across evolutionary biology. The biologists involved in this project--the
biometrical school of Francis Galton, Karl Pearson, W.F.R Weldon, and the
architects of the Modern Synthesis, especially R.A. Fisher, Sewall Wright, and
J.B.S. Haldane--are well known. But the precise views of these figures, their
philosophical rationales for introducing concepts of chance and statistical
methodology, when and how they did so, and the ways in which these ideas were
transmitted during this pivotal period of the history of biology are all poorly
understood. This project will provide a philosophically and historically
sophisticated analysis of the introduction of chance and statistics and their
transmission into the Modern Synthesis. By refining our views of how these
concepts act in evolutionary biology today, the results of this project have the
potential to impact a wide array of fields of knowledge, such as the theological
response to evolutionary theory or the suitability of a univocal concept of
human nature in a post-Darwinian world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.