* 1826086
* New Controller Design Approaches for Complex, Nonlinear Dynamic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Chunjiang Qian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 259,444.00

This project will create new theories and approaches for ensuring stable
behavior and desired performance of complex dynamic systems. Some examples of
such systems include network of power plants, interconnected electric vehicles,
or biological systems such as normal cell physiology and the alterations that
lead to human disease. This project will develop new theories and methods that
can help design control systems for such systems based on better understanding
of the intrinsic relationships between inherent characteristics of the system
and their dynamic behaviors. The theories, tools and approaches can be readily
used to solve a wide range of real-world engineering problems, including
predicting evolution of damage in bones, developing more energy efficient
control algorithms for power generation systems to reduce hazardous emissions,
or designing better coordination control for a network of electric vehicles. The
traditional approaches to design of control systems for complex nonlinear
systems involve simplified model (linearization) of the system which inherently
limits the performance of these systems. If successful, the outcome of the work
will be a big leap towards finding better control methods for nonlinear systems.
The project also has significant broader impacts. Through a structured research
activity this project will enhance minority students' education at the
University of Texas at San Antonio, a Hispanic serving institution. The project
will also promote international collaboration among U.S. students, faculty, and
their peers in the global community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop sustained and systematic research to explore new theories and approaches
for behavior analysis and controller design of inherently nonlinear dynamic
systems. The new framework of multivariant homogeneity will be developed based
on recent new concepts in defining homogeneity. The new generalized framework
will be instrumental to characterize a boarder range of nonlinear dynamic
systems. By establishing the homogeneous center manifold theory, the intrinsic
link between the convergence rate of the system trajectory and the monotone
homogeneity of the system will be discovered. The innovative design tools will
lead to solutions to many open control problems for inherently nonlinear
systems. The definitions, theories, and approaches in this project will add
much-needed components to complete the theory of homogeneous systems, accelerate
the research of control theory and dynamic systems, and facilitate new solutions
to real-world engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.