* 1826310
* The role of grain-scale non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the production and evolution of oceanic crust and lithosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 306,202.00

One of the most powerful approaches that scientists have for understanding
chemical systems, both natural and synthetic, is equilibrium thermodynamics.
This approach allows us to predict, in detail, the state that systems will
settle into if given enough time to react completely. In studying the melting
and crystallization of the magmas that erupt at mid-ocean ridges and form new
ocean floor, equilibrium has been the basic assumption and tool that scientists
have long relied on, on the basis of the reasonable assumption that temperatures
are quite high in magmatic systems and melt production and migration is
happening reasonably slowly. Much has been learned from work based on this idea.
However, it has limitations. Some reactions are very slow. Exposed samples of
the mantle may have a texture like "marble cake" and, if the regions of
different composition are big enough, they cannot react with each other
completely. Diffusion of elements through large crystals limits the rate at
which they can reach equilibrium. This reasoning leads to the conclusion that a
framework for thinking about melting, melt migration, and crystallization that
addresses the approach to equilibrium (rather than just the end state) is
necessary to test these assumptions, address harder problems, and gain a full
understanding of the origin of the seafloor and the information about Earth's
deep interior that can be gained by picking up rocks there. This is a
challenging endeavor because it requires new categories of numerical models
built on entirely different equations, and able to follow systems through time.
This work will borrow numerical approaches from materials engineering (fields
like metallurgy) that explicitly include a description of a parcel of Earth's
mantle at the scale of individual mineral grains, and tracks how those grains
grow or shrink, react with one another, and contribute atoms to the liquid phase
as melting proceeds. This tool will be applicable to numerous Earth science
problems and will enable solid Earth scientists to think about volcanism, mid-
ocean ridges, and subduction zones in entirely new
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support a multi-scale
computational study of melting processes in Earth's mantle, specifically
focusing on the role of non-equilibrium thermodynamics in determining the
chemical and textural evolution of the melting source and the composition of
melts. The numerical framework for grain-scale non-equilibrium thermodynamics
under development can self-consistently simulate processes such as coarsening,
phase transformation, major and trace element diffusion, reactions, and melting
of minerals or rocks. The work will begin by constraining model parameters and
validating the model's explanatory power against kinetic laboratory experiments.
That will set the stage for applying the model to the decompression melting of
oceanic mantle beneath spreading centers. Developments to be studied include the
use of phase-field techniques to describe interfacial dynamics, adding grain-
boundary diffusion, developing an algorithm for melt extraction, and adopting a
thermodynamic database for sub-solidus and magmatic phase relations. The first
task will proceed via application of the model to coarsening of solid and melt-
bearing assemblages, characterizing the roles of chemical and interfacial
mobilities, volumetric free energies, bulk composition, and grain boundary
diffusion on coarsening and phase transformation rates. Experimental validation
will examine reaction rates and textures between periclase, quartz, enstatite,
and forsterite. The main application will then be to investigate the
microstructural and chemical evolution of mantle peridotite during decompression
melting beneath mid-ocean ridge spreading centers. This phase will study the
topology of melt during production and migration, textural evolution due to
melting and phase transformations (e.g., garnet to spinel), and the effect of
grain size and decompression rates on composition. Investigations will consider
two scenarios: a semi-closed-system, near-fractional melting model and an open-
system, reactive flow melting model. The project supports training a
postdoctoral researcher, developing grain-scale non-equilibrium thermodynamic
modeling in the Earth sciences, and expanding that development to numerous
problems in material physics and engineering related to coarsening, diffusion,
and phase transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.