* 1826144
* Collaborative Research: Performance Incentives for Organ Transplantation Centers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ahmed Gaber, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,819.00

This award will impact the Nation's healthcare system by ensuring more effective
use of donor transplant organs. Organ transplantation is the most effective, and
often the only viable, therapy for end-stage organ failure. Unfortunately, the
demand for organs greatly exceeds the supply. To ensure that transplant centers
are effectively using these scarce organs, this award will develop new
transplant center evaluation criteria to incentivize transplant centers to
improve their post-transplant outcomes and maximize transplantation volume. This
award will lead to a deeper understanding of current pay-for-performance
initiatives in the transplantation system and in other healthcare settings by
examining the interplay between societal goals and provider incentives. The
goals of this award are in line with the NSF mission goal of promoting the
advancement of the national health. This award will fund a doctoral student in
inter-disciplinary research and create educational materials for both operations
researchers and transplantation professionals at the Texas Medical Center. This
award will involve students from underrepresented groups and engage in outreach
efforts through various programs at Rice University and the University of
Houston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build a bilevel optimization
framework to model the interaction between the societal perspective and the
goals of individual transplant centers to determine incentives that
simultaneously maximize societal and center-level benefits. This framework (1)
formulates the societal perspective (the leader) that quantifies the utility-
adjusted, national benefit and determines societally optimal incentive
parameters, and (2) models each transplant center's perspective (the followers)
as a sequential, stochastic decision-making problem so as to maximize its
transplant volume subject to the societal incentives. Bilevel models are
considered among the hardest optimization models. This research will lead to
advances in bilevel optimization where the followers' problems are sequential
and stochastic. To address the computational challenges, the researchers will
develop approximation techniques leveraging the fluid model structure of each
center's problem and chance-constrained programming techniques, and build
efficient algorithms based on decomposition, branch-and-cut methods, and high-
performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.