* 1826836
* RII Track-2 FEC: Systems Genetics Studies on Rice Genomes for Analysis of Grain Yield and Quality Under Heat Stress
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Andy Pereira, University of Arkansas
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 5,564,316.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The basic knowledge and understanding of how
environmental stressors, such as high temperatures, affect cereal crop
production is important for global food security. Rice, a model cereal plant and
a major world staple crop, is grown in the southern United States, and is
threatened by increased night temperatures that contribute to unstable
production, resulting in lower grain yield and quality, which result in
decreased market value. This project will identify individual rice lines that
are tolerant to high nighttime temperatures and will use a variety of genetic
and biochemical techniques to identify potential mechanisms that underlie the
ability of these plants to be high temperature tolerant. These mechanisms will
be tested in the plant using gene editing technologies to confirm that these
mechanisms and thus the underling causative alleles are responsible for the
plant's resistance to high nighttime temperatures. Knowing the actual mechanisms
will aid breeders to develop new lines that can help decrease the risk of major
crop losses due to high temperatures in the future. This project will be a
collaborative effort among the University of Arkansas campuses at Fayetteville
and Little Rock, Louisiana State University, and Oklahoma State University and
will help develop the careers of six early career research faculty, train
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdocs. In addition, the projects
will build educational resources for STEM at the undergraduate level as well as
K-12. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The japonica rice
subspecies is the basis of most US varieties currently in production and have
been used in US breeding efforts with other rice introductions from all over the
world to select varieties that are tolerant to high night temperature. In this
project, a diverse collection of rice lines critical to U.S. production will be
screened in the field, including environments differing in night temperature,
and replicated under controlled greenhouse conditions, to identify heat tolerant
genotypes with contributing genes and novel mechanisms that are of interest to
use in improvement of rice and other cereals for their resilience to high night
temperatures. The genetic changes or identification of alleles ascribed to the
desired phenotypes will be characterized at multi-systems levels: the
transcriptome, metabolome, proteome, and the physiological response. Information
from these analyses will be integrated into gene regulatory networks that can
provide a biological understanding of plant adaptations to the changing
environment documented in independent genotypes. Wildtype or mutant alleles
identified from the population studies will be validated by transformation and
CRISPR/Cas9 mediated allele engineering, followed by phenotypic validation to
identify alleles associated with heat tolerance, as proof of concept for use in
cultivar development. This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused
EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) project brings together complementary
expertise comprising senior and junior faculty from the University of Arkansas
campuses at Fayetteville and Little Rock, Louisiana State University, and
Oklahoma State University, to address this complex challenge in an
interdisciplinary manner. The participants include six early career faculty from
different institutions, who will be integrated into the interdisciplinary
program to develop expertise in cross-disciplinary research projects. The
project will include training of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students,
participation of 10-12th grade students in STEM girl's leadership events, and of
High School teachers and students for training in Plant Genetics and
Physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.