* 1826807
* Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Collaborative Research in Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Rachel Teasdale, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 286,229.00

This grant supports acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass
Spectrometer (ICP-MS) to support a new collaborative Geochemistry Research
Group, consisting of new and senior faculty in the Department of Geological and
Environmental Sciences at California State University, Chico, a Hispanic Serving
Institution. The instrument will support trace element analyses that will
facilitate cross-disciplinary research related to the geochemistry of the Earth
by faculty, undergraduates and M.S. students. Access to an on-campus ICP-MS will
facilitate undergraduate research in geochemistry by providing students with
hands-on analytical experience. The investigators have significant combined
experience mentoring non-traditional, underrepresented undergraduate independent
STEM research projects, from initial development through presentation at
regional or national meetings and publications. The ICP-MS will be incorporated
into over 20 classes in the College of Natural Sciences and the College of
Agriculture, giving a wide range of student users state-of-the-art analytical
experience. In association with the Gateway Science Museum, the Geochemistry
Research Group will set up a Citizen Science project to assess water quality in
the Chico area. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare
given the societal relevance of targeted environmental research aimed at
understanding the terrestrial water cycle with implications for improved water
resource management and the impact of the acquisition on training the next
generation scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-MS will support
NSF-funded projects in geochemistry and other current collaborations of the
research group but, more importantly, it will enable new multidisciplinary
collaborations in three main foci: Aqueous Biogeochemistry, Geochemistry of Ore
Deposits and Mine Reclamation; and Petrology. The research group is currently
engaged in a variety of research including: the role of iron in biogeochemical
cycling, mediating urban storm-water runoff by biofiltration, mineralization of
Gold (Au) bearing deposits, assessing soil and water contamination from historic
mining, metasomatism of stromatolites, and the petrogenetic evolution of a chain
of basaltic volcanoes. New projects in development include studies of surface
water quality in Lassen Volcanic National Park (California), impacts of volcanic
fluids and gases on surrounding soils and vegetation, and petrology of the
largest eruptive unit (the Lovejoy Basalt) identified in
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.