* 1826769
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Sensitivity of High-altitude Environments to Global Increased Temperature as Recorded by Lacustrine Microbialite Carbonates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Clyde, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 170,569.00

This project will reconstruct a high elevation environment during the globally
warm period between ~70 and 50 million years ago. Researchers have little
information about high elevation sites during past periods of increased global
temperature, although modern high elevation settings appear to be highly
sensitive to rapid changes in climate. We are focusing our research on the Sheep
Pass Formation, which is interpreted to have been deposited in a high elevation,
fresh water lake system. The project will initially provide a better estimate of
the age of the Sheep Pass Formation, which is important since there are few
stratigraphic records that capture this time interval in this region. A better
estimate of the age of the Sheep Pass Formation may enable development of new
records of rapid climate change during the Paleogene, which was one of the
warmest times in Earth's history and was marked by numerous rapid, short-term
warming events known as hyperthermals. We also expect to improve estimates of
the elevation of this region at the time of creation of the rocks. Finally, this
project will provide new information about how these rocks form in lakes today
and are altered after creation, which will improve how researchers interpret
ancient climate from other rocks like these. This project is timely and serves
the national interest because we need to better understand how the western US,
much of which is at higher elevations, will respond to future environmental
change. For example, this project may help us better understand threats to the
water supply in the western US, as well as potential for estimating how much
temperatures may change in these regions relative to global estimates. In
addition, the Sheep Pass Formation contains some oil. This project will produce
better understanding of the history of these rocks after they were created,
which will give us more information on the changes that may have allowed oil to
migrate into the rocks, giving us more insight into potential oil resources in
similar types of rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most modern high elevation regions
are warming faster than lower elevation regions at similar latitudes, which in
turn affects water resources and ecosystems in those regions. However, the
mechanisms driving this increase in temperature are unclear. The snow-albedo
feedback is often invoked as a major contribution to this effect, but this
mechanism would not apply during 'greenhouse' times in the past with little to
no ice at the poles or high elevations, such as the Cretaceous and Paleogene.
Study of high elevation regions during greenhouse climates may provide insight
into their sensitivity to globally warm climate, and help elucidate the
fundamental mechanism(s) driving the phenomenon. Additionally, intermontane
basins have yielded most of the existing terrestrial records of greenhouse
climate and hyperthermals to-date (e.g. the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum-
PETM). Thus, better knowledge of how these regions respond to warming will
improve comparisons of terrestrial paleoclimate records to marine records and
help resolve sources of discrepancy between them. This project focuses on the
Late Cretaceous-middle Eocene Sheep Pass Formation (SPF) in central Nevada,
which was at least 2 km high at the time of deposition. The SPF preserves a
thick succession of lacustrine microbialite carbonate suitable for stable
isotope analysis, and the age of the SPF suggests that it may preserve the K-Pg
boundary, the PETM, and other Early Eocene rapid warming events. However, age
constraint is limited, so we are using magnetostratigraphy and calcite U/Pb
geochronology to improve the chronostratigraphic framework. In addition, we are
characterizing the microbialite sedimentology and generating a comprehensive
suite of traditional and 'clumped' stable isotope values at better than 0.5 m.y
resolution. To better understand the role of microbes in lacustrine carbonate
precipitation and alteration, we are sampling modern microbialites in three
alkaline lakes in North America that span diverse environments and climates. We
are developing traditional and clumped isotope datasets of sediments and
porewaters; detailed sediment microfacies descriptions; lake water and porewater
carbonate chemistry datasets; and 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing of surface
and shallow subsurface microbial communities. We will combine these datasets
into an interpretive framework for lacustrine microbialites that we will apply
to the SPF to assess how high elevation environments responded to globally warm
conditions. This project is advancing discovery and understanding of science
through the training and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.