* 1826030
* Continuous Manufacturing of Aerogel-Foam Sheets and Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Sadhan Jana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 432,343.00

This grant will support research that contributes new knowledge on continuous
manufacturing of meters long and tens of centimeter wide highly porous, polymer
aerogel-foam sheets and films, thus advancing scientific understanding of
materials fabrication and producing enabling technologies to serve national
interests in defense, health, and energy. The aerogel-foam sheets will have
coexisting open pores of several length scales that introduce new functions not
achievable from conventional foam and aerogel materials obtained in current
technologies. This award supports the research on avenues of introduction of
open pores of multiple length scales in conjunction with high-speed fabrication
of sheets and films. The new aerogel-foam sheets and films will be appropriate
for fabrication of protective gears to combat nanoparticles and other bioactive
agent intrusion into human body, as filter materials for removal of 10-200 nm
size airborne nanoparticles, aerosols, and living organisms, as oil-water
separation media, and as gel electrolyte separators to expand the temperature
window of Li-ion batteries. The knowledge developed in this research will
benefit several disciplines, such as textiles, electrochemistry, membrane
separation, immunology, and manufacturing. The multi-disciplinary nature of the
research will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
will positively impact engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerogel-
foams are lightweight materials that combine certain attributes of foams with
those of aerogels. A population of micrometer size pores (macrovoids) introduced
via oil-in-oil emulsion templating method inside inherently generated macro- and
mesoporous networks of polymer aerogels make these materials attractive.
Conventional aerogel articles do not contain macrovoids while conventional
foaming technologies do not produce aerogels and cannot be adapted to produce
aerogel foams. In this work, the macrovoids will be introduced in aerogel
architecture via oil-in-oil emulsion-templating method in conjunction with a
step-polymerization scheme that produces polyimide chains. In this context, the
selection of surfactants and corresponding stability of the dispersed oil phase
against coalescence and gelation kinetics of the continuous phase present
several fundamental challenges that must be overcome to successfully manufacture
meters long and tens of centimeter wide aerogel foam sheets and film specimens.
The polarity of block copolymer type non-ionic surfactants, appropriate for
obtaining stable oil-in-oil emulsions, will influence the polymer gelation
kinetics and the openness of the macrovoid skin layers. The organic solvent of
appropriate electron accepting ability will allow variation of gel times from 3
min to 3 h.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.