* 1826994
* CC* NPEO: The Research and Science Engagement Center: A Production Platform for Operations, Applied Training, Monitoring, and R&amp;E Support
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jason Zurawski, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 3,500,000.00

The scientific community has experienced an unprecedented shift in the
way&lt;br/&gt;research is performed and how discoveries are made. Highly
sophisticated experimental instruments are&lt;br/&gt;creating massive datasets
for diverse scientific communities and hold the potential for new insights
that&lt;br/&gt;will have long-lasting impacts on society. However, scientists
cannot make effective use of this data if&lt;br/&gt;they are unable to move,
store, and analyze it. This project establishes the Research and
Science&lt;br/&gt;Engagement Center (ReSEC) as a collaborative focal point for
operational expertise and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;This project will assist
scientists in routinely, reliably, and robustly transferring their
data.&lt;br/&gt;ReSEC will deliver end-to-end user support and network
engineering solutions,&lt;br/&gt;and become a central community hub ready to
provide personalized expertise and assistance on an ongoing
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ReSEC proposes four primary execution thrusts: 1) a
Roadside Assistance center to reactively&lt;br/&gt;respond to immediate problems
with science data transfers; 2) proactive network observation&lt;br/&gt;using
tools such as perfSONAR and NetSage; 3) assistance with design &amp; deployment
of campus&lt;br/&gt;networking assets such as Science DMZs; and 4) training for
campus network administrators.&lt;br/&gt;ReSEC will scale operations broadly by
relying on Regional Network, Infrastructure and Science Community
partners.&lt;br/&gt;ReSEC will deliver expertise and assistance on a
sustainable, ongoing basis, with a particular emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on serving
educational institutions with relatively limited local network administrative
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.