* 1826635
* Collaborative Research: A Teleconnection between the Tropical Madden-Julian Oscillation and Arctic Sudden Stratospheric Warming Events in Warm Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2022
* USD 411,661.00

The wintertime winds of the Northern Hemisphere stratosphere form a vortex
circulating around a cold low pressure cell over the Arctic. Occasionally,
perhaps six time in a decade, the vortex experiences a major disruption known as
a stratospheric sudden warming (SSW), in which the Arctic stratosphere warms by
tens of degrees celsius in just a few days. SSWs are often followed by cold air
outbreaks and other forms of severe weather, thus they are of practical as well
as scientific interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classical studies of SSWs
established that the breakdown of the vortex is caused by planetary-scale waves
propagating upward and northward into the polar stratosphere. These waves can
originate in various ways, and previous work by the PIs and others finds that
some SSWs can be linked to the tropical Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). The MJO
is a broad envelope of cloudiness and convective rainfall that forms over the
equatorial Indian Ocean and propagates slowly eastward as far as the central
Pacific. Planetary waves generated by the MJO are known to affect weather in
middle and high latitudes but their effect on SSWs has not received much
attention until recently. The MJO-SSW connection is of particular interest given
recent studies suggesting that MJO activity increases when tropical sea surface
temperatures (SSTs) increase. The increase in MJO activity suggests greater SSW
frequency, but other factors such as changes in the jet streams in a warming
climate must also be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the
MJO-SSW connection in a hierarchy of models of varying degrees of complexity.
The research is enabled by a specialized model configuration which is capable of
simulating both the MJO, which is notoriously difficult to capture in current
weather and climate models, and SSWs. The model uses superparameterization (SP),
a technique pioneered by one of the PIs in which cloud resolving models are
embedded in every grid column of a global model (see AGS-0425247). The SP
technique is applied in the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM, the atmospheric
component model of the Community Earth System Model), used here with enhanced
vertical resolution to capture stratospheric dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work has broader impacts due to the effects of SSWs on surface weather in the
Northern Hemisphere. The warming of tropical SSTs raises the prospect of
stronger MJO events, and it is of practical interest to understand how stronger
events will affect weather regimes over the US and other countries. Moreover,
the slow propagation of the MJO offers some hope for extended-range prediction
of extreme weather linked to SSWs, thus research on the MJO-SSW connection has
implications for operational weather forecasting. The project has educational
broader impacts through summer internships supporting undergraduates and local
high school students, who are trained in python programming and atmospheric data
analysis. The award also provides support and training to two graduate students,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.