* 1826917
* IRES Track I: International Research Experience for Students in Computational Nanoscience
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 203,743.00

Nanoscience is one of the most exciting areas of modern research stretching
across the whole spectrum of science including: physics, engineering, chemistry,
medicine and health. Computational Nanoscience addresses the challenges of this
rapidly evolving field by using novel computational methods to tackle practical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to create
international research opportunity for students and immerse them in creative
computational nanoscience projects. Through the international research
experience, students will become part of a new generation of computational
scientists modeling outstanding problems in materials science, physics and
chemistry as researchers in industry, academia, and government labs. To achieve
this, students will be trained in both theoretical and practical aspects of
computational modeling, and further their professional development through
participation in computational projects in an international research
environment. The international research framework will allow students to be
practitioners and innovators in computational modeling by educating them in both
fundamentals (mathematics, physics, computational tools, material science and
computer science) and applications. The students will have opportunity to do
research in Japan's leading research center (Tsukuba Science City), world
renowned National Lab (RIKEN) and best university (University of Tokyo) and will
have access to the world's best supercomputers. In addition, the students will
be exposed to Japan's multifaceted culture, traditions, history and natural
beauty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research presents broad training
opportunities for students overarching physics, electrical engineering, material
science, quantum mechanical simulations, high performance computing, and novel
computational algorithms. The proposed international
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;will provide an unparalleled research environment for
students, exposing them to the forefront of scientific challenges and
technological innovations from an international podium. The projects will
encourage the participation of underrepresented groups by leveraging the
Vanderbilt-Fisk bridge program and by actively recruiting minority students. The
students will also be introduced into the&lt;br/&gt;rich culture and history of
Japan. The host Japanese groups will also likely to benefit not only from the
research outcomes but through the international cultural exchange and
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US students will pursue time-dependent
simulations of electron and ion dynamics in nanomaterials using novel atomistic
quantum mechanical approaches. These investigations will be frontier
applications of time-dependent first-principles quantum mechanical calculations
to describe interaction of electromagnetic fields and matter, electron transport
and scattering and physics of ultracold atoms. The results of these simulations
will be valuable in evaluating the experiments probing new frontiers of material
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with Japanese research groups,
researchers from VU have developed a linear scaling atomistic approach to
simulate the time-dependent behavior of molecules, solids, and nanostructures in
time-dependent external fields. The approach allows for the simulation of
electron and ion dynamics in systems containing thousands of atoms,
incorporating the effect of electromagnetic fields by coupling the time-
dependent Maxwell and Schrodinger equations. The participating students will use
these computer simulations tools to study various systems, including high
harmonics generation in solids, interaction of laser pulses and 2D materials,
ionization and fragmentation of molecules by circularly polarized light, low
energy scattering of electrons and biomolecules, and other interesting cases.
The students will also develop and test novel computational approaches to
increase the speed and accuracy of quantum
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.