* 1826585
* Collaborative Proposal: Adolescent Social Development During Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* April Thomas, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 383,675.00

Juvenile incarceration removes young people from their homes, schools, and
communities during a period of substantial social development. Incarceration not
only isolates adolescents from typical sources of socialization (e.g., family,
friends, mentors, teachers, coaches) and increases exposure to antisocial
influences (e.g., fellow inmates), but also reduces adolescents' opportunities
to engage in traditional social interactions. This research examines the effects
of juvenile incarceration on adolescents' social development and social
relationship quality. Further, the study will explore potential ripple effects
that such disruptions to social functioning may have on adolescents' mental
health and future offending. The information garnered from this study may inform
changes to juvenile justice policies and juvenile incarceration practices to
reduce negative effects of incarceration on social
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a longitudinal study
of approximately 300 adolescents (13-17 years) across a period of two years.
This sample will consist of three distinct groups of adolescents: 1)
incarcerated adolescents, 2) adjudicated adolescents sentenced to community
probation, and 3) community adolescents with no prior arrests. Participants will
be statistically matched across the three groups on variables associated with
incarceration (e.g., age, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gender, prior
behavior) to allow for inferences to be made about group-level differences in
social development, relationship quality, mental health symptoms, and offending
behavior, controlling for pre-existing differences on matched constructs.
Participants will complete 7 structured interviews and five weeks of daily diary
assessments about their social competence, social relationships, mental health
symptoms, and criminal offending behavior. Official records of subsequent
offending will also be provided for all justice-involved participants. The
proposed research is the first study of its kind to directly disentangle the
potential effects of juvenile incarceration on adolescent social
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.