* 1826099
* Research: A Mixed-Methods Approach to Characterizing Engineering Students' Computational Habits of Mind
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Mireille Boutin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Finding solutions to complex problems in our society requires engineering
graduates who not only possess the technical knowledge and skill set of a
discipline, but also a professional mindset. "Habits of mind" are modes of
thinking required to become effective problem solvers capable of transferring
such skills to new contexts. Such skills form an essential part of engineer's
professional mindset. This project studies undergraduate engineering students'
habits of mind related to computing. The novelty of the proposed approach is
that the data collection and analysis methods integrate machine learning with
methods traditionally used in education to analyze data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The guiding education research question of the project is: What
computational habits of mind do engineering students exhibit at different points
of their academic development? The goal of the effort is to provide a better
understanding of how these patterns relate to academic achievement, which in
turn informs learning pathways toward computational proficiency in engineering.
The project follows an Explanatory Sequential Mixed Method Design to study
engineering students' computational habits of mind by integrating machine
learning in a mixed method research. High-dimensional quantitative data is
collected for each learner and machine learning is used to find patterns
corresponding to groups of similar learners. By dividing the learners into
similarity groups, these patterns provide a higher detail of understanding than
global analysis methods. The reasons behind the patterns will be identified by
collecting and analyzing qualitative data. Building on the machine learning
results, an automatic subject selection strategy is used to reduce the number of
learners considered to a manageable size for the qualitative part of the
research. The goal of this learner reduction strategy is to obtain a small but
statistically meaningful sampling for each group of subjects in order to focus
resources for the most costly and time consuming part of the research. By doing
so, mixed method research is shown to be scalable to large and complex datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rationale for this project is that its successful
completion: a) addresses challenges in cultivating a culture of lifelong
learning among professional and future engineers; b) provides an understanding
of how patterns of habits of mind relate to academic achievement, which in turn
informs learning pathways toward computational proficiency in engineering; and
(c) demonstrates how mixed method research can be scaled up to study very large
and complex multidimensional datasets through the use of machine learning. This
effort supports the need for the foundation in engineering students' education
to incorporate necessary skills such as creativity, ingenuity, professionalism,
persistence, and willingness to take calculated risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.