* 1826648
* Labor Organization In A Traditional Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Sills, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 74,669.00

Drs. Heather McKillop of Louisiana State University and E. Cory Sills of The
University of Texas at Tyler, along with graduate and undergraduate students
will investigate how staple goods and resources are produced and distributed in
complex economies, in particular by examining how food staples are produced for
marketplace trade. The researchers will examine what factors make small
enterprises successful, including the organization and composition of labor and
the identification of markets, as well as factors that contribute to failure.
Archaeology is particularly useful in addressing these issues due to the
material evidence of production, distribution of goods, and the ability to
investigate changes over time. The research is important to the United States
economy, which includes both large corporations, as well as small businesses,
including family-run enterprises. Why do certain factors allow some enterprises
to succeed and other's fail? Students, many who are first-generation college
students, will be trained in the use of technologies such as Global Positioning
Systems, Geographic Information Systems, and 3D digital imaging, all marketable
skills in addition to participating in interdisciplinary research in
archaeology. Descendant communities as well as other interested people will be
involved in workshops to share findings from the project as well as 3D printed
replicas for exhibits. Additionally, the knowledge obtained from this study will
be available to interested students, professionals, and the public through an
online public repository, web page, and digital updates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will evaluate the production and
distribution of salt, a staple good, by study of abandoned salt works where
wooden buildings have preserved a record of production untouched from 1500 to
1000 years ago in a coastal lagoon in southern Belize. As a basic daily
necessity, salt was scarce at inland cities so its production on the coast
figures into supply and demand of a good distributed at inland marketplaces in
cities, towns, and smaller communities. Previous archaeological survey, mapping,
and transect excavations indicated massive salt production. However, there were
unanswered questions about the workforce, including if they lived near the salt
works or elsewhere, if production was organized by households who worked
individual salt kitchens or by day or seasonal workers from elsewhere. The
researchers will carry out aerial excavations inside multiple buildings and in
the adjacent yards at two large archaeological sites to identify residential,
production, and other uses. In addition, excavations will be carried out at
smaller sites in five different areas of the salt works. Interdisciplinary
collaboration includes study of mineralogy of pottery to identify the sources of
manufacture as a proxy for the locations of inland markets and consumers. The
study incorporates soil chemistry to identify chemical residues of activities,
along with quantitative and spatial evaluation of salt production tools. Species
identification and radiocarbon dating of wooden posts as well as column samples
of the earth beside posts will evaluate the ancient landscape and timing of
building construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.