* 1826213
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Hollow Particles with Encapsulated Active Sites for Use as Nanoreactors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ioulia Valla, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2021
* USD 226,974.00

This project generates new technology and fundamental concepts through the
development of a facile process to control nanostructured particle design
leading to scientific advancement and economic progress. The nanomanufacturing
process addresses the design of hollow particles with controlled shell-pore
structures of inherent use in technologies vital to the energy, environment and
healthcare sectors. The interior volume of the hollow nanoparticles is used to
encapsulate materials or conduct reactions in confined environments. The
availability of such hollow particles is of great interest due to applications
in catalysis, gas sensing, and pharmaceuticals delivery. This award focusses on
a one-step synthesis method for the large-scale manufacturing of functional
hollow particles, using a semi-continuous aerosol-based process with short
residence times. The novelty of this technology is the ability not just to
generate hollow particles, but also to encapsulate functional nanoparticles
within them. Such materials include the shell which acts as the support for the
encapsulated metals/metal-oxides which serve as catalysts for the precision
synthesis of chemicals vital to the chemical and energy industries. This is
process intensification at the nanoscale, where chemical species entering the
hollow particles containing catalytic materials, have time to react extensively
leading to highly efficient reaction and chemical synthesis. The results of this
research benefits many industries that rely on catalysis, which benefits
national economy and society. The research findings are integrated in a new
course designed for undergraduate and graduate students, linking materials
manufacturing, reaction engineering and industrial practice. Outreach to K-12
and community college students in process technology are aspects of the
educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific concept behind the
work is the chemistry-in-a-droplet aspect of ceramic materials synthesis in the
confined volume of an aerosol droplet passing through a heated zone. When
applied to templated mesoporous silica synthesis, the silica grows inwards from
the surface of the droplet. Introduction of a salt bridging agent leads to
accumulation of a structure-directing organic template in the interior, leading
to the shut-down of templating and providing a barrier to inward progression of
the silica thus leading to a metal oxide containing hollow ceramic upon
calcination. The project focuses on the understanding and further development of
this idea and the inclusion of catalytic active sites, such as zeolites, within
the hollow particles. The project investigates methods to control the properties
of these materials, including shell thickness and mesoporosity to generate
lightweight ceramics. Their effectiveness on two major applications, (a) the
reductive dechlorination of chlorinated environmental contaminants and (b) the
non-oxidative methane coupling reaction are studied as examples in environmental
remediation and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.