* 1826100
* Collaborative Research: Tuning Properties of Bi-Continuous Piezoelectric Composites via Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Lei Chen, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 204,696.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge relates to
the design and manufacture of next-generation flexible electronic devices. The
work will advance fundamental understanding of process-structure-property
relationships of a bi-continuous piezoelectric composite, an emerging flexible
material with potentially high efficiency in converting mechanical energy into
electrical signals. A bi-continuous piezoelectric composite is composed of a
ceramic phase and a polymer phase, continuously interconnected in three
dimensions (3D). Until now, bi-continuous piezoelectric composites can only be
achieved in the form of an open-porosity ceramic structure impregnated by
polymers, whose properties cannot be controlled accurately and reliably. By
utilizing additive manufacturing methods, this research will provide new
knowledge on how properties of a bi-continuous piezoelectric composite can be
accurately tuned through careful control of its micro- and meso-structure via
additive manufacturing. This new knowledge will enable the development of next-
generation piezoelectric devices that are low cost and lightweight, with a wide
range operating temperatures, high mechanical flexibility and advanced
electromechanical performance. This award will also enhance the infrastructure
for research and education in the states of Iowa and Mississippi through
activities designed to attract students from underrepresented groups and K-12
students to STEM disciplines.

The objective of this research program is to uncover new fundamental knowledge
for the design and manufacture of bi-continuous piezoelectric composites with
controlled properties via additive manufacturing. The first research objective
is to understand the fundamental mechanisms of porous microstructure formation
in bi-continuous piezoelectric composites during additive manufacturing. To
achieve this research objective, a phase-field-modeling method will be
established to generate bi-continuous piezoelectric composite designs with 3D
interconnected phase interfaces of desired connectivity. The second research
objective is to quantify the effect of phase morphologies such as phase
interfacial geometry on the piezoelectric properties of an additively
manufactured bi-continuous piezoelectric composite with identified porous
microstructures incorporated in the ceramic phase. To achieve this research
objective, a two-scale computational model will be constructed to predict the
piezoelectric properties of additively manufactured bi-continuous piezoelectric
composites with predefined 3D phase interfaces. The computational model will be
validated through characterizing piezoelectric properties of selected bi-
continuous piezoelectric composite structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.