* 1826959
* Student Support for the 2018 Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium; Austin, Texas; August 13-15, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Carolyn Seepersad, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,600.00

This grant provides support for 80 students to participate in the Twenty-Ninth
Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium, An Additive
Manufacturing Conference to be held August 13-15, 2018, in Austin, Texas. The
SFF Symposium is widely considered one of the premier academic conference on
additive manufacturing (AM) related research in the world. In 2017, it brought
together 654 researchers from universities, national laboratories, and companies
from 20 countries around the world, who together presented 473 technical
presentations and posters during the 3-day event. Students will have the
opportunity to engage in 3 days of technical sessions focused on the latest
advances in AM applications, process development, materials, modeling, and
design. All student awardees will be expected to present a paper and/or poster
during the symposium and to attend all 3 days of the event. The funding
opportunity will be announced broadly and early enough to provide ample time for
students to apply. Awardees will be selected by committee and the awards will
cover the cost of student registration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By attending and
presenting their work in the symposium, students will gain extensive knowledge
and understanding of the state of cutting-edge research in AM. They will also
have the opportunity for professional development by delivering a technical
presentation to a highly knowledgeable audience. Furthermore, they will have the
opportunity to network with other professional and student researchers in the AM
field and thereby build their personal network of future collaborators and
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.