* 1826050
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Controlling the Resistance to Scratching in Alkali-Free Glasses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christian Hoover, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 269,146.00

With the advent of substrate glasses for LCD/OLED panels and damage-resistant
protective covers for touch-screen computing devices, humans physically interact
with glass surfaces now more than ever. However, the resulting risk for scratch-
induced damage remains a key concern, which seriously limits glass's suitability
to many applications. Indeed, residual troughs resulting from abrasion tend to
impact the visual aspect of glasses, which, in turn, deteriorates their
transparency. More importantly, the presence of surface damage greatly decreases
glass's strength, thereby raising safety issues. To address these concerns, this
research aims to reveal the physics of glass scratching in calcium
aluminosilicate glasses, an archetypical model for alkali-free glasses used in
display applications. This effort seeks to provide a science-based foundation to
develop new glasses with tailored responses to scratching. This will contribute
towards the advancement of national health, prosperity, and welfare, by allowing
glasses to be designed and used for a broader range of applications with desired
failure mechanisms, for example allowing screens on handheld computing devices
to be more resistant to shattering. By integrating multiple disciplines,
including physics, material science, and mechanics, this research will train a
diverse group of students in various aspects of engineering and contribute to
forming the next generation of scientists that the U.S. glass industry
critically needs to compete globally. Additionally, the award will support
several educational and outreach activities at both institutions, e.g.,
undergraduate research, female and minority student participation, and high
school STEM events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scratching remains one of the main
types of surface damage and can greatly reduce the durability of a glass.
Indeed, the radial and median cracks that often develop as a result of a
scratching flaw act as stress amplifiers or singularities on the surface of
glasses and, thereby, have a direct influence on glass's structural integrity by
decreasing its mechanical strength. Yet, the mechanics of glass scratching has
remained chiefly empirical thus far. To address this gap of knowledge, an
integrated, multiscale approach relying on both computational and experimental
tasks is planned to reveal the physics of scratching in alkali-free calcium
aluminosilicate glasses. To this end, we adopt a multiscale, bottom-up approach
wherein molecular dynamics simulations, structure characterization tests, and
nanoscale mechanical experiments are used to inform continuum peridynamic models
with the aim to deconstruct the contribution of each energy dissipation
mechanism during scratching. The predictions from peridynamic models will be
systematically validated by scratch testing. The handshake between multiple
scales will provide some new fundamental knowledge serving as a guide to
elucidate how the composition and atomic structure of a glass control the nature
and extent of each energy dissipation mechanism that acts upon
scratching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.