* 1826897
* WORKSHOP: The iConference 2018 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2021
* USD 14,389.00

This is funding to partially support participation by the PI and 5 U.S.-based
doctoral students who have completed their dissertation proposals, along with
distinguished faculty mentors, in a doctoral colloquium (workshop) on
information science research to be held in conjunction with the thirteenth
iConference that will take place March 25-28, 2018, on the campus of University
of Sheffield, UK. This will be the first time the iConference is held in
England, and only the second time in Europe. Since 2005, the iConferences have
provided a forum where information scholars, researchers and professionals from
around the world gather to share insights on critical information issues in
contemporary society. An openness to new ideas and research fields in
information science is a primary characteristics of these events, which have
been successful in bringing together people who otherwise might rarely interact
with one another, thereby helping to promote interdisciplinary research. Recent
iConferences have drawn approximately 500 attendees, a testament to
participants' appreciation for the inspiring sense of community, high quality
research presentations, and myriad opportunities for engagement. The
iConferences are presented by the iCaucus, now a consortium of 78 Information
Schools in the United States and abroad (along with 8 associate members)
dedicated to advancing the information field and preparing students to meet the
information challenges of the 21st Century. This year's theme is "Transforming
Digital Worlds"; more information may be found online at
http://ischools.org/the-iconference. The iConference doctoral colloquia
traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers focused on the interplay of information and
technology in a social context, allowing them to develop a network both among
themselves and with senior researchers. Participation is encouraged from a broad
range of relevant disciplines, thereby expanding attendees' perspectives on
their topics of study and promoting advancement of the field. Due to timing
constraints, the student participants in the 2018 event have already been
selected. The organizers worked proactively to maximize diversity along such key
dimensions as institution type, research topic, methodological approach,
disciplinary tradition, gender, ethnicity, and national or cultural background,
so that the students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their
professional development. Of the 18 students accepted in total, 7 are women; 6
are studying in the UK, 5 in the US, 3 in Canada and 1 each in Germany, Israel,
Nigeria and South Africa (2 of the UK-based students are originally from African
countries).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 Doctoral Colloquium will be tightly
integrated into the conference experience, starting with an orientation event
highlighting specific content during the technical program, and culminating in a
full day focused on peer-research critique and career development which will
overlap with and immediately follow the closing session of the conference
technical program on March 28. The primary objective of the Doctoral Colloquium
is to help train the next generation of information science researchers. To this
end, it will provide the student participants with an environment in which they
can share and discuss their goals, methods and results in order to gain feedback
on their work both from the mentors and from other students, which should allow
them to enhance their research. The student participants will come away with a
better understanding of the various research communities engaged in the study of
information science, and learn how to position their work within the field. In
addition, the colloquium will provide students with opportunities such as poster
sessions to make new professional connections beyond their own disciplines and
institutions, and it will also help them successfully launch their careers
whether in industry or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.