* 1826443
* Impact of Building Design Attributes on Occupant Behavior in Response to Active Shooter Incidents in Offices and Schools
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Gale Lucas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 12/31/2022
* USD 402,452.00

This project studies how various factors such as building design, size and
demographics of the crowd, and individual differences like one's familiarity
with the building impact responses to active shooter incidents. Fundamental
questions addressed by the project include: 1) How do building attributes
designed to enhance security affect human behavior during active shooter
incidents? 2) How do individual factors moderate occupant responses? and 3) How
does the setting of the incident or familiarity with building affect occupants'
situational awareness and occupant behavior? The project explores these
objectives by conducting human subject experiments using Immersive Virtual
Environments (IVEs). This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve preparedness and response
to active shooter events, which will save lives and reduce panic, anger and
confusion during these events. The project supports education and promotes
diversity through outreach activities aimed at recruiting and retaining under-
represented students in research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project models the
built environment in virtual reality, simulating the behavior of both the
adversaries and the crowd. By exposing participants to an active shooter
incident using IVE, the researchers can measure their responses in realistic
ways that are not possible outside the laboratory environment. Task 1 uses IVEs
and agent-based simulations to create representative virtual built environments
and realistic active shooter scenarios. There are three critical elements in the
development of the IVEs: building attributes that enhance security, setting
(school vs. office building), and virtual actors (crowd/adversary). Task 2
examines how various factors (building design attributes, individual factors,
participant role, crowd setting, and familiarity with building layout) affect
responses to active shooter incidents. Simulation scenarios will include
security enhanced buildings versus standard buildings, and school versus office
versions. The project outcomes can inform safer building designs and operations
and train occupants and security personnel on how to respond to human-enabled
catastrophic events, thus saving lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.