* 1826709
* CNH-RCN: A Research Network for the Resilience of Headwater Systems and Water Availability for Downstream Communities Across the Americas
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Jan Boll, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 10/31/2023
* USD 499,915.00

Worldwide, human communities rely on water storage from glaciers, snowpack, and
groundwater in watersheds at high elevations, called headwater stream
watersheds. Water supply amount and variability from headwater watersheds to
downstream communities are predicted to shift with environmental change. These
shifts threaten long-term water security related to domestic water use,
agriculture, and energy production. Foundational science is needed to understand
how water storage in headwaters will change and how downstream communities will
adapt to those changes. This award will study how headwater dependent systems
water storage changes by coupling knowledge of watershed hydrology, climatology
and downstream human development in multiple watersheds across a latitudinal
transect across North and South America. This research coordination network will
focus on three dominant headwater storage types from Canada to southern Chile:
1) glaciers; 2) seasonal snowpack; and 3) rain-fed. This network includes
coordination of researchers and practitioners who can translate the new
knowledge into practical strategies. The project will provide education and
training opportunities for university students and
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research coordination network award will
catalyze innovative research to advance the understanding of: 1) hydro-climatic
processes that influence headwater storage; 2) the socio-economic context and
processes for adaptation to changing headwater supplies; 3) ecosystem service
delivery and value from headwater watersheds to downstream human systems; 4)
effects of human and natural drivers of change on downstream communities; and 5)
integrative modeling capacity for evaluating adaptation scenarios. US and
international participants with diverse research expertise, regional knowledge,
and access to data and field sites will explore connections within and between
systems along the transect and opportunities for building research collaboration
and intellectual capacity through education activities. This project will couple
advances in the study of stable isotopes in atmospheric and terrestrial
freshwater and modeling of water balance processes across headwater types with a
deeper understanding of socio-economic development in downstream communities,
and create an integrated evaluation of social and ecological system processes
for science-based interventions toward climate adaptation. The project will
launch a broad effort to synthesize lessons learned by universities with
interdisciplinary social-environmental programs and invite participants to join
our network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.