* 1826589
* Statistical Models for Dynamic Networks with Endogenous Vertex Migration
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Carter Butts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 349,982.00

This research project will develop models of complex systems in which the
movement of social entities themselves (either into or out of a system of
interest or among subsystems) is endogenously related to the relationships among
those entities. Endogenous migration is critical to understanding important
social phenomena ranging from recruitment into and turnover in organizations to
the mass convergence of volunteer responders that occurs when disaster strikes.
Endogenous migration is an important driver of the heterogeneity that can
challenge conventional models of social network structure. This project will
address current limitations in the modeling of networks with endogenous
migration. The development of these models will advance modeling of complex
social systems. Although the primary impact of this research will be within the
statistical and social science communities, the tools and techniques to be
developed also will be applicable to problems in biology, computer science, and
engineering. The resulting insights will have direct policy relevance for groups
or organizations dealing with important societal issues, such as emergency
responses. The project also will make contributions via student education and
training, the creation of instructional materials, and freely available software
tools for use by government, industry, researchers, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new families of
statistical models for studying social networks with endogenous migration
processes. The project will build on the well-known exponential family random
graph model and related network modeling frameworks to integrate migration
processes. The investigator will develop of new classes of models for dynamic
relational data with endogenous migration and for cross-sectional data arising
from unobserved migration-dependent processes. The investigator will evaluate
and test these new model classes using social network data. A variety of data
sets will be used as testbeds for the new models, including social media data,
disaster-related data, and water and polymer data. Testbed applications will be
used to evaluate the models and also facilitate the communication of results
across disciplines. Broad access to these models will be ensured by the
development of freely available software toolkits and the creation of training
materials and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.