* 1826135
* Cell-Cell Adhesion Mechanics and Mechanotransduction at the Single Cell Level
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jung Yul Lim, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 439,584.00

For cells to remain attached to their neighbors, there are cell-cell 'adhesion
complexes.' These complexes are parts of the cell surface made up of very large
adhesive molecules that transfer forces between the cells and hold them
together. Mechanical coupling at adhesion complexes is necessary for many of the
healthy behaviors of cells. Changes in the structure of the adhesion complex or
of how the molecules change shape during stretching can cause diseases of the
heart, joints (arthritis), and is part of the cellular story in cancer. The
cell-cell junctions also are part of the cell's ability to detect how large the
forces are on the tissue (mechanotransduction). One type of these junctions
between cells, the 'desmosome', connects to the fiber network inside the cell to
transmit forces and is not understood very well since most previous adhesion
complex research has been done on the 'adherens' junction, which has different
molecules and is associated with different diseases. This research project will
reduce the huge knowledge gap about desmosomes with respect to their potential
roles in mechanotransduction and disease control. The research will further the
goals of the United States in developing the basic knowledge needed to
understand and eventually treat medical conditions that are caused by failure of
the desmosome to properly function. The research study will be integrated with
existing University of Nebraska educational programs to offer undergraduate
students experiences in mechanics, robotics, and cell biology. The PIs will also
translate the research methodologies into a new course, "Cell Mechanics", in
order to bring bioengineering-intensive knowledge into the current
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from the PI's group have demonstrated the
role of the desmosome-intermediate filament linkage in regulating cell
mechanics, a role that has long been regarded to belong solely to the adherens
junction. The research will determine the role that desmosomes play in cell-cell
adhesion mechanics and in mechanotransduction. To achieve this goal, a novel
device will be developed to provide in situ stimulation and interrogation of
cell-cell junctions through defined mechanical tension. The platform will be
able to stretch the mutual junction of a single pair of cells and simultaneously
perform mechanical measurement, which will address the current challenge in
interrogating cell-cell adhesion (i.e., difficulties in applying defined
mechanical stimuli and conducting mechanical measurements at the same time).
More importantly, integrated within an imaging system, the effect of mechanical
stimuli on mechanotransduction pathways at the cell-cell junction can be
monitored in real-time under applied load. With the platform, two fundamental
scientific questions will be answered: (1) what is the contribution of desmosome
and its link to intermediate filaments in maintaining cell-cell adhesion
strength and (2) does the desmosome junction include mechanosensors that convert
applied mechanical cues into biochemical signals to regulate cell
behavior?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.