* 1826756
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nutritional ontogeny and development of the microbiome in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2020
* USD 28,080.00

Infant and juvenile primates must navigate a complex nutritional world, even
before they have fully developed the mechanical, behavioral, physiological, and
microbial adaptations used by adults. Folivorous species, which rely on diets
high in fibrous foods like leaves, face an especially challenging nutritional
environment requiring specialized strategies and adaptations. These adaptations
include a symbiotic gastrointestinal microbiome, which plays a central role in
the breakdown and capture of nutrients from high-fiber foods. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate the role of the microbiome in the
nutritional strategy of a folivorous primate during juvenile growth and
development, advancing knowledge about the primate microbiome, nutrition and
life history adaptations. The project will support student training and
mentoring in STEM research, several cross-institutional and international
collaborations, community science and conservation outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will focus on Gorilla beringei, as they
occupy a unique nutritional niche in an extreme ecology; they live at high
altitudes with very limited availability of high-energy food sources (e.g. ripe
fruit). As a specialist folivore, they are a useful model for testing the
relationship between nutritional development and life history. Project aims will
address 1) the nutritional intake and feeding strategies of infant and juvenile
mountain gorillas; 2) the dynamics of the gastrointestinal microbiome in infants
and juveniles; and 3) the functional contribution of the microbiome as a
nutritional strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.