* 1826542
* GOALI: Stimulated Raman microscopy for sensitive real-time detection of membrane fouling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Victor Bright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,959.00

A membrane provides a selective barrier or filter, allowing certain compounds to
pass through but preventing others. Membranes separate salts from sea water to
produce drinking water. In emissions control, membranes prevent pollutants from
being released into the environment. In landfills, membranes stop contaminants
from leaching into the groundwater. In the process of filtering contaminants,
however, the retention of certain compounds can lead to fouling. Fouling is a
serious and ubiquitous problem in purification processes that rely on membranes,
as it decreases membrane performance, increases energy consumption, and can lead
to permanent damage of the membrane. Combined, these effects increase the cost
of membrane operation, and thus, fouling mitigation is of great interest for
industrial membrane processes. A key part of the mitigation strategy is
detection, in order to proactively prevent fouling before it proceeds unchecked.
Existing detection techniques rely on bulk measurements, such as pressure drop
across the membrane, which can give an early warning of fouling. However, these
bulk techniques do not provide chemical specific information on what leads to
fouling. It is anticipated that chemical identification could facilitate
molecular-level design of membranes that are resistant to fouling. The research
will demonstrate an innovative method to detect membrane fouling under realistic
operating conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will demonstrate an
effective, high-resolution, label-free, non-destructive, and non-invasive real-
time method for fouling detection under realistic operating conditions. A number
of fundamental questions will be answered, including the sensitivity of the
proposed optical detection method to early-stage reverse-osmosis, scaling
initiation and growth as manifested by an increase in lateral and thickness
dimensions. The research is an interdisciplinary topic spanning physics,
materials science and engineering. If successful, the project will enable higher
efficiency and lower-cost operation of reverse-osmosis desalination systems; and
will provide similar significant benefits for other membrane-based separation
applications. The project will provide research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as dissemination to under-represented students
at the college and K-12 level through involvement with public scientific
demonstrations, laboratory tours, K-12 courses, and involvement with the Women
in Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.