* 1826218
* QRM: Using Visual Information to Quantify Microstructure-Processing-Property Relationships
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Holm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 664,618.00

To advance technology for infrastructure and manufacturing, new, high-
performance materials must be developed, with tunable properties (for example,
strength or electrical conductivity) and predictable performance. The
computational tools used to predict material performance have often relied on
Materials Engineers examining pictures of a material's microscopic substructure,
termed the microstructure, to determine the relationships between
microstructural features and material properties. The analysis of
microstructural images can be expensive and time consuming, and can produce
inconsistent results. This award supports fundamental research to build the
tools to enable an automated approach to microstructure image analysis, with the
aim of better understanding the microstructural features that control material
properties and performance. In this project, researchers will collect a large
set of microstructural images and use artificial intelligence (AI) tools
including computer vision and machine learning to analyze them. The AI system
will autonomously identify different features of the microstructure, measure
them, and link them to how the materials was made (processing) and how it
performs (properties). The advantages of this system are that it is fast,
objective, general, and may perceive information that is not readily visible to
humans. To test and validate this approach, it will be applied to understanding
scientifically challenging problems with application in advanced manufacturing,
including predicting the strength of materials, and determining the limits of
microstructural information. This project will additional train Materials
Science and Engineering students in the principles of AI. Furthermore, the
methods and results of this project will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative representation of
microstructure is the foundational tool of microstructural science and
traditionally involves a human deciding a priori what to measure and how to
measure it. However, recent advances in data science, including computer vision
(CV) and machine learning (ML) offer new approaches to extracting information
from microstructural images. In this project, the PIs will acquire, curate, and
publish a diverse collection of microstructural image data sets, including
composition, processing, and property metadata, and will build a suite of CV/ML
tools for autonomous microstructural image representation and quantification.
The CV/ML approach will be applied to finding quantitative composition-
microstructure-processing-property relationships, with the goal of materials
discovery. Case studies will focus on achieving scientific understanding of
additive manufacturing processes; enhancing knowledge of deformation mechanisms;
advancing microstructural science to include visual signals that are not
perceptible by humans; and assessing the degree of scientific knowledge learned
by a black-box ML method. The methods and results developed in this project will
be disseminated via open access codes and data repositories, and will contribute
to workforce development by educating Materials Science and Engineering students
in the principles of computer vision and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.