* 1826967
* CC* NPEO: Toward the National Research Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ilkay Altintas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,548,000.00

Academic researchers need a simple data sharing architecture with end-to-end
10-to-100Gbps performance to enable virtual co-location of large amounts of data
with computing. End-to-end is a difficult problem to solve in general because
the networks between ends (campuses, data repositories, etc.) typically traverse
multiple network management domains: campus, regional, and national. No one
organization owns the responsibility for providing scientists with high-
bandwidth disk-to-disk performance. Toward the National Research Platform
(TNRP), addresses issues critical to scaling end-to-end data sharing. TNRP will
instrument a large federation of heterogeneous "national-regional-state"
networks (NRSNs) to greatly improve end-to-end network performance across the
nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of improving end-to-end network
performance across the nation requires active participation of these distributed
intermediate-level entities to reach out to their campuses. They are trusted
conveners of their member institutions, contributing effectively to the "people
networking" that is as necessary to the development of a full National Research
Platform as is the stability, deployment, and performance of technology. TNRP's
collaborating NRSNs structure leads to engagement of a large set of science
applications, identified by the participating NRSNs and the Open Science Grid.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TNRP is highly instrumented to directly measure
performance. Visualizations of disk-to-disk performance with passive and active
network monitoring show intra- and inter-NSRN end-to-end performance. Internet2,
critical for interconnecting regional networks, will provide an instrumented
dedicated virtual network instance for the interconnection of TNRP's NRSNs.
Cybersecurity is a continuing concern; evaluations of advanced containerized
orchestration, hardware crypto engines, and novel IPv6 strategies are part of
the TNRP plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.