* 1826509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Primate Nutritional Niches and Species Coexistence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Jessica Rothman, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

In primate communities there are multiple examples of coexisting species that
overlap substantially in their use of dietary and other ecological resources in
the same habitat. Discovering the mechanisms by which they are able to coexist
is important for understanding how ecological communities are formed and is
vital for conservation efforts. This dissertation project will examine the role
of nutrition in primate species coexistence, investigating how different primate
species who consume the same foods may select different amounts of protein, fat,
carbohydrate, and other nutrients that result in a species-specific nutritional
profile. By collecting behavioral, dietary, and nutritional data it is possible
to quantify these nutritional profiles and examine the amount of overlap among
them. This project provides a novel approach for conservation efforts because it
will potentially uncover the nutrient balance necessary for the success of
individual species. In addition, the Co-PI will provide training in lab-based
nutritional ecology methods to undergraduates from underrepresented groups in
STEM fields, and the project will involve international research collaborations
with Malagasy colleagues and students. The Co-PI will also engage in
conservation and scientific outreach at K-12 schools in the US and field
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the role of the
nutrition in maintaining species coexistence in four species of lemurs: the
Milne-Edward's sifaka, the Verreaux's sifaka, the red-fronted lemur, and the
red-tailed sportive lemur. The project will apply the Nutritional Geometry
framework, which models how organisms balance multiple nutritional components,
to identify the nutritional goals of each species and examine their degree of
nutritional specialization. The project will also examine if there are sex-
differences resulting in sex-specific nutrient goals, and finally, it will
examine whether this nutritional approach is more informative for understanding
coexistence than previous methods that used solely diet and microhabitat
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.