* 1826763
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: KY-WV LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kazi Javed, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,500,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation program is an alliance-
based program. The program's theory is based on the Tinto model for student
retention. The overall goal of the program is to assist universities and
colleges in diversifying the nation's science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) workforce by increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and
graduate degrees awarded to populations historically underrepresented in these
disciplines: African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kentucky-West Virginia Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (KY-WV LSAMP) STEM Pathways and Research Alliance
(SPRA) project consists of ten institutions that include both two- and four-year
institutions of higher education. These are the: University of Kentucky (Lead
Institution), Bluegrass Community and Technical College, Centre College,
Jefferson Community and Technical College, Kentucky State University, University
of Louisville, Marshall University, West Virginia University, West Virginia
State University, and Western Kentucky University, The KY-WV LSAMP project will
continue to utilize evidence-based techniques to aggressively increase the
competitiveness quality and number of students from traditionally
underrepresented minority (URM) populations who receive degrees in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines; and 2) partner with
social sciences researchers to examine the impact of LSAMP activities and
pedagogical techniques on LSAMP participant academic success and graduation.
Activities focus on providing URM students with the skills, background
knowledge, and professional networks to become successful leaders in academia,
government and the private sector. Emphases will be placed on activities that
enhance cognitive and non-cognitive skills to improve academic success by
increasing 1) professional skills, through research experiences and faculty
mentoring; 2) leadership skills through peer mentoring and K-12 mentoring
opportunities; and 3) professional networks through access to research and
presentation opportunities in Kentucky, West Virginia, nationally, and
internationally. KY-WV LSAMP administration, staff, and faculty mentors and
researchers will have knowledge of and access to a wealth of tested program
components, shared expertise, insights, local best practices, and
teaching/learning resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study will help
the Alliance reach goals and attain outcomes by examining the impact of LSAMP
programs on non-cognitive factors related to academic success and graduation,
including academic motivation; STEM self-efficacy, identity, belonging, and
attitudes; and experiences of racial micro-aggressions over the course of
participation in the LSAMP program relative to their non-LSAMP peers. Project
findings from evaluation activities will be disseminated via social media,
websites, STEM conferences and the development of new scholarly
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.