* 1826222
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  The Emergence Of Unique Regional Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Enrique Rodriguez-Alegria, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 23,285.00

Adriana Linares-Palma, of the University of Texas at Austin, will undertake
research to study identity politics in San Juan Cotzal, Guatemala, during the
Postclassic period. She will research why the Ixil Maya have a unique regional
identity and how the Ixil Maya responded to K'iche' Maya expansionism during the
Late Postclassic period (A.D. 1250-1530) in the Maya highlands of Mesoamerica.
The project aims to understand what effect socio-political conflict and
migration in the Mesoamerican region had upon people's relationship to
landscape, territory, and social identities in Ixil Postclassic communities. To
study the development of Ixil identity, research will focus on the regional
settlement patterns, architecture, and artifacts of the Ixil, in comparison to
those of other Maya groups in the region. Through archaeological, archival, and
ethnographic investigation, researchers will examine Ixil settlement patterns
and ancient materiality to determine if Ixil people were in isolation or in
contact with other Maya groups in the area, and whether they formed networks or
maintained autonomy with respect to diverse Maya groups in the area during the
Postclassic Period. Linares-Palma will lead a team of students to conduct
mapping of the archaeological sites under study as part of their professional
development. The research will provide information into how traditional
societies adapt within a regional context and interact with other
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be conducted at San Juan Cotzal,
Quich?, one of three towns of the Ixil region. The researcher and team of
students will map all the archaeological sites in order to explore the following
questions: do Ixil settlement patterns and materiality reflect isolation from
the expansionist tendency of the K'iche' political entity during the Postclassic
period? Do they reflect instead contact, autonomy and perhaps even networks with
diverse Maya groups of the highlands and lowlands during the Postclassic Period?
Through spatial analysis of Ixil architectural configuration, incorporation of
contextual data from previous archaeological research, as well as an analysis of
ceramics and other artifacts, researchers will compare particular
characteristics of the Ixil with other Maya highland and lowland settlements.
They will incorporate socio-political organizations of lineages among the Maya
highlands, which are visible through architecture, spatial configuration, and
settlement patterns. Through archaeological, archival and ethnographic research
at San Juan Cotzal, Quiche, Guatemala, researchers will expand on theories of
migrations; regional political and cultural conflicts social networks and
identity politics. Moreover, researchers will expand on theories of segmentary
lineage organization previously proposed for the Maya highlands, as well as
contribute to the refinement of previous interpretations of the Ixil
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.