* 1826083
* When Does a Diverse Initial Solution Set Lead to Better Engineering Design Outcomes?
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Fuge, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 549,445.00

Designing high-performing engineering systems--for example, fuel-efficient
aircraft, medical devices, new manufacturing and agricultural equipment--
requires searching for high-quality solutions among many possible options. It
can be difficult to find good solutions to complex problems, and one rule-of-
thumb people use is to first start with a diverse set of options. The intuition
is that having diverse starting points will make it more likely that one will
eventually find a good final solution. But is this always the case? For what
types of problems does having diverse initial solutions help versus hinder
creating better final solutions? This award supports fundamental research into
mathematical models that answer these questions. Specifically, this research
studies new models that 1) map how engineering problems differ from each other
in terms of their structure and the processes people use to solve them, and 2)
predict whether diverse initial solutions across each type of engineering
problem lead to a higher quality final solution. The work will impact society by
providing a way to reduce costs and improve problem-solving performance of
engineers across multiple industries. The mathematical models will also provide
foundational understanding to other fields where similar questions arise, such
as in biology, computer science, and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives of this project are to (1) unify various representations of
engineering systems through the use of Category Theory and isomorphisms between
types of solution spaces; (2) encode search and design processes using Random
Matrix Theory to track solutions over that unified representation; (3) use
metrics from Submodular Vertex Coverage to calculate the diversity of initial
and final solution sets; (4) test the model across five benchmark problems of
increasing difficulty and complexity, using computational simulations and
behavioral experiments with human participants; and (5) study the finite sample
behavior of the model using Matrix Concentration Inequalities. The results from
this project will advance the field of engineering by providing a testable model
for how diverse initial solutions impact a wide range of tasks from human
decision making and teaming to computational optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.