* 1826699
* Louis Stokes Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation (LSMAMP) Pathways Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Donald Cole, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2024
* USD 4,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Mississippi STEM Pathways and Research Alliance is a
comprehensive statewide program that is designed to support broad-based STEM
education and to provide pathways to STEM careers in all geographical areas of
the state of Mississippi. This alliance is comprised of nine (9) post-secondary
institutions that have a long history of cooperation through collective sharing
of resources combined with individual institutional strengths. The institutions
include Jackson State University (the lead institution), the University of
Mississippi, Mississippi State University, Alcorn State University, Mississippi
Valley State University, the University of Southern Mississippi, Tougaloo
College, Delta State University, and Hinds Community College. The alliance will
recruit and support the economically disadvantaged minority student population
throughout the state. The support provided by NSF has been, and will continue to
be instrumental to the training of students unrepresented in STEM from
undergraduate through graduate programs. Many Mississippi students enrolled in
STEM disciplines will likely change their majors after the first year in
college. LS-MAMP will develop pathways for successful, recruitment, retention
and transition of students to STEM majors and will aid in changing these
patterns for a significant number of URM students in the region. These efforts
will be carried out through programmatic activities such as mentoring, intrusive
intervention, legislative changes, (2+2) community college program and
transfers, conferences, expert speakers, summer internships, advising and many
other activities to improve upon these successes and to retain and graduate
these enthusiastic yet less prepared STEM students from undergraduate to
graduate and to STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for a
strong, strategic, and productive STEM graduate pipeline within the state cannot
be overemphasized. The alliance will continue to provide opportunities for
students and equip them with the foundation necessary to tackle the states' and
the nation's science and technology needs and challenges. The scientific and
technological needs of the nation as well as the unique opportunity presented by
the demographics and educational needs of the state makes the alliance a strong
partner of the National Science Foundation. The mission of the Mississippi STEM
Pathways and Research Alliance will be accomplished by 1). Increasing
undergraduate STEM enrollment and recruitment by 35% and increasing STEM
retention and baccalaureate graduation by 30% over the next five years, 2).
Increasing the number of students matriculating into STEM graduate program
pipelines by 25% over the next five years, 3). Increasing the production and
dissemination of scholarly research on broadening participation of URM students
in STEM discipline, 4). Increasing the number of students gaining international
research experiences from 20 to 30 students annually, 5). Providing mentoring
and STEM research experiences for students through partnerships with national
laboratories, industry, out-of-state universities, and scientific societies, 6),
Supporting the alliance initiatives via continued institutionalization. (7).
Engaging in educational research that will provide a sustainable institution-
wide model to highlight high impact best practices, and control group study to
drastically improve the graduation rates of URM students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.