* 1826997
* CC* Integration: Delivering a Dynamic Network-Centric Platform for Data-Driven Science (DyNamo)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Ewa Deelman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Computational science today depends on many complex, data-intensive applications
operating on datasets that originate from a variety of scientific instruments
and data stores. A major challenge for data-driven science applications is the
integration of data into the scientist's workflow. Recent advances in dynamic,
networked cloud infrastructures provide the building blocks to construct
integrated, reconfigurable, end-to-end infrastructure that has the potential to
increase scientific productivity. However, applications and workflows have
seldom taken advantage of these advanced capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Dynamo will
allow atmospheric scientists and hydrologists to improve short- and long-term
weather forecasts, and aid the oceanographic community to improve key scientific
processes like ocean-atmosphere exchange, turbulent mixing etc., both of which
have direct impact on our society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Dynamo project will
develop innovative network-centric algorithms, policies and mechanisms to enable
programmable, on-demand access to high-bandwidth, configurable network paths
from scientific data repositories to national CyberInfrastructure facilities,
and help satisfy data, computational and storage requirements of science
workflows. This will enable researchers to test new algorithms and models in
real time with live streaming data, which is currently not possible in many
scientific domains. Through enhanced interactions between Pegasus, the network-
centric platform, and new network-aware workflow scheduling algorithms, science
workflows will benefit from workflow automation and data management over
dynamically provisioned infrastructure. The system will transparently map
application-level, network Quality of Service expectations to actions on
programmable software defined infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.