* 1826871
* MRI:   Acquisition of a versatile, user-friendly, automated fluorescence microscope to promote research performed by faculty and undergraduates at a Hispanic-serving institution
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Andrea Holgado, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 207,310.00

An award is made to St. Edward's University (SEU) to do state-of-the-art
fluorescence microscopy as part of faculty-mentored research and course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). SEU is a minority-serving
institution with a diverse student body, many of whom are first-generation
college students. Faculty-mentored research at SEU is usually their first
exposure to novel scientific research. The acquisition of this microscope
improves the research infrastructure by promoting the quality of faculty-
sponsored independent research, increasing and enhancing the number of cell-
molecular experiments performed as part of CUREs, and broadening the types of
outreach programs involving Austin Community College students and K-12 teachers
and students. Finally, this microscope will provide needed synergy with other
current NSF-funded projects at SEU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorescence microscopy
allows the detection and analysis of molecular and cellular structures,
molecular dynamics, and gene expression through a panoply of widely available
fluorophore-conjugated molecules and genetically-encoded fluorescent proteins.
This award facilitates the purchase of a microscope that is conducive to live
imaging under controlled environments, high-sensitivity detection of faint
fluorophores, optical sectioning of thick specimens, and 3D image acquisitions.
The instrumentation enables the research of a highly diverse set of scientific
programs at SEU: (1) Characterization of the interplay between cellular
metabolic regulation and neurodevelopment in soil-dwelling nematodes, (2)
Determination of the molecular mechanism underlying interactions between host
cells and parasitic pathogens like those causing toxoplasmosis, (3)
Understanding the molecular basis of variation for patterning of the egg shell
in fruit flies, (4) Investigation of the bacterial targets of antimicrobial
plant extracts and examination of the protective action of probiotics, and (5)
Characterization of plant-fungal interactions in response to phosphate
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.