* 1826755
* Louis Stokes Regional Centers of Excellence in Broadening Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,407,239.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. Louis Stokes Regional Centers of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSRCE) are designed to serve as regional
testbeds for outreach, knowledge-generating and diffusion activities or other
activities that contribute to successful practices in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a stronger, more diverse STEM
workforce is a clear national need to promote economic prosperity and maintain
global leadership in science. Work toward that end is in accord with the
National Science Foundation's mission to promote the progress of science. Since
2004, the Fisk-Vanderbilt Master's to PhD Bridge Program has broadened
participation in STEM through identifying and promoting talent from historically
underrepresented or underserved groups. To date, bridge program participants
have earned over 80 Master's degrees and 29 PhDs. Of note, the retention rate to
the PhD for the bridge program is 83% and 90% for the 8-year PhD completion
rate, well above the national averages. The broad goal of the Fisk University
LSRCE work is to generate new knowledge about best practices to promote
broadening participation that can be disseminated on a regional and national
scale. The Center have three objectives: 1) Build on their current publicly
available toolkit to create a more comprehensive guide detailing the theory and
research underlying the tools; 2) Research the effectiveness of program
activities and create tools for internal evaluation and data collection that can
be widely disseminated to the higher education community; and 3) Host a regional
workshop focused on identifying best practices from other local institutions,
disseminate the theory and tools from the Fisk-Vanderbilt Master's to PhD Bridge
Program guide, and connect practitioners with researchers. The fundamental
approach that the Center is taking to achieve these objectives is to develop a
relationship with social scientists and educational researchers at the
Vanderbilt Peabody School of Education and the American Institutes for Research.
Fisk University LSRCE seek to better explain the science of broadening
participation, to advance understanding of best practices and simultaneously
develop tools to ease the implementation of activities and interventions that
promote the development of a more diverse STEM workforce. The Center's work will
be disseminated to the larger scientific community to promote adoption of these
practices to the benefit of our nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by NSF INCLUDES which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to
collaboratively work for inclusive change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.