* 1826903
* Mechanistic studies of plasmodesmal permeability
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Magdalena Bezanilla, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2023
* USD 751,586.00

This project is a multi-disciplinary collaboration between a biologist and
physicist to investigate the molecular mechanisms that plant cells use to
regulate cell-to-cell communication. Cells must communicate with each other in
order to form tissues and ultimately establish a body plan. In contrast to
animals, plant cells are surrounded by walls permanently locking cells to their
sister cells. Thus, tissue formation and cell-to-cell communication is quite
different in plants compared to animals. To negotiate the permanence of the
wall, plants have evolved intricate channels that mediate movement of molecules
between cells. While these channels were identified in the 1800s, it has been
very challenging to understand how these channels function, and what determines
whether they are open or closed. The research here will capitalize on findings
that a protein named myosin VIII is found near these channels during very
specific stages of development. Plants lacking this protein exhibit patterning
defects that likely result from impaired cell-to-cell communication. By
investigating the nature of how this molecule interacts with the channels, this
research will provide much needed insights into regulation of cell-to-cell
communication, and have broad implications for the fields of plant cell and
developmental biology. Including undergraduates from both a primarily
undergraduate institution as well as a research university will further broaden
the impact of the research. The undergraduates will work together to incorporate
quantitative cellular modeling and molecular cell biology to answer fundamental
questions in cell-to-cell communication. Additionally, a program for middle-
school aged girls will be developed to encourage the participation of women in
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmodesmata, the channels that connect
plant cells to mediate cell-to-cell communication, are poorly understood at the
molecular level. These channels have been challenging to study because they are
absolutely essential for plant viability and development. This project will
investigate this critical developmental problem in the cell and developmental
biological plant model, the moss Physcomitrella patens. P. patens is uniquely
suited for these studies as it has a simple body plan that is highly amenable to
cell biological and genetic manipulation. This research will build upon the
development of a moss line that contains a single myosin VIII protein, an actin-
based molecular motor, which localizes to plasmodesmata at only one cross wall
at a particular stage of development, providing a long-needed genetic and
cellular system to study how actin and myosin may regulate the conductance of
plasmodesmata. Using a combination of quantitative microscopy and computational
modeling, this project will determine whether myosin VIII has an impact on the
movement of molecules between cells. Taking advantage of myosin VIII as a
molecular handle, the proposed research will identify new pathways regulating
plasmodesmata function, ultimately impacting patterning and development. Since
myosin VIII and actin are highly conserved between moss and seed plants, these
studies are expected to identify evolutionarily ancient mechanisms controlling
cell-to-cell communication and tissue patterning.