* 1826064
* Understanding the Transition between Ductile and Brittle Fracture Modes in Sintering Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Zachary Cordero, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 317,071.00

Sintering is a high-temperature process used to transform loosely bound powder
aggregates into near net-shaped, dense objects with controlled amounts of
porosity. In many sintering applications, external constraints can prevent a
powder aggregate from densifying in one or more directions. Under these
constrained sintering conditions, internal stresses can develop in the sintering
material, and in extreme cases, these stresses can grow so large that they tear
the powder aggregate apart. This fracture process, referred to as sinter-
cracking, degrades product quality, lowers yield, and proves highly undesirable
in manufacturing processes. This award supports fundamental research to
understand the sinter-cracking phenomenon. The goal of this research is to
clarify why this cracking occurs, with a view toward identifying processing
strategies for suppressing fracture during constrained sintering. By relating
material properties, geometric factors, and process variables to the growth of
sinter-cracks, this research will guide materials engineers towards processing
and manufacturing parameters to prevent catastrophic sinter-cracking. This new
scientific knowledge will have important applications in the powder processing
industry, potentially benefiting a range of manufacturing sectors, particularly
those making use of new 3D printing technologies, including the aerospace,
automotive, and energy sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims
to understand the ductile-to-brittle transition in sintered materials. 3D
printing will be used to independently vary important geometric features during
sintering experiments such as the size of the starter crack, the specimen
thickness, and the initial length of the uncracked ligament. By coupling
experiments on these 3D printed specimens with discrete element method
simulations of sinter-cracking, continuum descriptions of stresses and strains
will be linked with particle-scale phenomena occurring at the crack tip to
develop a multi-scale, physics-based understanding of sinter-cracking and the
causes of the ductile-brittle transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.