* 1826677
* CAREER:  Nanoscopy Of Surface States In Two-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/07/2017,08/31/2022
* Yohannes Abate, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 448,059.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Rapid technological advances are often driven
by the discovery of new materials and physical phenomena. Two-dimensional
layered materials exhibit some of the most striking physical phenomena in modern
materials research and hold promise for a wide range of future devices and
technological applications from flexible electronics to energy harvesting and
storage to bio-engineering. This project explores emergent electronic and
excitonic surface states on layered two-dimensional crystals that arise due to
the concerted many-body interactions at nanometer length scales. These
investigations will advance our fundamental understanding of surface states that
govern the electronic and optical properties of the next-generation nano-
optoelectronic devices and the feasibility of two-dimensional nanolasers. These
research activities are part of an integrated education plan to further high
school, undergraduate and graduate students' nanoscience and nano-optics
learning in the greater Atlanta area. The research is also integrated with
outreach activities to enhance the education and training of local high school
physics teachers and students as well as with community outreach plans that
targets the educational experience of African immigrant students/families and
African American youth in the Atlanta area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The research part of this CAREER award explores the
electronic and excitonic surface states on van der Waals layered two-dimensional
crystals using state-of-the-art far-field and nanoscale near-field spectroscopy.
The goals of this research are: (i) understand the fundamental properties of
surface states in two-dimensional systems, metallic and conducting surfaces
states and topologically protected surface states; (ii) understand the
properties of excitons (charged and neutral) at island edges and defects and
elucidate the coupling mechanism between excitonic two-dimensional materials and
surface plasmons, in particular the mechanism of stimulated emission in
excitonic van der Waals heterostructures made by vertically stacking atomic thin
materials; and (iii) expand the scope and utility of optical, infrared and
terahertz scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy approaches in the
field of low-dimensional physics. The results of the proposed research will
forward our underlying understanding of surface states that control the
electronic and optical properties of two-dimensional emergent material systems
and will lead to exotic many-body physics and applications in spintronics,
practical quantum computers and solid-state quantum
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.