* 1826134
* US-Ireland Partnership Program: Urban ARK: Assessment, Risk Management, and Knowledge for Flood Management in Urban Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Raul Lejano, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 335,932.00

Current flood models in urban areas frequently fail to include the presence of
subsurface spaces - such as underground transportation networks, residential and
office basements, and underground parking - in characterizing the effects of
flooding on humans and property at the time of the flood and during recovery.
This project develops new tools to exploit recent advances in remote sensing,
distributed computing, and visualization to support the creation of more
accurate flood maps. This project will generate a mobile, easily deployable,
low-cost immersive flood risk communication tool integrating laser scanning data
and flood prediction models. This tool can also be adapted for training
emergency staff and engagement with local communities about non-flood-related
issues requiring spatial context, such as temporary access restrictions due to
construction or community events, or for assisting those with mobility
restrictions. NSF will fund US-based researchers working in New York City,
leveraging the coordinated efforts of researchers in Ireland and Northern
Ireland (funded by Ireland and Northern Ireland) working in Dublin, Ireland, and
Belfast, Northern Ireland. This scientific research contribution thus supports
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national
welfare with benefits that can inform policymakers involved in resilience of
urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses flood risk assessment
generation and risk communication in the context of 3 study areas; New York City
in the United States, Dublin in the Republic of Ireland, and Belfast in Northern
Ireland. Photographs, aerial laser scans, and hyperspectral imagery are treated
as input streams to explore several paradigms for model building and risk
communication. These input streams are sourced both from existing data
collections and through opportunistic data collection using SLAM (Simultaneous
Localization And Mapping) technology for both street level and underground
spaces. Using these data, techniques will be developed to identify and estimate
the size of underground spaces in the urban environment. Data will be stored in
a new form of integrated spatial database based upon Map-Reduce and hosted in
the cloud. The database will be evaluated on both public and private cloud
platforms to ensure that it is fully scalable and interoperable with numerical
flood models. This database will be accessible through a Graphical User
Interface which will allow users to query the data at differing levels of
spatial and temporal granularity and extract the resulting data to serve as high
resolution input for flood modeling systems. In addition to enhancing flood
modeling capabilities, this project seeks to understand risk awareness and past
behavior in flood conditions to inform a new risk communication tool. This tool
leverages the high-resolution data and flood models developed in the project to
provide citizens and other stakeholders with a low-cost and easy to deploy
virtual reality experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.