* 1826810
* IRES Track 1 Graduate Research In Industrial Projects for Students - Berlin
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Christian Ratsch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 233,235.00

This project will support the "Graduate-level Research in Industrial Projects
for Students-Berlin" (GRIPS) led by the Institute for Pure and Applied
Mathematics (IPAM). The program will offer graduate students in mathematics and
related disciplines the opportunity to work on industry-sponsored research
problems in Berlin through a collaboration with Research Campus MODAL in Berlin,
Germany. MODAL has existing industrial partners affiliated with their
laboratories that provide their research groups with interesting and challenging
research problems. The program will be eight weeks in length; eight US graduate
students will participate each summer. Half of the US students each year will be
women, and one or more will be a member of an underrepresented ethnic group.
MODAL will recruit 8 European students to form 4 research groups of two US and
two European students each, and provide academic mentors. The program will not
only produce interesting research in applications of mathematics to real-life
problems, but will give a diverse group of US students an insight into
industrial research and provide them with hands-on experience of working on
industrial problems. One of the goals of the program is to make the students
aware of the multiple career pathways open to them and highlight the value and
adaptability of their mathematics skills as applied to interesting real-life
problems. The students will also receive invaluable experience collaborating
with foreign colleagues and companies. The projects will be the natural
outgrowth of MODAL's existing industry research partnerships, and will be
selected in collaboration with IPAM. Participants will produce a final report on
their work, and will be encouraged to submit their work for conference
presentations and/or publication in technical journals. It is expected that many
of the participants will continue the research and collaborations they started
in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied mathematics research has become
increasingly important and relevant to engineering problems and, indeed, to
everyday life. Increasingly, core applied mathematics topics, ranging from
applied probability, to partial differential equation, to optimization, find
important applications in areas such as materials science, mathematical biology,
operations research, and, more recently, machine learning. Applications of
mathematical techniques to real-life problems require both a deep understanding
of mathematical theory, as well as acute awareness of both the physical and
technical aspects of the problem, as well as implementation details of any
numerical algorithms or simulations. For this reason, such successful
applications are often a combination of individual and team efforts, with the
main problem being divided into more specialized parts, and specific expertise
of each team member brought to bear on each such component.The exact topics of
the research projects will change from year to year and will depend on the
interest of industry and academic researchers involved. Generally speaking, the
projects will apply mathematical techniques to questions of optimization (such
as optimization of rail network throughput), efficient simulation (such as
simulation of modern nanophotonic devices) and machine learning (such as
analysis of medical mass data sets).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.