* 1826623
* Mechanical phase transitions and the rheology of stiff polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Frederick MacKintosh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 464,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on how collagen and fiber networks more generally respond
to mechanical deformation. In animals, most soft tissues such as skin, tendon
and organs depend on networks of collagen that impart mechanical stability to
the full tissue. Similar networks of fibrinogen also form as part of the wound
healing process. A common feature in the mechanical response of such natural
biopolymer materials is that they become stronger, with increased mechanical
stiffness as they are deformed. This self-stabilizing mechanical response is
still not well understood and it has been difficult to achieve in man-made soft
materials, such as rubber or other synthetic polymer-based materials. This
project is aimed to develop a fundamental theoretical model and understanding of
the mechanics of collagen and related biopolymer-based materials. This will be
based on the fundamental physics of phase transitions or changes of state, much
like the change of state of water to form solid ice as it is cooled. The PI and
colleagues have recently demonstrated that collagen networks undergo a similar
mechanical phase change as they are deformed rather than cooled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental understanding of the origins of the
mechanical response of collagen and related fiber-based materials can be the
basis for the rational design of synthetic materials with similar properties.
This project can also form the theoretical basis for control and design of the
mechanical properties of carbon nanotube foams and aerogels, which have recently
emerged as a promising class of very light and soft conductors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will be the basis for
training of graduate students working at the interface between physics and
chemical engineering, with application perspectives in tissue engineering and
materials science. The research will also impact the teaching of mechanics of
materials to undergraduates and graduate students working in chemical and
biomolecular engineering, chemistry, physics and materials science at Rice
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research on the mechanics and
rheology of athermal fiber networks. Polymers naturally range from highly
flexible or freely jointed chains to idealized rigid rods, with a broad class of
semiflexible polymers in between that are often described as wormlike chains.
The so-called persistence length, which characterizes the scale over which
polymers appear straight in the presence of thermal fluctuations, is often used
to distinguish these regimes. Among the most rigid of polymers are biopolymers
that play important structural and mechanical roles from the single cell level
to the whole tissue level of extracellular matrices. The principal component of
extracellular matrices is usually collagen, consisting of thick protein fibers
with effectively infinite persistence length and negligible thermal
fluctuations. Nevertheless, collagen fibers are not rigid rods and bending plays
an important role in the mechanical response of collagen networks. The challenge
of understanding such networks has recently brought renewed interest to the
mechanics and rheology of athermal fiber networks. A new approach to fiber
networks has recently been proposed, drawing on the notion of athermal,
mechanical phase transitions and associated critical phenomena. This was
motivated in part by classic work on network stability going back to Maxwell's
isostatic constraint counting arguments, as well as more recent developments in
jamming of particles. Importantly, however, the isostatic threshold cannot
account for the mechanics of real fiber networks in 3D, since these lie below
the Maxwell point for central-force or spring-like interactions: bending must be
included. The PI's group recently identified theoretically signatures of
critical phenomena in subisostatic networks as a function of strain, which have
now been confirmed experimentally in collagen networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to (1) develop and test computationally
scaling theories for mechanical phase transitions in fiber networks; (2) predict
and test phase behavior and rheological signatures of strain-controlled phase
transitions; (3) develop models of composite fiber networks, with both fluid and
soft gel matrices; (4) develop computational models for carbon nanotube
gels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach based on mechanical phase transitions
and especially strain-controlled critical phenomena represent a novel approach
to polymer rheology. This research will deepen our understanding of a class of
mechanical phase behavior that should be of significant interest within
condensed matter and materials science, while establishing fiber networks as new
model systems in which to study critical phenomena using
rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of composite networks should
significantly advance the quantitative understanding of collagen extracellular
matrices, for which a consensus theoretical model has been lacking. This project
can also form the theoretical basis for control and design of the mechanical
properties of carbon nanotube foams and aerogels, which have recently emerged as
a class of very light and soft conductors. The research in this project will be
the basis for training of graduate students working at the interface between
physics and chemical engineering, with application perspectives in tissue
engineering and materials science. The research will also impact the teaching of
rheology to undergraduates and graduate students working in chemical and
biomolecular engineering, chemistry, physics and materials science at Rice
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.