* 1826848
* RAPID: Testing macronutrient imbalance as a key factor limiting range expansion in herbivores
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Insect outbreaks are common in nature and locust outbreaks are particularly
dramatic due to their tremendous ecological and agricultural impacts.
Occasionally, insect populations explode throughout broad geographic ranges, and
then collapse back into their smaller permanent breeding zones within months or
years. Neither the mechanisms of population expansions nor declines are well
understood, but our knowledge of the declines is particularly poor. This is a
major challenge in organismal biology and ecology, with significant implications
for human society. This research project will take advantage of an ongoing
outbreak of the South American locust (Schistocerca cancellata) to test the
hypothesis that the ability for S. cancellata to attain a balance of nutrients
optimal for growth limits their capacity to maintain persistent high populations
over broad regions of South America. Locusts are a major challenge for food
security globally, with outbreaks causing 80-100% crop losses. In the future,
working collaboratively with government plant protection agencies, this research
can be directly applied to strategies to improve livelihoods, human and
environmental health, and global food security. Moreover, this award will
support postdoctoral and student training, and cross-cultural exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South American locust (Schistocerca
cancellata) is experiencing its largest population upsurge in 60 years,
expanding beyond its permanent breeding zone in northwest Argentina into a much
larger part of Argentina and beyond into Bolivia and Paraguay, causing national
emergencies in those three countries. One hypothesis for why S. cancellata do
not persist at high densities in their invasion zone, which is supported by
preliminary data, is that S. cancellata in their expansion zones are unable to
obtain food of sufficiently high carbohydrate:protein ratio to maximize their
fitness. This poor nutrition then leads to population decreases in their
expansion zone. This carbohydrate insufficiency hypothesis will be tested in
this project by: 1) assessing the plant macronutrient contents and feeding
behavior of S. cancellata in the field at sites differing in median plant
macronutrient ratios; 2) measuring the short-term effects of dietary
macronutrient content on the performance of juvenile S. cancellata in the field,
and 3) measuring the whole-lifetime effects of dietary macronutient content on
the performance of S. cancellata in the lab under controlled environmental
conditions. Together these experiments will test the mechanisms potentially
responsible for fluctuations in locust populations in the recession and invasion
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.