* 1826232
* QRM: Microstructural Quantification and Virtual Reconstruction of Polymer Matrix Composites within the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Tibor Beke, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2023
* USD 565,221.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
the manufacturing process of complex structures, promoting the progress of
science, advancing national prosperity and securing national defense. Polymer
composites are a lighter-weight alternative to metals that have the potential to
transform energy efficient aerospace, automotive and infrastructure
applications. Fiber-reinforced composites combine high-strength fibers embedded
within a durable polymer to give them directional properties with very little
weight. However, these materials suffer from less consistency in performance
than metals, resulting in costly over-design. Some of this performance
variability is attributed to dispersion of fibers in fiber-reinforced
composites, and thus a fundamental understanding of the fiber behavior is
critical to reliable manufacturing of fiber-reinforced polymer matrix
composites. This award supports fundamental research to understand variability
in composites by understanding the tie between fiber dispersion and polymer
properties based on the manufacturing process. This research will enable the
quantification of variability in composites after manufacturing, which will
allow the design of more reliable structures with higher performance
predictability, increasing safety and reducing cost. This research involves
several disciplines, including materials science, manufacturing, structural
engineering and mathematics. The multi-disciplinary approach will positively
impact engineering education, and outreach activities are aimed at broadening
participation in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
elucidate the manufacturing process-microstructure-property relationships of
fiber-reinforced composite structures, and quantify uncertainty at the micro
scale and its propagation at the composite level. The research team will perform
material characterization, including high-resolution tomography and micro-Raman
scattering studies to quantify fiber spatial distribution and matrix in-situ
properties at the micro-scale; implement virtual structure reconstruction of
fiber-reinforced composite microstructures, determine physics-based statistical
descriptors, and virtually reproduce statistically equivalent curing models.
Experiments and modeling are integrated to quantify the relationships among
residual stress during curing, local microstructure, properties and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.