* 1826712
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Holocene Shifts in the Diets and Paleohistory of Antarctic Krill Predators
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Kelton McMahon, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 12/31/2020
* USD 139,795.00

The Antarctic marine ecosystem is highly productive and supports a diverse range
of ecologically and commercially important species. A key species in this
ecosystem is Antarctic krill, which in addition to being commercially harvested,
is the principle prey of a wide range of marine organisms including penguins,
seals and whales. The aim of this study is to use penguins and other krill
predators as sensitive indicators of past changes in the Antarctic marine food
web resulting from climate variability and the historic harvesting of seals and
whales by humans. Specifically this study will recover and analyze modern
(&lt;20 year old), historic (20-200 year old) and ancient (200-10,000 year old)
penguin and other krill predator tissues to track their past diets and
population movements relative to shifts in climate and the availability of
Antarctic krill. Understanding how krill predators were affected by these
factors in the past will allow us to better understand how these predators, the
krill they depend on, and the Antarctic marine ecosystem as a whole will respond
to current challenges such as global climate change and an expanding commercial
fishery for Antarctic krill. The project will further the NSF goals of training
new generations of scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to
the general public. This project will support the cross-institutional training
of undergraduate and graduate students in advanced analytical techniques in the
fields of ecology and biogeochemistry. In addition, this project includes
educational outreach aimed encouraging participation in science careers by
engaging K-12 students in scientific issues related to Antarctica, penguins,
marine ecology, biogeochemistry, and global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help place recent ecological
changes in the Southern Ocean into a larger historical context by examining
decadal and millennial-scale shifts in the diets and population movements of
Antarctic krill predators (penguins, seals, and squid) in concert with climate
variability and commercial harvesting. This will be achieved by coupling
advanced stable and radio isotope techniques, particularly compound-specific
stable isotope analysis, with unprecedented access to modern, historical, and
well-preserved paleo-archives of Antarctic predator tissues dating throughout
the Holocene. This approach will allow the project to empirically test if
observed shifts in Antarctic predator bulk tissue stable isotope values over the
past millennia were caused by climate-driven shifts at the base of the food web
in addition to, or rather than, shifts in predator diets due to a competitive
release following the historic harvesting of krill eating whale and seals. In
addition, this project will track the large-scale abandonment and reoccupation
of penguin colonies around Antarctica in response to changes in climate and sea
ice conditions over the past several millennia. These integrated field studies
and laboratory analyses will provide new insights into the underlying mechanisms
that influenced past shifts in the diets and population movements of charismatic
krill predators such as penguins. This will allow for improved projections of
the ecosystem consequences of future climate change and anthropogenic harvesting
scenarios in the Antarctica that are likely to affect the availability of
Antarctic krill.