* 1826920
* MRI: Acquisition of Total Organic Carbon/Total Nitrogen Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching at Georgia Gwinnett College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Seungjin Lee, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 39,931.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation P(CRIF) programs. Professor Elizabeth Sudduth from Georgia
Gwinnett College and colleagues Seungjin Lee and Sang H Park have acquired a
total organic carbon/total nitrogen analyzer. This instrument uses an analysis
technique that is historic and fundamental to analyzing samples. This is
combustion analysis which by combusting (burning or oxidizing) a sample can
provide the content of elements such as carbon and nitrogen. This a basic
analytical tool for environmental analysis of materials in water, or water
treatment. The research to be conducted is largely localized to the Georgia
region. It provides undergraduate students training in measurement, data
analysis, and instrumentation usage valuable as they go on to future technical
employment or to higher level training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this
analyzer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially aids the characterization of the effects of urbanization and beaver
activity on patterns in organic carbon and nitrogen concentrations and ecosystem
functions in urban streams. The instrument is necessary for the evaluation of
the efficiency of surface water treatment and recycling processes for
sustainable nutrients for the investigation of nitrogenous disinfection
byproducts formation potential of Gwinnett County's drinking water source. The
analyzer also helps investigators and students in characterizing the composition
of atmospheric aerosols and dry atmospheric deposition rates of nitrogen, and
for the characterization of combustion exhaust gas from a diesel generator using
fuel blends of commercial ultra-low sulfur diesel and biodiesel synthesized on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.