* 1826567
* ERA-CAPS: From genes to shape: Towards development of a computable flower
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Elliot Meyerowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 453,043.00

Plants have typical shapes, and one part of each plant, the flower, has a shape
and structure characteristic of the species. How growing plants create flower
shapes is unknown. Understanding how flowers acquire shape is important flowers
are major sources of human food. Earlier work has shown that the shape that
flowers take depends on the expression of regulatory genes in the growing
flowers, and on the mechanical properties of the walls of the floral cells. This
project will create computer models of flowers that show all of the cells and
cell walls at several stages of floral growth and add to those models the
physical properties of the walls (measured by several biophysical methods) and
the patterns of gene expression that create the cell walls and regulate floral
shape. By comparing these patterns, the team will develop hypotheses about how
the combination of changing gene expression and changing mechanical properties
lead to changes in cell shape and size, and therefore to the development of
flower shape. They will test the hypotheses and the models by changing wall
mechanical properties experimentally and seeing if the computer model predicts
the shape changes seen in the experiments. The outcomes will provide tools with
wide applicability to crop plants, enabling researchers and breeders access to
genes and processes that contribute to establishing floral shape. Educational
efforts focus on training students and post-docs in cutting edge
interdisciplinary approaches that merge biology and mathematical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a tool called the
"Computable Flower" that permits the user to (i) integrate data on geometry,
gene expression and biomechanics and (ii) explore, interpret and generate
hypotheses based on data supported by mechanistic modeling approaches. The tool
therefore provides an integrated description in the form of a 3D dynamic
template of the growing flower bud. The Computable Flower will be populated with
existing or novel quantitative datasets coming from experimental and
computational techniques concerning the spatial distribution of regulatory
molecules such as transcription factors and hormones, and the spatial expression
patterns of genes involved in cell wall synthesis and remodeling which operate
downstream and upstream from these regulatory networks. Information on the
spatial organization and properties of structural elements of the developing
flower, including cell wall stiffness, microtubule orientation and cellulose
microfibril organization will be added to the template. Following this, temporal
information will be included, showing correlations of gene expression,
mechanical properties of the tissue, and changes in geometry. This will lead to
computational models and hypotheses regarding biochemical, physical and
geometrical properties with simulation outcomes quantitatively compared with
experimental data. Predictions coming from the modeling will guide experiments
using domain-specific perturbation of genes that influence microtubule and wall
status. These transgenic lines will then be subjected to detailed quantitative
growth studies to test the validity of the model or to refine it. The overall
result will be a path to calculate floral phenotype from genotype that includes
mechanical properties of tissues and their role in morphogenesis. The broader
impact will include potential applications in agriculture as well as training of
students and postdocs in the combination of experimental and computational
developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.