* 1826593
* Collaborative Research: RUI: IRES-Track I: Brown Carbon Aerosol Formation by Photooxidation of Phenolic Compounds in Nanodroplets
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* David De Haan, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2023
* USD 156,672.00

This IRES project provides experiences for 4-6 undergraduate researchers from
the University of San Diego and Harvey Mudd College to spend 8-10 weeks
researching brown carbon formation by aqueous photooxidation of atmospheric
phenolic compounds. Four weeks of research will be conducted onsite at
Universite Paris Est-Creteil (UPEC), where the cohort of undergraduate
researchers will closely collaborate with their international mentors on a
series of CESAM aerosol chamber experiments utilizing advance spectroscopic
methods. After returning from France, the undergraduate research team will focus
on the workup, interpretation, and presentation of chamber data, while
continuing to interact with international mentors via video conferencing. Each
participant will be involved in the project for at least one semester prior and
two semesters subsequent to travel for training and further experimentation at
their U.S. campuses. In total, 15 undergraduates over 3 years will participate
in this international project and will be mentored by French scientists while
gaining hands-on experience with advanced research tools. &lt;br/&gt;This IRES
project is focused on atmospheric chemistry and will contribute to the better
understanding of clean air and global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenolic
compounds, which are produced during biomass burning and from the oxidation of
anthropogenic aromatic precursors, are believed to be significant sources of
brown carbon aerosol when oxidized in cloud droplets, especially in the presence
of iron (from dust) or nitrogen oxides (from combustion pollution). However,
multi-phase reactions of phenolic compounds have been studied mainly in bulk
aqueous solutions rather than in more realistic nanodroplets, where
photobleaching can become photobrowning and where reactivity is often
accelerated, especially for surface-active oligomerizing species. The
researchers will therefore study brown secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation
by phenolic precursor species in nanodroplet "cloud simulation" photooxidation
experiments at the CESAM chamber in Paris, characterizing chemical and optical
changes in aerosol particles before, during, and after cloud events. Particle
browning will be monitored by CAPS-ssa and UV/visible spectroscopy of water-
soluble OA as the reactants interact with seed aerosol, water droplets, and
simulated sunlight in the pressure, temperature, and RH-controlled chamber.
Particle-phase chemistry will be monitored by aerosol mass spectrometry (ACSM-
TOF), and particle uptake and outgassing will be detected by high-resolution
PTR-MS and long-path FTIR monitoring of gas- phase species. This project will
provide 15 diverse U.S. undergraduates with international research experiences
at a state-of-the-art cloud chamber facility as the center of a 3-semester
research experience for each participant. Project activities will increase
understanding of important sources of brown SOA, which will in turn allow this
pollutant, and the adverse effects on human health and climate that it causes,
to be minimized in a more cost-effective manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.