* 1826364
* Collaborative Research: Rethinking the Role of Building Envelopes with Smart Morphing Facades
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jared Hobeck, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2022
* USD 203,109.00

The goal of this project is to transform building facades from passive
structural elements serving their conventional architectural and functional
roles to an adaptable engineered system that can (1) protect a building against
extreme wind events, (2) reduce safety concerns and structural costs, and (3)
eventually contribute to a sustainable solution for energy saving.
Traditionally, fixed structures, such as tall buildings, have been designed with
a specific shape based on estimates of average wind flow conditions. This
appearance-based design can result in shapes that are not the most effective,
especially where the wind becomes variable in intensity and direction. To
address structural performance issues and achieve an improved safety and comfort
for building occupants, this project will develop innovative smart, morphing
facade modules that actively modify the building?s aerodynamic shape to
alleviate flow-induced vibrations during moderate to high winds. This technology
has the potential to be integrated with the growing industry of adaptive facades
for energy generation in buildings, providing additional functionality and
sustainability benefits. Both graduate and undergraduate students will become
involved in this research project, with recruitment that will particularly
target students who are underrepresented in engineering fields. The project will
also result in new educational engineering activities presented through
undergraduate coursework and in STEM outreach to underrepresented and
underserved K-12 populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research
will result in a new generation of multifunctional morphing facade modules that
are sustainable and resilient. Such modules, which have tangible safety and
economic benefits, will transform the design of morphing control systems for
hazard mitigation purposes. This project will create fundamental knowledge in
(1) modeling of the dynamics of tall buildings, taking into consideration the
feedback loops for control systems in structural analysis, as well as assessment
of the dynamic behavior of the integrated building and active facade; (2)
diagnostics of the system properties from observations through pressure,
accelerometer, and velocity sensors, where a network of sensors will be used to
characterize and reconstruct a near-real-time representation of flow-induced
forces acting on the building; and (3) control of the aerodynamic shape of the
system to obtain a desired dynamic behavior. This research is expected to
advance aerodynamic optimization and active control systems for large-scale
morphing surfaces through integrated computational and experimental
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.