* 1826065
* Understanding Selective Recruitment in Neuronal Networks via Systems Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2022
* USD 373,339.00

This project will study the dynamics of systems characterized by a particular
interconnection structure, inspired by properties of nerve cells. Nerve cell
models typically implement some type of activation function, which determines
how the nerve cell responds to input stimuli from other nerve cells. The
activation function studied in this project passes an input signal without
changes, if the input to the structure is positive. However, if the input to the
activation function is negative, then the output is zero. This activation
function gives rise to a model of nerve cell dynamics that is capable of
accurately representing some behaviors of real neurons. There are powerful
mathematical results available for these models. In contrast, nerve cell models
with activation functions based on exponentials can be difficult to analyze.
This project will create new mathematical tools to study how different
subnetworks interact, either to suppress unwanted activity or to synchronize and
reinforce their responses. These subnetworks can be built up hierarchically into
progressively more complex structures. The project will relate these networks to
both normal and abnormal neuronal circuits. The results will be of interest for
the insight they provide into the architecture of the human brain, but also for
constructing explainable engineered networks that can learn and adapt. This
project will advance the national health and welfare by increasing understanding
of biological neuronal systems, and by enabling the creation of robotic systems
with enhanced resilience and adaptabilty. The project will also impact the
training of a new generation of undergraduate and graduate students through
undergraduate student involvement in research, graduate supervision and
curriculum development, outreach targeted at middle, high school, incoming
freshman and transfer students, involvement and retention of minority students,
and broad dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the existing gap between the experimental evidence on selective recruitment in
the brain and the theoretical understanding of the mechanisms that explain it.
Taking a systems and controls perspective, the research effort aims to develop a
mathematical framework to analyze how neuronal networks optimize their
computational capabilities and unravel the role that network structure plays in
shaping the dynamical behavior of the brain. This research seeks to advance the
current knowledge on how the brain selects the relevant subnetworks during each
time interval and suppresses the activity of others, and how it efficiently
recruits those selected subnetworks and coordinates information transfer to and
from them. The research plan is structured along the following interconnected
research thrusts: (i) network stability and emergence of oscillations. The
project seeks an in-depth characterization of the conditions on network
structure that determine its dynamical properties, in particular, existence,
uniqueness, and asymptotic stability of equilibrium points and limit cycles;
(ii) inhibitory control and dynamic dimensionality. The project aims to
characterize the mechanisms by which long-range connections between two networks
can be used by one to dynamically inhibit different subset of nodes in the
other. An aspect of particular importance is the consideration of
physiologically-relevant scenarios involving feedforward and feedback
inhibition, and their relation to network size, structure, and robustness; (iii)
inter-regional connectivity and information transfer. Building on the lessons
learned in the previous two thrusts, the project sets out to characterize the
mechanisms of information transfer through coherent oscillations. This involves
the study of ways in which neuronal networks can encode and decode information
as oscillations and the role that the hierarchical structure and inter-regional
connectivity of the brain has on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.