* 1826155
* Collaborative Research: A Data-centric Uncertainty-informed Framework for Resilience Analytics of Critical Infrastructure Under Extreme Climate Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Mazdak Tootkaboni, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 224,341.00

The United States' critical infrastructure and the communities that rely on
their services are increasingly prone to climatic risks, with widespread impacts
that are often followed by lengthy and costly restoration efforts. There is a
fundamental need for scalable and accurate prediction models of natural hazard
risks at local and regional scales to better assess and manage the resilience of
our nation's infrastructure. The outcome of this research is expected to help
policy makers and infrastructure operators characterize infrastructure
resilience under various uncertain future scenarios and identify the optimal
adaptation or mitigation strategies that result in maximum resilience gain in
the system. In addition, this project possesses great potential for other
positive societal impacts by educating the next generation of scholars in hazard
modeling through a truly interdisciplinary, research-integrated educational
program, a commitment to increased diversity in workforce training and broad
dissemination of the results to scientific communities and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to advance the
theory and practice of resilience engineering through establishing a
pluralistic, data-centric and uncertainty-informed framework to efficiently
characterize the multi-dimensional infrastructure resilience under stochastic
hazards as well as plausible infrastructure evolution (due to adaptation or
mitigation strategies) and climate change scenarios. This will be done through
implementing the three key objectives of: (1) creating an accurate and multi-
paradigm hurricane risk model, (2) establishing an accurate predictive framework
for resilience analytics of critical infrastructure, based on a multi-
dimensional Bayesian algorithm, and (3) leveraging recent advancements in
stochastic analysis - based on Polynomial Chaos surrogates - to both fully
characterize the uncertainties associated with the multi-dimensional resilience
model, and implement computationally efficient scenario-based sensitivity
analysis. Successful implementation of this project will yield a significant
breakthrough in resilience modeling by enabling a scalable, accurate, and multi-
dimensional assessment of infrastructure and community resilience; with
rigorously and efficiently accounting for
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.