* 1826909
* Origins of Mesoamerican Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 158,789.00

Dr. Takeshi Inomata and Dr. Daniela Triadan of the University of Arizona will
examine the origins of Maya civilization between 1000 and 700 BC, focusing on
the questions of 1) whether Maya civilization developed through local processes,
under direct influence from Olmec civilization, or through complex interactions
among various regions; and 2) whether formal ceremonial complexes emerged during
the transition from mixed subsistence to fully-established maize agriculture. It
has traditionally been argued that the Mayan civilization developed from a
geographically 'Olmec' predecessor and is thus derived. Work by Inomata and
Triadan in southern Mexico potentially challenges this hypothesis and suggests a
more complicated narrative which includes not only potential inter-regional
interaction but also an underlying shift in subsistence practices from part to
full time agriculture. The question is important because complex societies
developed at roughly the same time in many regions of the world and scientists
wish to understand what factors underlie this process. The project directed by
Dr. Inomata and Dr. Triadan will contribute to the cross-cultural understanding
of how interregional interaction affects the process of political
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will examine multiple
sites located in the Middle Usumacinta region of southern Mexico, located
between the Maya lowlands and the Olmec heartland. The project research will
include: 1) airborne laser survey (LiDAR); 2) the ground-truthing of LiDAR data
through pedestrian surveys; and 3) excavations of the known sites and those
located in the LiDAR survey to examine their chronology. The largest site in the
region, Aguada F'nix, includes a rectangular platform, measuring 1.4 km in
length. The study of those poorly-known monumental constructions dating between
1000 and 700 BC may transform our understanding of social processes leading to
the development of Maya civilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.