* 1826314
* The Role of Multi-Scale Porosity on Termite Mound Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 475,000.00

Termite mounds provide an excellent example of naturally-built habitats that are
efficient and resilient. Mound construction is achieved through efficient use of
local materials without the need for a heat-beat-treat cycle often employed in
the development of man-made materials. The mounds are also nature's model for
combined structural and mechanical systems providing ventilation and temperature
regulation solely through the form of the structure. An understanding of the
natural processes involved in termite mound construction and function can be
adapted to inform engineering applications related to the construction of man-
made structures that require zero or minimal energy inputs. Also, as termites
micro-3D-print mounds, this work can inform new paradigms in 3D-printed human
structures. The transdisciplinary project will lead to advances in materials and
structural forms that are informed by the construction methods of termites for
structures that require significantly less energy and are more sustainable than
traditional construction. Research outcomes will move the U.S. toward greater
energy independence and security. Technology transfer of new materials and
systems will grow manufacturing and strengthen national economic
development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to inform
new processes for sustainable bio-inspired building systems and bio-cemented
materials using locally available materials. This will be accomplished by
identifying the thermal and mechanical properties of termite mounds as systems
and the chemical, thermal and mechanical properties of the bio-cemented soil
using the multi-scale porosity of the structure and material as the key
parameter. The complex nano-to-mega-scale structure of the termite mounds will
be analyzed using a suite of advanced techniques. 3D models of the macro-to-
mega-scale pore structure of termite mounds will be developed by photogrammetric
mapping their exterior and by imaging slices of cast molds of the interior
tunnel structure. The nano-to-meso-scale pore structure of harvested bio-
cemented material will be measured using nitrogen adsorption, mercury intrusion
porosimetry, and high-resolution X-ray micro-computed tomography. Including
porosity in consideration of homeostasis of termite mounds provides information
on the importance of material properties in mound ventilation, thermal and
structural characteristics. Studying the ability of termites to regulate systems
through the synergy of the structural topology and unique materials can be a
starting point for engineering designers to use local materials efficiently and
adaptively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.