* 1826965
* Acquisition of a Helix SFT Noble Gas Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 10/31/2019
* USD 343,361.00

This grant supports continued innovation and application of techniques of He
isotope geochemistry to address Earth science problems. The grant will be used
to purchase a new He isotope mass spectrometer capable of making precise and
accurate He isotope abundance measurements even on very small quantities of
helium. The instrument replaces a decades-old predecessor and requires no
modification to the existing hardware for extracting gases from rocks and
minerals for analysis. This instrument will be used in support of many Earth
science subdisciplines and will be the main tool used by multiple undergraduate
and graduate students and postdoctoral investigators in their
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two isotopes of He, 3He and 4He, provide a
wealth of information on the origin and history of terrestrial rocks. 4He in
rocks is almost exclusively derived from &amp;#945;-decay of the elements U and
Th. Accumulation of 4He in minerals allows a unique form of chronometry. Because
He diffuses out of minerals at elevated temperatures characteristic of burial to
a few km depth in the crust, the accumulated 4He in minerals can be used to
determine when rocks were brought to the Earth's surface by erosion or faulting.
Such data provide important insights to key geologic processes such as the
timing and causes of mountain building. 3He in rocks and minerals can come from
more unusual sources. For example, 3He is produced when cosmic rays interact
with the elements that make up minerals in the uppermost ~ 2 meters of the
crust. This too acts as a chronometer, but a chronometer that can be used to
measure erosion rates and also to establish when rocks first became exposed at
the surface. The latter technique is one of the central tools in establishing
the glaciation history and Milankovitch-driven climate change over the last few
tens of thousands of years. In marine sediments, 3He is derived from the
accumulation of cosmic dust. By measuring 3He concentrations in sequences of
marine sediments it is possible to establish sedimentation rates (another key
indicator of time) and, in some cases, to identify major cosmic-dust producing
events such as the rare destructive collision of many-km-sized
asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.