* 1826767
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: Documentation and Analysis of a Typologically Uncommon Maimai Language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Matthew Dryer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 18,668.00

New Guinea, a large island north of Australia, makes up approximately 2% of the
total land area of the world. Despite its size, it also contains roughly 20%
(over 1,000) of the world's languages. For a vast majority of these languages,
there exists no documentation. In addition, many of the languages of New Guinea
are critically endangered, due in large part to the incursion of Tok Pisin,
which is an English-based creole that serves as a lingua franca. Given the fact
that young children are ceasing to learn heritage languages in lieu of Tok
Pisin, many of the languages of New Guinea are likely to be extinct by the end
of the century. The documentation and description of these languages can have a
large impact for both the scientific study of language. From a scientific
standpoint, the languages of New Guinea exhibit features that are rare among the
languages of the world, such as the use of verbs in functions which are
typologically unusual; forms of word-formation that were previously unattested;
and complex strings of consonants. Understanding how these linguistic systems
work can inform how languages change over time, and how populations have moved
around the world. For the communities which speak these languages, the
documentation can potentially represent the only record of their language and
the knowledge that they contain. Due to many of these languages' endangered
status, documentation and description must be undertaken now, or they will be
lost forever. A broader impact of the work that will be completed is the
dissertation and concomitant PhD that the researcher will obtain. All data
collected will be archived in PARADISEC, an archive that specializes in
languages of the Pacific. The data provided to this archive, as well as a
dictionary of the language, will be openly accessible to researchers, the Heyo-
speaking community, and interested members of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral student Thomas Diaz of SUNY at Buffalo,
under the advisement of Dr. Matthew Dryer, will document and describe one such
language, named Heyo. Heyo is a member of the Torricelli family of languages,
belonging to the Maimai branch and spoken in the northwest of Papua New Guinea.
While every other of the Torricelli language family's seven branches have
received some level of description and documentation, the Maimai branch has
received no such treatment and remains completely undocumented. The project will
consist of three major steps. First, the researcher will collect and record raw
data from speakers in Papua New Guinea. This data consists of traditional
narratives, naturalistic conversation, and cultural performances. After the
collection of raw data, the researcher will analyze and annotate this data for
linguistic phenomena, and uncover the linguistic structure of the language. In
the final stages of the project, the researcher will, as a requirement for his
doctoral dissertation, produce a grammatical description of Heyo. The
documentation will include descriptions of typologically rare argument and
gender marking; the complex system of discourse clitics; and the blurring of
morphosyntactic distinctions between word classes, primarily in regards to nouns
and verb. Furthermore, this project will inform knowledge of contact and
borrowing patterns across genealogically disparate, but geographically close
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.