* 1826490
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance (CSU-LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lisa Hammersley, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The California State
University-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP) program
was established in 1993 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled
technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in the
State of California. CSU-LSAMP is an alliance of the 23 campuses of the
California State University (CSU) system. As a LSAMP STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance, the project has two primary goals: (1) increase the number of
underrepresented minority (URM) students graduating with undergraduate and
graduate degrees in STEM, and (2) contribute to the production of scholarly
research in broadening participation in STEM. These goals support the National
Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly
inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the scientific literacy
of all citizens." To achieve the first goal, CSU-LSAMP will provide activities
that support the academic integration, professionalization, and social
integration of participants. Goal two will be achieved through the creation of a
research team made up of social science researchers, program evaluators, and the
CSU-LSAMP leadership team. This research team will be the first step in creating
a CSU center for broadening participation research, which will serve as a
resource for education and social science researchers across the CSU system.
Research results will be broadly disseminated to ensure the replication of
successful undergraduate intervention models that increase access to, and
success in STEM baccalaureate degree programs and facilitate admissions to STEM
graduate programs; and moreover, lead to a more talented and diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.