* 1826621
* Natural Gas Desulfurization by Adsorption
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ralph Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 298,051.00

PI Name: Ralph T. Yang&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1826621&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raw natural gas contains various concentrations of
hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas, which needs to be reduced to a concentration below 4
parts per million in the US. Conventionally, natural gas desulfurization is
accomplished by contacting the gas stream with a liquid stream that absorbs the
H2S. Although the liquid absorption process is technologically mature and has
been used for nearly 100 years, it is highly energy intensive and is also
plagued by equipment corrosion and solvent loss problems. Adsorption is a
technology that is ideally suited for gas purification, provided an efficient
sorbent with high adsorption capacity and H2S-selectivity is found. In this
work, new approaches for synthesizing amine-grafted silicas with superior sulfur
capacity will be developed. Results of this project may guide the design of a
new, more efficient process for natural gas desulfurization. This project will
involve active participation of a diverse group of graduate as well as
undergraduate students, particularly minority and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amine-grafted mesoporous silicas are currently
the best desulfurization sorbents because they have good sulfur capacity and
selectivity, high moisture resistance/stability, fast uptake rates, and
regenerability; however, the sulfur capacity needs to be further improved to
make adsorption competitive to the liquid scrubbing process. Amine grafting is
accomplished by the reaction between the surface hydroxyl groups of silica
(i.e., silanols) and an aminosilane dopant. The approach used in this work is to
increase the silanol density on the mesoporous silica, thereby directly
increasing the grafted amines and consequently the H2S capacity. The work
includes three basic strategies to increase the silanol density. The mesoporous
silica MCM-48 will be the main silica to be used because of its high BET surface
area (~1400 m2/g). Other silicas such as SBA-15 (with large pores, 7-20 nm) and
MCM-x with expanded pores will also be used. The three strategies are all
scalable and environmentally sound, outlined in three tasks: 1) new and improved
organic-template removal processes; 2) post-treatment (i.e., after template
removal) of the mesoporous silica in a hydroxyl abundant environment; 3) in-situ
synthesis of mesoporous silicas with maximized silanol densities. Task 1 is the
main task, which includes five sub-tasks aimed at new template removal processes
to increase silanol density: microwave digestion; special gaseous oxidants;
supercritical extraction; extraction using organic solvents and ionic liquids,
and nonthermal ("cold") plasma. The resulting mesoporous silicas with the
highest silanol densities will be subjected to aminosilane grafting and H2S
adsorption/desorption measurements including both equilibrium adsorption
isotherms and rates. Because the results of the three strategies may be
synergistic, the PI will study combined treatments during the later phase of the
proposed work. This work will lead to the development of superior H2S adsorbents
that may enable adsorption technology to replace the wet amine absorption
technology that is currently used for natural gas desulfurization. The increased
use of clean natural gas--compared to coal and oil--will help mitigate global
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.