* 1826689
* RII Track-2 FEC:  From Genome to Phenome in a Stressful World: Epigenetic Regulatory Mechanisms Mediating Thermal Plasticity in Drosophila
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2023
* Sara Cahan, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 10/31/2023
* USD 5,171,722.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Over the last sixty years, science has made
incredible advances in our understanding of the role of genetics in determining
the structure and function of living organisms, with important implications for
our ability to treat disease, improve agricultural resources, and conserve
natural populations and communities. Yet even the same genes can have very
different effects depending on the environment in which an organism develops and
lives, with life-long or even multigenerational effects on physical traits when
exposed to environmental stress. How these changes are accomplished at the
molecular level is poorly understood, despite being critical for successful
adjustment of the body to acute and chronic stress conditions. In this project,
the researchers will investigate the epigenetic response to stressful
temperatures in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, along with closely
related species living in diverse environments, as a model for uncovering the
molecular mechanisms by which cells detect and respond to environmental stress.
This work will provide research and training opportunities for a diverse group
of graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge genomic sequencing
technologies and bioinformatic analysis, with STEM outreach to high-school
students from under-served urban and rural communities in three EPSCoR
jurisdictions (Vermont, Rhode Island, and Kentucky). In addition, five new
faculty members will be mentored as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a
team of researchers from VT, RI, and KY will work collaboratively to test the
hypothesis that epigenetic regulators act as an intermediary between
environmental sensors and protein production, altering the set of genes
available for transcription at the level of chromatin accessibility and then
fine-tuning expression through the action of epitranscriptomic molecules. The
primary objectives are to determine: 1) whether and how epigenetic mechanisms
mediate plastic changes in thermal tolerance; 2) the extent to which epigenetic
variation underlies natural segregating variation in phenotypic plasticity; and
3) the role of epigenetic divergence in shifting capacity for acclimation over
evolutionary time. To identify epigenetic mechanisms driving plasticity, the
project team will characterize changes in chromatin accessibility, post-
translational histone modification, miRNA and lncRNA associated with
developmental acclimation, adult-reversible acclimation, and rapid hardening in
response to high and low temperatures in Drosophila melanogaster. Functional
genetic manipulations will be used to validate candidate causal epigenetic
mechanisms. Genome-wide association mapping and experimental evolution
approaches will be employed to evaluate the genetic architecture of thermal
plasticity. Finally, to test whether niche transitions to colder or warmer
habitats are accompanied by evolutionary gains or losses of these plastic
responses, the researchers will reconstruct the history of evolutionary shifts
in capacity for thermal plasticity in species across New World species of
Drosophila. The project will establish comparative and experimental models for
understanding the evolutionary history and molecular mechanisms of thermal
plasticity that are ideally suited to address long-standing hypotheses
concerning the drivers of plasticity, and investigate the ecological and
evolutionary role of plasticity in promoting organismal resilience in the face
of rapid, progressive shifts in climate. This project will involve five junior
faculty members with different areas of expertise. Two junior faculty members
are from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), and mentoring programs
that target these junior faculty members are in place. Three post-doctoral
research associates will be involved in the project, who will become familiar
with the experiences of faculty members at both PUIs and PhD granting
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.