* 1826925
* Student Support for the 41st International ACM Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR-2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Hongning Wang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The aim of the provided support is to increase student participation in the 41st
ACM Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR
2018), held in Ann Arbor Michigan, U.S.A., July 8-12, 2018. A strong
representation of U.S. researchers, particularly students, at the SIGIR
conference is essential to maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important
area today and into the future. We recognize the importance of recruiting and
engaging students in information retrieval research in early stages of their
graduate studies as well as broadening participation of underrepresented
students. Support will be provided to 25 US-based graduate students, selected by
the SIGIR 2018 Student Sponsorship Committee, on the basis of merit and need.
The selection of students receiving the support will also put emphasis on the
diversity of the students. Students will be able to present and discuss their
research with each other and with senior researchers and help to form future
research collaborations.

SIGIR is the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Information Retrieval. Since 1963, the SIGIR conference has promoted research,
development and education in the area of search and other information access
technologies. It is the major international forum for the presentation of new
research and the demonstration of new systems and techniques in the broad field
of information retrieval. It covers all aspects of information retrieval
research, including theories and foundations, algorithms and applications, and
evaluation and analysis. The SIGIR conference program includes oral and poster
presentations of refereed papers as well as panel discussions and invited talks
by the leading experts from industry and academia. Information on SIGIR 2018 can
be accessed at http://sigir.org/sigir2018/. Proceedings will be made available
through the ACM Digital Library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.