* 1826801
* RII Track-2 FEC: Genomics Underlying Toxin Tolerance (GUTT): Identifying Molecular Innovations that Predict Phenotypes of Toxin Tolerance in Wild Vertebrate Herbivores
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Marjorie Matocq, Boise State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 6,598,285.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Plants and the animals that eat them are in
a constant battle for survival that results in evolutionary change. Plants
evolve to produce new toxic chemicals while herbivores, and their associated
microbial communities, change such that they become more tolerant to plant
toxins. The understanding of plant toxins and herbivore tolerance is important
for conservation biologists that manage native herbivores and plants, for the
ranching and agricultural community that rely on plants to feed livestock and
chemicals to defend crops from pests, and the medical community that relies on
plant-derived chemicals to manage human health. A better understanding of these
important plant-herbivore systems will require the expertise of many scientists
with different specializations that must cooperate across state boundaries. This
project will leverage, build, and integrate research and education strengths
across Idaho, Nevada, and Wyoming to identify the Genomes Underlying Toxin
Tolerance (GUTT) in vertebrate herbivores. The GUTT team will integrate a range
of expertise to identify how variation in toxin tolerance influences populations
of wild mammalian and avian herbivores. The team will work with high school
teachers and use Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences in introductory
biology, chemistry, and math courses to train, inspire, recruit, and retain a
diverse workforce capable of applying genetic understanding of toxin tolerance
in animals and microbes to conservation, agriculture and human health. The
project will also connect GUTT participants with local agency and industry
partners to diversify career and funding opportunities for faculty and students.
The research and educational activities will increase the capacity for Idaho,
Nevada, and Wyoming faculty, students, and community partners to more
effectively manage toxic plants and the animals and microbes that interact with
these plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project
identifies the Genomes Underlying Toxin Tolerance (GUTT) by establishing the
links between molecular and physiological mechanisms of toxin tolerance that
predict demographic consequences in vertebrate herbivores. The researchers use
metabolomics, transcriptomics, metagenomics, and molecular modeling to identify
molecular interactions between herbivore and gut microbial genomes and toxic
chemicals ingested by herbivores. The team will use in vivo and in vitro
experiments to quantify physiological mechanisms of toxin tolerance and
physiological consequences of toxin exposure. Participants will also work on
manipulating molecular and physiological mechanisms of toxin tolerance to
develop, validate, and iteratively refine models that predict how toxin exposure
influences herbivore demography. The research will result in: 1) An
unprecedented, detailed view of concerted herbivore and microbial response to,
and modification of, toxins in the herbivore gut that influence demographic
rates of native vertebrate herbivores; 2) Discovery and archiving of chemical,
genetic, and microbial diversity from unique interactions created in the guts of
mammalian and avian herbivores consuming diverse plant chemicals; and 3)
Workforce development programs that create and sustain a culture of inclusion
for marginalized groups across all career stages who can innovate and lead new
frontiers in integrated research and educational practices. High school outreach
programs and interactions with predominantly undergraduate institutions will be
used to inspire the next generation of scientists. Rentention of these students
will be ensured through Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
throughout the undergraduate curriculum where students use genetic and chemical
data to discover novel mechanisms and consequences of toxin tolerance. Overall,
the Idaho, Nevada, and Wyoming EPSCoR RII Track-2 GUTT team will foster novel
collaborations and contribute to society by predicting and managing how wild,
agricultural, and human systems respond molecularly, physiologically, and
demographically to chemicals in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.