* 1826745
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: University of Texas System LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2025
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,796,618.00

The University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation's primary purpose is to increase the quantity and quality of
underrepresented minority (URM) students who pursue and earn Bachelor's (BS)
degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) in the state
of Texas to diversify the nation's workforce. The Alliance also aims to increase
the number of STEM BS graduates who pursue Master's and/or Doctoral degrees. The
Alliance is comprised of 14 institutions and will continue its statewide work by
enhancing activities based on best practices such as undergraduate research
opportunities domestic and abroad, collaborations with US Department of Energy
laboratories, and an annual research conference modeled after national, research
symposia. Innovative activities include the creation of a curricular Research
Stream Initiative (SRI) in which student cohorts enroll in research courses for
credit. Additionally, an expert evaluation team will introduce a new educational
research component that will survey the growing pool of UT System LSAMP alumni
to determine the social, economic, and academic factors that influence their
community college and university preparation and degree completion, as well as
their decision to pursue graduate degrees. This research activity will produce
high quality conference and journal publications to disseminate the Alliance's
results, which will encourage the replication of LSAMP activities at other peer
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities, centered on a set of
interconnected undergraduate research experiences, will advance knowledge and
understanding of the social, economic, and academic factors that enable URM
students to successfully earn STEM degrees and continue to graduate school. This
project will positively influence and diversify the national STEM workforce to
be globally competitive and truly representative of the nation's 21st century
demographic. As a model Senior Alliance, it has demonstrated that collaborative
efforts reap substantial rewards. The alliance has served as a genuine example
of a statewide commitment to improve enrollment, retention, performance, and
graduation of underrepresented groups that traditionally have not had access to
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.