* 1826720
* Collaborative Research: Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Students in STEM Education Using Nanotechnology
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Osama Awadelkarim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,685.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. Louis Stokes Regional Centers of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSRCEs) are designed to serve as
regional testbeds for outreach, knowledge-generating and diffusion activities or
other activities that contribute to successful practices in STEM education.
LSRCE activities may also be concentrated in the development of disciplinary
research institutes.&lt;br/&gt;Norfolk State University, Tidewater Community
College and Pennsylvania State University (lead collaborators) and other partner
organizations that include the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Langley Research Center (NASA-LaRC), Jefferson National Research Laboratory
Applied Research Center (JLab-ARC), and Eastern Virginia Medical School (EVMS),
all active members of the broader nanoscience and engineering research
community, will collaborate as part of the Southeastern Coalition for Engagement
and Exchange in Nanotechnology Education (SCENE), a regional Louis Stokes Center
for Excellence in Broadening Participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCENE utilizes
nanotechnology and its many applications as a conduit for engaging and inspiring
talented students from traditionally underrepresented minority populations.
Through guided mentoring and opportunities for research and hands-on training
experiences, students will (1) pair student participants with accomplished
research professionals to seed and motivate continuing research activities; (2)
sponsor student-centered research and training activities to achieve cohorts of
students who are prepared and competitive for opportunities in advanced STEM
environments; and, (3) utilize its unique resources and established
collaborative connections to deliver and disseminate a suite of digitally
prepared products and services to users. The program design augments an
extensive summer training and internship component, with an aggressive strategy
to prepare and mentor talented students as they generate portfolios and generate
competitive profiles for research opportunities at national labs and federal
research agencies (e.g. NSF GRFP and NASA Graduate Student Fellowship Program
(GSFP) applications). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center will be led by multiple
institution types including a historically black university, a community
college, and a research I institution that houses the Center for Nanotechnology
Education and Utilization in addition to federal and private sector
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.