* 1826835
* MRI: Acquisition of a Siemens MAGNETOM Prisma 3-Tesla MRI
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricia Kuhl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,231,298.00

With support from the NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program to the
University of Washington (UW), Drs. Geoffrey M. Boynton in the Psychology
Department and Patricia K. Kuhl, co-director of the Institute for Learning &amp;
Brain Sciences, will purchase a Siemens MAGNETOM Prisma 3-Tesla Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner for human neuroimaging research. MRI is the
primary tool for investigating the human brain. This instrument will be shared
and available for scientists from a wide range of departments including
Psychology, Speech and Hearing, Radiology, Psychiatry and Computer Science. This
state-of-the-art device has four functions for studying the human brain:
structural imaging, functional imaging, diffusion weighted imaging and magnetic
resonance (MR) spectroscopy. Structural imaging is using the MRI scanner to
acquire images of brain structure which can be used to study, for example, how
the brain structure differs across different populations, or how age and
experience affect the growth of the human brain. Functional imaging, or
"functional magnetic resonance imaging, (fMRI)" is used to measure where and
when brain activity occurs as human subjects perform a task or experience
sensory stimulation. fMRI relies on the MRI scanner's ability to measure changes
in the level of oxygenated vs. deoxygenated blood that are caused by changes in
brain activity. Diffusion weighted imaging can detect the major neuronal
pathways in the brain by measuring the way in which water molecules naturally
diffuse along these pathways. Finally, MR spectroscopy measures the levels of
neurotransmitter concentration, such as the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA
throughout the brain. Different levels of GABA have been found to vary, for
example, between subjects with autism and neurotypical subjects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new MRI scanner will be the primary device for
studying a wide range of human neuroscience problems. These include studies of
linguistic function and dysfunction, cognition, developmental cognitive
neuroscience, sensory neuroscience, neurological disorders, and studies of
social cognition including autism. The four functions described above will be
used to study a wide variety of subjects including children, adolescents,
subjects with autism, attention deficit disorder (ADD), Alzheimer's, blindness,
dyslexia, and Parkinson's disease. For example, fMRI will be used to study the
brain's response while subjects with ADD attempt to ignore a visual stimulus. In
another example, diffusion MRI will be used to study changes in prefrontal
executive function networks in children during language development. The new
scanner will form the centerpiece of a thriving and growing human
interdisciplinary neuroscience community and will further strengthen an existing
culture of training in neuroimaging data acquisition and analysis methods.
Through a program of courses and hands-on training, we will provide the training
that is needed for students and postdocs across all disciplines to master the
advanced imaging techniques necessary to launch successful independent careers
in the human neurosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.