* 1826824
* Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: LSAMP - NSF International Center of Excellence (NICE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Steve Penouilh, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,305,580.00

The goal of the Louis Stokes Regional NSF International Center of Excellence
(LSAMP-NICE) is to create a collaborative framework for Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) institutions to leverage resources, establish
partnership and support from several other NSF programs and countries, and to
further strengthen the NSF Broadening Participation initiative through
international research experiences in STEM. Specific and measurable objectives
are: Objective 1. Dissemination and professional development through the
establishment of a virtual portal, Objective 2. Organization of an annual LSAMP-
NICE Conference for dissemination and professional development, Objective 3.
Development of a dynamic archive of information or dissemination, exposing as
many as 100 LSAMP undergrads and 20 LSAMP BD grad students to collaborative
international research opportunities annually, Objective 4. Develop, implement,
and assess faculty co-mentor award process, and Objective 5. Tracking the
successful publication of peer-reviewed journal articles co-authored by LSAMP
undergrad and BD grad students resulting from collaborative international
research. The Intellectual Merit associated with LSAMP-NICE derives from
facilitating collaboration among LSAMP alliances and dozens of complementary NSF
programs with significant international research opportunities. International
partners within LSAMP-NICE will make major contributions to expanded
participation of underrepresented students in meaningful international research
experiences. The Center will implement and assess co-mentor awards for US
faculty who remain scientifically engaged with their students as they do
research abroad. The benefits to students' research progress associated with
simultaneous engagement of both US and international co-mentors will be
explored. LSAMP-NICE activities will also lead to dissemination of research
results across the worldwide STEM community and public
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively few students in the NSF LSAMP program
are given the opportunity to perform meaningful research outside the United
States. This project serves the national interest via NSF's mission to promote
the progress of science and to advance prosperity and welfare. LSAMP-NICE is led
by a coalition of a Tribal College (Salish Kootenai College), a Hispanic Serving
Institution (the University of Illinois at Chicago), a Historically Black
College (Jackson State University), and a large public research university
(Louisiana State University). LSAMP-NICE aspires to broaden exposure of
international research opportunities and support resources across the LSAMP
coalitions. A particular focus is on Native Americans enrolled in diverse types
of institutions. LSAMP-NICE seeks to ensure that U.S. institutions and their
researchers are able to advance research through international collaboration to
help to maintain U.S. leadership within the global scientific community.
Adapting the NSF model of collaboration, LSAMP NICE acts as an interface for the
LSAMP community, NSF Partnership for International Research and Education, NSF
Engineering Research Centers, international science organizations, as well as
ministries and institutions of higher learning across the world. This interface
activity is accomplished through the establishment and maintenance of
international partnerships with the LSAMP community, communication of best
practices in collaborative research and professional development, and broad
communication of student success via annual conferences and digital
dissemination of information to domestic and international
constituencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"This LSAMP Regional Center of Excellence -
NSF International Center of Excellence is co-funded by NSF INCLUDES, which
focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.