* 1826781
* RII Track-2 FEC: Functional Analysis of Nitrogen Responsive Networks in Sorghum
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Neil Lamb, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,546,896.00

The high yields typical of modern agriculture rely upon nitrogen fertilizer, yet
the manufacture of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer is extremely energy intensive
and represents a major cost for farmers. Additionally, fertilizer runoff
produces many secondary problems such as aquatic dead zones with low oxygen
contents, and reduced water quality, increasing the costs of providing safe
drinking water in agricultural regions of the country. Genetic gains in nitrogen
use efficiency (NUE) by plants will aid in protecting yield while mitigating
both costs and negative environmental impacts associated with high rates of
fertilizer application in agriculture. Through this Track-2 Focused EPSCoR
Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) project, researchers at the HudsonAlpha
Institute for Biotechnology in Alabama and the University of Nebraska will
partner to conduct cutting-edge plant genomics research to better understand how
nitrogen affects plant growth and development. HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology will bring its biotechnology education and agricultural genomics
research expertise to the collaborative project while the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln will contribute its expertise in plant transformation and
automated phenotyping with their state-of-the-art automated greenhouse system
for imaging large plants. Researchers will collect information of how plants
respond to nitrogen levels through a variety of genetic, biotechnological, and
observational methods in the widely-used grain crop sorghum. Sorghum thrives in
climates where many food crops struggle and is more efficient at utilizing
resources such as water and nitrogen. It is an ideal crop to target for
improvement to meet the predicted doubling of global food demand by 2050. In
addition, the project will include an educational component, which will train
and inspire students to pursue genetic and biotechnology-based research for
agriculture. To accomplish this, HudsonAlpha will develop a three-week summer
course for advanced high school students called the "AgriGenomics Academy."
Additional activities include the recruitment of three undergraduate students
who will complete summer internships at both HudsonAlpha and University of
Nebraska-Lincoln to learn advanced techniques, and support for the Launching
Aspiring Biotechnology Students (LABS) program, which introduces low and
moderate-income students to biotechnology. The project will also mentor four
early career faculty. In addition to nitrogen use efficacy, the combined efforts
of these two institutions will make significant progress toward understanding
the biology of other complex agronomic crop traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to understand the role of genes in nitrogen (N)
responsive co-expression networks in sorghum using a combination of genomics,
biotechnology and automated phenotyping by combining the expertise at the Hudson
Alpha Institute of Biotechnology and the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. We
will achieve this goal through three main objectives: (i) Generate
transcriptomic and phenotypic data to characterize the molecular responses of
sorghum to N availability; (ii) perturb the N response by combinatorial
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing and overexpression of key genes in N network modules;
and (iii) characterize plants with targeted changes in components of the N
network. Genomic and transcriptomic data will be used to identify key regulatory
sequences controlling genes predicted to affect nitrogen use efficiency (NUE),
through effects on component traits of NUE from nitrogen assimilation through in
planta metabolism. These predicted target regulatory sequences and genes will be
validated in sorghum using innovative protocols for CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing
to manipulate the promoters of high-priority gene targets, resulting in
expression changes of these genes. Lines confirmed to carry misexpressing
alleles will be characterized across development under different levels of
nitrogen deficit stress using nondestructive, high throughput phenotyping
techniques. Plants exhibiting phenomic changes under N deficit stress will be
analyzed for variation in their gene expression networks to understand their
roles in regulating sorghum's responses to N deficit stress. The outcome of this
program holds great potential to expand our knowledge on N responsive gene
regulatory networks and associated gene function in sorghum and closely related
C4 grasses. It can also serve as a model for understanding other complex
agronomic traits through gene network manipulation. This project will contribute
to research infrastructure capacity building by cross-training and motivating
students and post-docs to explore strategies to improve the rate of genetic
gains in crops by understanding how genomic and phenomic approaches can be
integrated using cutting edge genomic, molecular, and whole-plant
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.