* 1826940
* Identifying Cross-talk between Nitrogen and Manganese Redox Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 06/30/2021
* USD 563,575.00

Aquatic environments such as wetlands are natural settings in which many
chemical elements undergo transformations that play critical roles in Earth's
biogeochemical cycles. This research will focus on developing a more detailed
understanding of natural reactions between two important elements that undergo
such chemical transformations: nitrogen and manganese. Reactions between these
elements in aquatic environments have implications for the mobilization of
nutrients and metal contaminants in natural waters, the production of gases that
play important roles in Earth's atmosphere-climate system, as well as
implications for reactions that occurred during early Earth history before the
formation of the modern atmosphere. The research will provide training and
mentoring opportunities for a graduate student and postdoctoral scholar, and
will contribute to the education of undergraduate summer student fellows at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The researchers will collaborate with the
Boston Green Academy to provide science presentations and teaching materials to
science teachers, giving a variety of students from underrepresented groups
opportunities to participate in research experiences in the Earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will shed new light on the
relatively poorly understood coupling of redox reactions between nitrogen (N)
and manganese (Mn) in aquatic ecosystems. Although thermodynamic conditions are
generally favorable for coupled reactions between N and Mn, evidence for the
occurrence of such reactions has remained enigmatic. This research will revisit
previously hypothesized reactions between Mn and N, armed with new tools for
both Mn and N speciation and isotopic behavior such as advanced soluble and
solid-phase Mn-speciation, multi-isotope analyses and flow-through sediment
incubations. These techniques will be used to examine abiotic oxidation dynamics
of N species by Mn(III)-ligand complexes and other environmentally relevant
forms of Mn in naturally dynamic redox zones. The research team will examine the
role of reactive forms of Mn such as Mn(III)-ligand complexes and disordered
Mn(III/IV) oxides in abiotic transformation of N, and how these abiotic
reactions are controlled by the biological production of reactive intermediate
species of both N and Mn. The specific objectives are to quantify reaction
kinetics and associated isotope effects during oxidation of reduced N species,
determine the influence of natural dissolved organic carbon on these reactions,
identify reactions between N and Mn intermediates formed by microbes, and
examine coupled Mn and N reactions under natural conditions. By bringing new
tools to understand these reactions in naturally dynamic redox zones, these
results will expand our burgeoning understanding of these reactions, with
important implications for aquatic biogeochemistry, fate and transport of
natural and anthropogenic nitrogen, impacts of dual isotope signatures of
nitrate, mobilization of contaminants and nutrients, production of N-bearing
greenhouse gases, and catalysis of early Earth reactions before the Great
Oxidation Event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.