* 1826962
* WORKSHOP: Support for Travel to Participate in the ACM Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI) 2018 Conference and Student Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Wai-Tat Fu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to provide financial support for up to 15 graduate students (all
from U. S. universities and working towards either their Master's degree or a
Doctorate) to attend the 2018 International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces (IUI 2018), to be held March 7-11 in Tokyo, Japan, and to participate
in a full-day Student Consortium (workshop) that will be held on March 9.
Sponsored by ACM, the annual IUI conferences represent the growing interest in
next-generation intelligent interactive user interfaces. Attracting 200-300
attendees, they are the premier forum where researchers from academia and
industry worldwide who work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) come together to exchange insights and to
present outstanding research and applications whose goal is to make the
computerized world a more amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the focus is not
so much on making the computer smart all by itself, but rather on making the
interaction between computers and people smarter; and unlike traditional HCI,
there is a focus on solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and
emerging technologies such as natural language understanding, brain-computer
interfaces, and gesture recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions
not only from computer science but also from related fields such as psychology,
behavioral science, cognitive science, computer graphics, design, the arts, etc.
IUI 2018 will be the 23rd conference in the series; more information about the
conference is available online at http://iui.acm.org/2018. This funding will
enable attendance at the IUI conference by students who might otherwise be
unable to do so for financial reasons. It will enhance the educational
experience of funded participants, by bringing them into contact with leading
researchers in the field and by exposing them to the lively discussion during
the course of the conference that often leads to opportunities for career
advancement. The quality of the conference itself will be enhanced as well,
thanks to a broadening of the base of institutions represented and increased
diversity of participants. The rich exchange of ideas at IUI has previously
proven to be a valuable source of ideas for future research, as well as leading
to collaborative efforts; this funding will extend the opportunities for
collaboration and provide intellectual stimulus to programs that have previously
sent few or no representatives to this conference. The organizing committee has
undertaken to proactively recruit student participants from schools that have
not traditionally been well represented in the IUI community. Women and students
who are members of underrepresented groups will be particularly encouraged to
participate. To further assure diversity, no more than two students will be
accepted from any given institution.

The IUI 2018 Student Consortium will build on the success of previous such
events. The heart of the Consortium will be a full-day workshop on March 9.
Student trainees will be afforded exposure to their new research community by
giving a 20-30 presentation on their work and receiving feedback from peers and
a panel of senior researchers. A group lunch and dinner will encourage social
interaction among the student cohort and informal personal interaction with the
mentors. The students' work will also be featured during the main conference in
a poster session, where they will gain additional experience explaining their
work to others in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.