* 1826719
* Collaborative Research: Louis Stokes Regional Center of Excellence: Louis Stokes Midwest Regional Center of Excellence for Broadening Participation in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Christopher Botanga, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,323,121.00

The Louis Stokes Midwest Regional Center of Excellence (LSMRCE) for Broadening
Participation in STEM is a partnership of Chicago State University (CSU) and
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). As co-founders of the
pilot, Louis Stokes Midwest Center of Excellence (LSMCE),CSU and IUPUI extend
the partnership to include the Ohio State University (OSU) and Fermi
National&lt;br/&gt;Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) in order to deepen
collaborations with 6 Midwestern Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation Programs (LSAMPs), while strengthening existing partnerships with
non-LSAMP institutions that are LSMCE collaborators. The LSMRCE also aims to
become a regional backbone support organization for information dissemination
that contributes to the development of the NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (INCLUDES) National Network. The LSMRCE will develop, house, and
distribute results of regional efforts in the collection, analysis, and
assessment of best practices as recommended in the LSAMP model. It will also
contribute to fundamental research in the science of broadening participation
(BP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will implement four strategic plans:
1) Organize annual Broadening Participation conferences with BP professional
development opportunities for students, faculty, and program administrators of
both LSAMP and non-LSAMP institutions; 2) Provide social&lt;br/&gt;science
research guidance and support to promote BP research collaborations among STEM
faculty on LSAMP and non-LSAMP campuses; and further investigate the
contributing factors that facilitate sustainable partnerships/research
collaborations for improving URM academic success; 3) Demonstrate tangible
outcomes of key characteristics of the LSAMP model by providing URMs at LSAMP
and non-LSAMP institutions with research skill development, mentoring, and
professionalization activities; and 4)Develop a virtual BP resource center using
features of the LSMCE website to disseminate current program information as well
as evidence-based, high-impact BP practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSMRCE
will obtain significant new knowledge on factors that sustain institutional
collaborations that advance URM student achievement in STEM majors at Midwestern
non-LSAMP campuses. The engagement in BP research collaborations of the faculty
will help generate the needed data to assess STEM education efficacy that
reaches across all communities of learners who will graduate and
advance&lt;br/&gt;their education in STEM. The LSMRCE will become a national
model for fostering connections that are essential for expanding the INCLUDES
Network. The annual BP conferences, available on-line resources about LSAMP
programming, and other analytics on high-impact practices in STEM teaching and
learning will enable practitioners and researchers to design effective
strategies for increasing the number of URMs who graduate with STEM degrees.
LSMRCE summer research interns at Fermilab will be tracked and the impacts of
collaborative mentoring on student persistence and advancement in STEM will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the NSF INCLUDES
program which focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work
for inclusive change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.