* 1826892
* Competition in a Post-conflict Landscape
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Robert Hayden, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 259,207.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social scientists who study the
aftermath of civil war have found that "post-war" does not necessarily mean
"post-conflict." While official reconciliation processes move forward, conflict
may be pursued covertly as former adversaries jockey for position in post-war
landscapes. The research supported by this award asks if this phenomenon is
inevitable: is the persistence of antagonism an example of path dependency? Path
dependency is the theory that the past lays down institutional, technological,
and cognitive structures and patterns that act as constraints on future
behaviors. But questions remain about how this happens, how these constrained
behaviors emerge, the feedback mechanisms that reinforce them, and the degree to
which they can be interrupted and redirected. Post-conflict societies provide a
unique opportunity to address these questions because efforts at social change,
resistance to these efforts, and outcomes can be tracked in the micro-processes
of daily life. Findings from this research will be important for theorists
studying barriers to policy implementation and for policy makers who want their
policies to succeed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by
legal anthropologist, Dr. Robert Hayden (University of Pittsburgh). The
researcher has identified post-conflict Bosnia-Herzegovina as an appropriate
site to conduct the research. After the civil war (1992-1995), the territory was
divided constitutionally into regions, in each of which one of the three
competing ethno-religious communities is dominant demographically although
multiple communities are present. The basic science research question is whether
there is evidence of path dependence in newly emerging intergroup relationships.
The researcher will collect data on claims of heritage rights and the recreation
of destroyed landscapes to test the hypothesis that reconstruction and
replacement have been strategic rather than neutral and that they reinforce pre-
war relationships rather than creating new ones. The researcher and his team
will collect data on site destruction and rebuilding; quantitative measures of
site importance and dominance, including centrality and size; and community
interactions. They will employ a mixed-methods approach including archival
research, analysis of official records, stakeholder interviews, and geo-spatial
mappings. The primary focus will be historically antagonistic communities but
the sample also will include a neutral control group. The research will support
international research collaborations and opportunities for students. The
results of the research will enrich social science theory of constraints on
behavioral modifications in post-conflict contexts, and will serve interests of
national security through better understanding of conflict persistence in multi-
ethnic societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.