* 1826777
* RII Track-2FEC: Genomic Ecology of Coastal Organisms (GECO)? A Systems-Based Research and Training Program in Genome-Phenome Relationships in the Wild
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Serita Frey, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,998,680.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Research and Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award harnesses
complementary research expertise at the Universities of New Hampshire and Maine
for an integrated study of genomes to phenomes in natural systems. The project
team will develop a research and training program in the Genomic Ecology of
Coastal Organisms (GECO) to advance understanding of the genetic bases of
organismal responses to natural environments. The program integrates genomic
technologies with field-based ecological and observational data of six species
of tidal marsh birds inhabiting a harsh environmental gradient in a coastal
ecosystem. The research will reveal insights into the genetic basis of
adaptation at a genome-wide level and the links between genotype, phenotype and
environment in the context of resulting organismal performance and fitness.
These are key questions in evolutionary biology today, which can only be pursued
through studies like this one of wild populations in dynamic, natural
environments. The project will thereby advance understanding of long-standing
questions in evolutionary biology as well as provide novel insight into genetic
elements and mechanisms that underlie organismal resilience and adaptive
capacity. The latter are important for predicting organismal responses to
rapidly changing environments. To facilitate societal benefit, conservation
implications of this project will be transferred directly to resource managers
and other stakeholders. The project provides extensive training and mentoring
opportunities for the team aimed at producing professionals adept at systems-
level thinking at all biological scales. Educational activities include the
development of a new graduate training certificate in ecological genomics and at
the undergraduate-level, the development of active-learning modules aimed at
addressing known conceptual difficulties in genetics, ecology, and evolution.
Additional outreach programs will provide high school students from
underrepresented low-income groups and rural areas with learning experiences
focused on ecological adaptation and coastal ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;One of the
largest gaps in our understanding of genome to phenome relationships is how
these interactions are driven and constrained by environmental forces in free-
living organisms. This collaborative project between the Universities of New
Hampshire and Maine addresses this knowledge gap through a research and training
program in the Genomic Ecology of Coastal Organisms (GECO), focused on advancing
understanding of the genetic bases of organismal responses to natural
environments. The systems-level approach of this program links genomic,
transcriptomic, and phenotypic data to organismal performance and fitness, using
six tidal marsh bird species undergoing parallel evolutionary processes in a
dynamic coastal ecosystem. The research will advance understanding of long-
standing questions in evolutionary biology about the genetic bases and genomic
architecture of adaptation, the influence of phylogeny on parallel evolution,
and the relative roles of phenotypic plasticity and genetic adaptation. It will
also provide novel insight into genetic elements and mechanisms that underlie
organismal resilience and adaptive capacity, as well as the extended effects of
genome and phenome variation for ecological communities and ecosystems. The
resulting insights are needed for predicting organismal responses to rapidly
changing future environments, a critical and timely scientific goal with
important societal benefits. Conservation implications of this research will be
rapidly transferred to stakeholders from state, federal, and non-governmental
organization with a focus on translating research into on-the-ground actions.
The program provides training and mentoring for early career faculty,
postdoctoral associates and numerous graduate and undergraduate students in
ecological genomics. It creates a graduate certificate in Genome to Phenome
Adaptation; active-learning, systems-level teaching modules for undergraduate
genetics, ecology, and evolution courses; and STEM pedagogical training for
post-docs and early career faculty. A Diversity Action Plan guides recruitment
and retention of program members and STEM-based outreach programs will expose
high school students from underrepresented low-income groups and rural areas to
scientific tools and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.