* 1826954
* Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Lonnie Sharpe, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,549,230.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program is an
alliance-based program. The overall goal of the program is to assist
universities and colleges in diversifying the nation's science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce by increasing the number of STEM
baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to populations historically
underrepresented in these disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (TLSAMP) is to
significantly increase the quality and quantity of baccalaureate degrees awarded
to underrepresented minority students who major in a science, technology,
engineering or mathematics (STEM) discipline. TLSAMP is a strategic
collaboration of 10 institutions of higher education which began with six public
and private institutions - LeMoyne Owen College, Middle Tennessee State
University, Tennessee State University, the University of Memphis, University of
Tennessee-Knoxville, and Vanderbilt University. TLSAMP was expanded by adding
four additional colleges and universities, that is, Fisk University, Tennessee
Technological University, Nashville State Community College, and Southwest
Tennessee Community College. TLSAMP partners share a collective interest in
recruiting, cultivating, and developing the next generation of scientists,
leaders, and a highly skilled workforce to ensure not only Tennessee's economic
prosperity but also America's global preeminence. Over the next five years, the
Alliance will increase its efforts to recruit minority STEM students, implement
research-based strategies to retain students to graduation, and increase the
number of minority STEM graduates that transition to graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a mixed-method exploratory sequential design, the
TLSAMP Alliance proposes to conduct a research study that examines the factors
involved in mentoring students from underrepresented groups (URG) in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics and who are at the critical retention to
graduation academic stage. This research study will provide insights and
understanding of mentoring as a strategy that fundamentally addresses the
persistent need for increased participation and support of URG in STEM education
and employment in STEM careers. Student mentees, their mentors, Alliance PIs,
and coordinators will participate as respondents in the proposed
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.