* 1826839
* CNH-L: People, Place, and Payments in Complex Human-Environment Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Douglas Stow, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,450,000.00

This project seeks to advance the understanding of the impact of payments for
ecosystem services (PES), a global conservation approach that incentivizes users
of essential natural resources to protect the related ecosystems. In recent
decades these programs have increased in popularity, and an increasing number of
parallel PES programs have been deployed to mitigate environmental degradation
and the over-exploitation of natural resources. PES programs are often
implemented concurrently in the same temporal and spatial context, yet little
understanding exists about the mechanisms, pathways, and social and ecological
effects of such interacting, parallel PES programs. This project will analyze
how and why parallel PES programs interact with one another and with the
corresponding coupled natural and human system. This work will result in
generating insight into the potential, often unintended, social and ecological
consequences. PES programs may impact human migration, investment in education,
and other connections between local households and the physical environment.
Furthermore, the project will address how such programs may affect changes in
land cover, land use, and species habitat over time. This project will benefit
society by addressing the interactions between development conservation policy
and the effectiveness of governmental investments made in PES programs. This
project's broader impacts also extend to innovative education and outreach
activities that mentor K-12 students and their teachers, creative use of new
geospatial technologies for effective monitoring and conservation of endangered
wildlife, development of a student-centered pedagogy that enhances understanding
of complex human-environment systems, and the development of a related movie and
a web-based PES Center to disseminate project results. The research will train
graduate students and foster collaboration between U.S. and Chinese scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand the reciprocal relationship
between parallel PES programs, shedding light on the related social and
ecological consequences of these programs over space and time. The PIs will
answer the following questions: (1) Through what pathways or mediating variables
do parallel PES programs, through their influence on human and natural
subsystems, affect one another? (2) Where and to what extent do parallel PES
programs lead to net changes in the environment? (3) How has and will the human-
environment system evolve over space and time given these interventions? Within
the human subsystem the PIs will focus on the impacts of migration and job
opportunities, as well as the educational investments of participating
households. Within the natural subsystem, the PIs will document and monitor land
cover and land use change, as well as occupancy and habitat of major mammal
species using an unmanned aerial vehicle, camera trapping, and satellite imaging
techniques. Lastly, the PIs will develop a complex systems framework, which
consists of geospatial and statistical analyses, structural equation modeling,
and development of an agent-based model (ABM) integrating qualitative and
quantitative data and models across various spatial and temporal scales.
Although this project will use data from Fanjingshan National Nature Reserve
(FNNR) in China, the research will provide insights and approaches for
understanding the mechanisms behind parallel PES programs in many coupled
natural and human systems, substantially improving the science, technology, and
practical effectiveness of PES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.