* 1826544
* Sequence Resources for Cotton, a Model System for Allopolyploid Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Jonathan Wendel, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,491,568.00

Cotton has one of the lowest amounts of genetic diversity of any of the major
crop plants in the U.S. Much of the natural genetic diversity contained in the
wild was lost during the thousands of years of breeding since the original
founding population. Developments in DNA sequencing technology have enabled new
strategies to quantify and characterize this missing genetic diversity. This
project will select and re-sequence 506 accessions of cotton (and its wild,
diploid relatives). These DNA sequences will be used to identify individual
plants that contain unique genetic diversity. The understanding of genetic
diversity will illuminate basic biological processes in cotton and will provide
genomic resources for improvement of the domestic cotton crop. This project will
also provide summer research training internships for teachers (grades 7-12) at
both Brigham Young University and Iowa State University. The program will
introduce the conceptual and experimental foundations of genome analysis
strategies. Teachers will then be able to share their knowledge of genome
sequencing with their high school and middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amount and apportionment of genetic diversity
in domesticated plants and their wild relatives are key concerns for crop
improvement. This project will re-sequence 506 accessions of cotton that include
a broad representation of the commercially important allopolyploid (AD-genome)
species G. hirsutum and G. barbadense as well as related wild species
representing other allopolyploids and progenitor diploid (A, D) genomes.
Sequence reads generated through high-coverage sequencing of DNA libraries for
each accession will be mapped to the reference cotton genome using a variety of
computational tools to begin to identify and quantify nucleotide variation along
chromosomes of various accessions. Population genomics analyses will reveal
unique alleles, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), copy number variants
(CNVs) in accessions within the public cotton germplasm collection. Using this
information, a pan-genome of cotton will be synthesized to better understand the
scope, pace, and pattern of genomic variations that arise during speciation,
population differentiation, and domestication and breeding. All project outcomes
will be made available to the public through a project website. Sequence data
will be accessible through long-term repositories such as GenBank, the NCBI's
SRA, and Phytozome. Data will also be available long-term through CottonGen
(http://www.cottongen.org/), a community genomics, genetics and breeding
database for cotton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.