* 1827414
* North American Native Potato Domestication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Kinder, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 222,024.00

How are wild plants transformed into crops? The process of domestication is
essential for producing nutritious foods that can be grown, harvested, stored
and eaten. It is an interactive process, with humans transporting and
cultivating desirable species, thus creating the base of the food chain and a
great diversity of plant forms. The common potato, for example, was domesticated
over 7,000 years ago in the high Andes and is now the third most important crop
in the world, comprising over 4,500 varieties. And although domestication has
occurred and been studied in hundreds of species, only a few plants native to
North America were ever domesticated and none of those are from west of the
Mississippi. Recent evidence, however, suggests that a novel potato species,
known as the Four Corners Potato (Solanum jamesii Torr.) was manipulated by
ancient people sometime during the last 12,000 years. The tubers might have been
an important food and energy source because of their nutritional qualities,
reliable productivity and ability to persist in the soil. Furthermore,
populations of this species now occupy atypical habitats among and within the
great pueblos of the Southwest, evidence that indigenous farming practices
included this species. Therefore, a collaborative archaeological and biological
approach is well-suited to provide insight on the initial stages (use, transport
and manipulation) in the domestication process. In the broader context,
detecting these stages will challenge understanding of foraging strategies and a
long-established scientific paradigm regarding agricultural origins and food
choices among hunter-gatherers in North America by identifying the Four Corners
as a hitherto unknown center of plant domestication. There are no other places
in North America that can claim such a long heritage with a local food.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lisbeth Louderback, Natural History Museum of Utah
(University of Utah) and Dr. Bruce Pavlik, Red Butte Garden and Arborteum
(University of Utah), along with colleagues at the USDA Potato Genebank, Ohio
Northern University, and Utah Din Bikyah, will test the hypothesis that tubers
of a native potato (Solanum jamesii Torr.) were used, transported, and
manipulated sometime during the Holocene in the American Southwest. Use will be
characterized by examining the microscopic residues of potato starch that
persist on groundstone tools from archaeological sites in the Four Corners
region. Genetic and population techniques will be used to identify the unique
signatures of transport from one place to another in the ancient world. The
evidence for possible manipulation will be gathered using chemical and
physiological analyses, in addition to genetic markers, to detect selection for
taste, cold tolerance and the loss of tuber dormancy. Finally, the fading
traditions of the Four Corners potato, kept alive into the 21st Century by the
very last generation of knowledgeable stewards, will be documented. Tended only
in a few fields by Native Americans and pioneer descendants, this project hopes
to generate a new interest and a new sense of stewardship for this remarkable
plant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.