* 1827733
* PFI-RP: Automating building code compliance checking and modular construction through interoperable building information modeling technology.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Nora El-Gohary, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,108,003.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project includes
leapfrogging the United States into a high-technology leadership role in
construction, thereby increasing our economic competitiveness. The architecture,
engineering, and construction (AEC) industry has been implementing building
information modeling (BIM) technology for years. However, current offerings
restrict data exchange between platforms. This creates inefficient siloes during
the building design and construction process that annually cost the capital
facilities industry $15.8 billion. This project will provide the first
commercial BIM system that puts interoperability at its core, helping to
significantly mitigate these industry losses, using a new data-driven software
development (DSD) technology. By applying this technology to building code
compliance checking and construction automation, the health and welfare of the
American public will be advanced through better quality and more efficiently
built facilities. To help develop a more globally competitive American STEM
workforce, the results of this project will be incorporated into existing
undergraduate/graduate courses, and a 'Construction Ready' training program.
Ultimately, this innovation will enhance the understanding and application of
BIM technology to help the building and construction industry achieve improved
efficiency and reduced time, cost, and human-induced errors. The R&amp;D results
will also transfer well to the infrastructure domain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to develop an interoperable BIM prototype system for
automating building code compliance checking and modular construction analysis.
This will bridge a critical gap in the AEC sector by connecting the currently-
isolated BIM applications involved in the design and construction phases of an
AEC project. This PFI project builds upon the DSD technology and the automated
code compliance checking technology developed by the PIs. The DSD technology
enables BIM interoperability by using invariant features of objects in BIM,
which is radically different from existing approaches that rely on
standardization or term-based semantics. It is the key to achieving seamless
interoperability between different applications. The development of the
prototype system will use an iterative method to constantly improve its
performance. The planned prototype system will be tested in checking building
designs with quantitative requirements of International Building Codes, and
analyzing the design for modular construction automation. A 100% recall of
missing information and noncompliance cases is sought after. New knowledge will
be created about the implementation of the DSD technology so that it can be
better utilized to develop other BIM-based applications and eventually lead to a
comprehensive BIM solution with seamless interoperability between all
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.