* 1827444
* Ship Operations - R/V ROGER REVELLE
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 38,949,523.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) proposes to continue operating the
research vessel Roger Revelle to support NSF-funded scientific research for the
five-year period 2018 -2022. Roger Revelle is a capable, well-equipped general-
purpose Global Class research vessel that is owned by the US Navy and has been
operated by SIO since the ship's introduction into the US Academic Research
Fleet in 1996. As a large shared-use facility scheduled within the collaborative
framework of the University-National-Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS),
Roger Revelle will host scientists from across the United States to undertake
research in a variety of disciplines. The ship will be operated in a manner that
promotes safety, capability and efficiency in order to maximize NSF's investment
in the ship and in the programs that are conducted on board. SIO employs a
disciplined approach to vessel maintenance, regulatory compliance, foreign
clearance, crewing and logistics so that scientific missions can be completed
successfully and on schedule&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation, measurement,
and collection of samples and data are accomplished on a global scale by
scientific missions aboard Roger Revelle. SIO-operated ships have played a
critical role in the exploration of our planet since 1907, and continue to
contribute significantly to the U.S. ocean research effort. SIO's ship
operations department supports NSF core values of scientific excellence,
organizational excellence, learning, inclusiveness and accountability. The
vessel management and operations proposed here enable transformative scientific
research in physical and biological processes in the natural environment upon
which human well-being depends. The intellectual merit of this proposal is
amplified by the combined merit of research projects undertaken by scientists on
board. During 2018, Roger Revelle will support eight different NSF-sponsored
programs in the Pacific Ocean in marine ecology, marine chemistry, ocean
observing, seismology, volcanology, earthquake and tsunami hazards, physical
oceanography, and plate tectonics. NSF-sponsored research (including Ocean
Observing Initiative research) will account for 63% (155 days) of Roger
Revelle's work this year. The remainder of the work will be supported by NASA
(42 days, 17%), the Navy (16 days, 7%), the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(10 days, 4%), and other academic institutional or Navy sources (23 days, 9%).
Each scientific program contributes its own distinctive intellectual
merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIO's management of Roger Revelle enables research,
education and training that advance discovery and understanding while achieving
far-reaching broader impacts. The proposed management supports strongly
collaborative, multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional use of the vessel.
Through UNOLS, SIO coordinates the shared use of Roger Revelle with scientists
and funding agencies so shipboard capabilities meet the current and anticipated
needs of the community. SIO is committed to promoting a climate
of&lt;br/&gt;fairness, cooperation, and professionalism on board that embraces
diversity, equity, and inclusion as essential ingredients of scientific
discovery, technical development, and learning. SIO's operation of Roger Revelle
leverages institutional programs that complement NSF's mission to promote
achievement and progress in science, engineering and education for the benefit
of the nation. For example, SIO's UC Ship Funds Program enables graduate and
undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers and early career faculty to
pursue independent research and instruction aboard Roger Revelle via an internal
peer-reviewed competitive process for ship time. The vessel is integral to SIO's
K 12 education program "In the Footsteps of Roger Revelle", which uses
oceanography to teach physical science to economically disadvantaged seventh-
and eighth-grade students. As a broadly-subscribed shared-use facility, Roger
Revelle similarly contributes to the education, training and outreach missions
of scientists from institutions across America who conduct their research and
educational programs on board. As proposed here, Roger Revelle will continue to
serve NSF by safely, capably and efficiently facilitating multidisciplinary
scientific research to advance our understanding of our oceans and
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.