* 1827321
* PFI-TT: Translation of a Microcoil-Based Stimulating Array for Cochlear Implants
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Pamela Bhatti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to accelerate the
manufacture of a hearing assistive device, a cochlear implant. In contrast to
hearing aids that simply make sounds louder, a cochlear implant is surgically
placed into the human ear and activates the hearing (auditory) nerve in a way
that the brain perceives as sound. Presently, cochlear implants are used less
than they can be in the United States, and even more children could benefit from
the device. The reasons for the limited utilization include awareness and costs
of the device, surgery and follow up care. The pursuit of this PFI project will
offer a new way to make cochlear implants with microcoils. Furthermore, by
creating the devices in a way similar to printed electronics, dramatic cost
reduction may be realized, along with the natural integration with conventional
cochlear implant technologies. This project will also improve the awareness of
cochlear implants through outreach and engagement of undergraduate and graduate
students, with a focus on underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project pursues a novel method to develop microcoils that can fit
within the human ear as part of a cochlear implant, the cochlear array. To
produce this device, we plan to overcome technology transfer barriers through a
novel manufacturing approach relying upon recent advances in additive
manufacturing and flexible electronics to rapidly write (print) conductive
traces on a polymeric substrate in three-dimension. We then encapsulate the
device fully in a biocompatible polymer to realize proof-of-concept microcoils
for bench and in-vitro testing. These devices will enable us to overcome the
existing knowledge gap in microcoil dimensions, proximity to target auditory
neurons, and stimulus parameters through bench and neural cell culture testing.
The scientific merit is the demonstration that microcoils can elicit focused
neural activity, via magnetically induced electric fields, and enable selective
activation of auditory neurons. We will have the baseline data upon which to
build our technical case for commercialization. A strong multidisciplinary team
consisting of engineers, clinicians, commercialization mentor and domain expert
collaborators will partner to pursue translation with the goal of achieving a
life-changing intervention for children and adults suffering from severe-to-
profound hearing loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.