* 1827091
* Excellence in Research: Teaching Problem-Solving and Deductive Skills to K-12 Students Through a Forensics Course Based on Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Frances Dancer, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Malicious and criminal acts occur every day using technologies such as mobile
phones. There is a shortage of trained, workforce-ready forensics analysts who
are skilled and knowledgeable of smartphone use, cybercrimes, and mobile
cybersecurity. This project explores an organizing structure to conduct forensic
analysis of mobile phones to address the gap between proliferation of crimes
using smartphones as tools and preparation of skilled analysts to address such
crimes. The investigator will test several research questions to explore models
to isolate user actions such as file deletions and modifications. The resulting
process and framework will be independent of model and type of phone. This
investigator and senior personnel will also implement a summer camp for middle
school students, grades 6- 8, and will develop a course in mobile digital
forensics for undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses
on enhancing an existing process model, Platform Independent Process Model
(PIFPM), as a framework for analysis of smartphones, regardless of make or
model. Experiments are proposed to resolve functionality by contrast, comparing
operating systems, state changes via file paths, and classifying degrees of
contamination using statistical models. A Mobile Device Forensics Detective Camp
will be developed as a joint effort between Jackson State University and the
Jackson Public Schools district, with a focus on middle school grades 6-8.
Undergraduate research assistants will participate in a Near-Peer mentoring
joint program between the university and the school district during the summer
camp. A course will be developed for junior- and senior-level undergraduates in
the curriculum. The evaluation plan includes tracking computer science majors at
JSU in terms of the impact of the activities on increases of underrepresented
students, especially women. Additionally, a logical model is provided that
aligns inputs and activities with impacts on middle school students? perceptions
of computer science, computer engineering, and electrical engineering, as well
as performance on selected metrics from the school
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.