* 1827936
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Research and Research Training at Barnard College
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Christian Rojas, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Michael Campbell from Barnard
College and colleagues Christian Rojas, Dina Merrer and Marisa Buzzeo have
acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with an automatic sampler and low-
temperature capabilities. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts female students at this institution, who are
trained in research and then go on to PhD programs at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this 400 MHz spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
studies on the syntheses of transition metal-based molecules capable of
exhibiting cooperative interactions and in the development of metal-catalyzed
amidoglycosylation reactions to prepare stereo-varied 2-amino sugars. The
spectrometer is helpful in understanding the influence of nonstatistical
dynamics on reactions of carbenes with strained carbon-carbon pi bonds and in
carrying out electrochemical studies of selenium-containing biological
molecules. The instrument also serves researchers developing catalysts for green
chemistry and investigating mechanisms of metalloenzyme-mediated alkane
transformations. The spectrometer benefits studies of small-molecules that
inhibit the cytoskeletal regulatory proteins formins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.