* 1827851
* Household Risk Perceptions and Hazard Adjustments to Earthquakes in Oklahoma
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Alex Greer, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 340,570.00

This research improves our understanding of the risk perceptions that people
have regarding techna hazards (i.e., a natural disaster triggered by technology)
with a focus on earthquakes in Oklahoma. Earthquakes are a relatively new
phenomenon in Oklahoma, and have become increasingly common since 2008.
Residents lack experience dealing with this type of hazard and do not know how
to protect themselves or their property in the event of an earthquake. This
scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science and to advance our national welfare. In this case, the
benefits will be information for emergency managers to develop plans and
campaigns to help residents adjust to earthquakes , taking into account the
special needs associated with different demographic groups. The project supports
education and promotes diversity through outreach activities aimed at recruiting
and retaining under-represented students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines the fundamental understanding of risk in relation to disasters
that blur the line between natural and technological. It provides emergency
managers with key information they can use to encourage local households to
adopt hazard adjustment measures. It builds upon existing hazard adjustment
theories and a recent pilot study to address five research objectives: 1) to
understand Oklahomans' view of earthquakes, risk perceptions, and levels of
adjustment in different earthquake risk zones, 2) to investigate differences in
household earthquake hazard adjustment levels across different demographic
groups, 3) to understand household views of earthquake triggers (endogenous vs.
exogenous), 4) to discover ways researchers can increase their mail survey
response rate, and 5) to develop a theory that better describes how households
adjust to hazards. By capturing household perceptions of earthquake hazard
risks, origins, and implications, along with their understanding of their
ability and responsibility to address these threats, this project provides a
critical complement to technical assessments of these
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.