* 1827452
* Collaborative Research: Illuminating the Cascadia plate boundary zone and accretionary wedge with a regional-scale ultra-long offset multi-channel seismic study
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Suzanne Carbotte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 10/31/2022
* USD 768,064.00

At the Cascadia Subduction Zone, the slow ongoing descent of the Juan de Fuca
plate beneath the northwestern coast of North America has generated large
earthquakes and associated tsunami in the past. Geologic records suggest that
some sections of the subduction zone fault or "megathrust", which extends ~35-90
miles seaward from the coasts of northern California all the way to southern
British Columbia, slipped less than other sections during the last large
earthquake (1700 AD), and that in some prior EQ only parts of the subduction
zone ruptured. Whether these along-margin variations may persist in future EQ
has important implications for quantifying earthquake and tsunami hazards within
the heavily populated Pacific Northwest margin. Geologic structure such as
seamounts and other topographic features in the descending Juan de Fuca plate,
the structure and properties of the thick folded and faulted package of
sediments that forms above the subduction zone fault, or the properties of
megathrust fault rocks, could contribute to these along-margin variations.
However the current observations are limited and allow for a wide range of
possible future earthquake scenarios. Modern marine seismic reflection imaging
techniques provide the best tools available for illuminating a subduction zone
to the depths of the earthquake source region and below. The overall goal of
this project is to acquire a regional grid of modern marine seismic reflection
data spanning the entire Cascadia Subduction zone to image how the geologic
structure and properties of this subduction zone vary both along and across the
margin. This project will serve the national interest in that the acquired data
will form a foundational dataset for future initiatives focused on hazard
assessment in the U.S. Pacific Northwest, including for an earthquake early
warning network and deep drilling to sample the fault zone rocks, and it will
promote the advancement of science by providing a new regional framework
relevant for the wide range of multi-disciplinary onshore and offshore studies
conducted in this region over the past several
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study will use ultra-long-
offset multi-channel seismic (MCS) data to characterize subducting plate and
accretionary wedge structure, and properties of the megathrust, to address the
following specific questions: 1. Are there any systematics in the structure and
properties of the incoming Juan de Fuca plate, the megathrust zone, and
accretionary wedge associated with inferred paleo-rupture segmentation? 2. Are
there down-dip variations in megathrust geometry and reflectivity indicative of
transitions in fault properties, and what are the properties of the potentially
tsunamigenic shallow portion of the megathrust? Long 15-km-offset MCS data will
be acquired along twenty 2-D profiles at 50-100 km spacing oriented
perpendicular to the margin and located to provide coverage in areas inferred to
be paleo-rupture patches and their boundary zones. The survey will also include
one continuous strike line along the continental shelf centered roughly over
gravity-inferred fore-arc basins to investigate possible segmentation near the
down-dip limit of the seismogenic zone. The margin normal lines will extend
approximately 50 km seaward of the deformation front to image the region of
subduction bend faulting in the incoming oceanic plate, and landward of the
deformation front to as close to the shoreline as can be safely maneuvered. The
acquired data will be designed to characterize 1) the deformation and topography
of the incoming plate, 2) the depth, topography and reflectivity of the
megathrust, 3) sediment properties and amount of sediment subduction, 4) the
structure and evolution of the accretionary wedge, including geometry and
reflectivity of fault networks, and how these properties vary along strike,
spanning the full length of the margin and down dip across what may be the full
width of the seismogenic zone at Cascadia. The data will be processed to pre-
stack depth migration using state-of-the art seismic processing techniques and
will be made openly available to the community, providing a high-quality data
set illuminating the regional subsurface architecture all along the Cascadia
Subduction Zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.