* 1827700
* PFI-RP: A Multi-Disciplinary Approach to Detecting Adolescent Online Risks.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Sriram Chellappan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 837,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to develop
improved social media tools to keep teens safer online. A multidisciplinary team
of researchers, clinicians, and industry partners will build, evaluate, and
commercialize state-of-the-art technologies that proactively detect adolescent
online risk behaviors, including mental health issues, sexual solicitations, and
online harassment, for the purpose of mitigating these risks and preventing
harm. The team plans to release two separate technology offerings: First, an
open source project that shares our risk detection algorithms with developers,
so that they can build upon these solutions and form a community dedicated to
promoting adolescent online safety. Second, a commercial product that combines
these risk detection algorithms into an easy-to-use and accessible service that
provides needed support and infrastructure to internet-based companies, who
ultimately facilitate the risks teens encounter online, so that they can share
in the joint responsibility of protecting the teens who use their platforms. It
is imperative that as a society we become more proactive about protect teens
from online risks, especially the most vulnerable teens who are at highest risk
of engaging in online activities that can lead to physical harm or even
death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the critical and
timely problem of adolescent online safety by leveraging a multi-disciplinary
approach of human-centered machine learning to accurately detect risks teen
encounter online. The work will be accomplished in four stages: 1) a user-
centered phase that examines the types of online risk exposure that matter most
to teens and their families. With this insight, the team will build evidence-
based adolescent online risk models that identify key dimensions and patterns of
risk. 2) a data-driven phase that draws upon these models to establish ground
truth and annotate a rich training set of teen social media data, 3) a machine-
learning phase that improves existing and builds new risk detection algorithms
that are contextualized to teens and able to detect behavioral changes over
time, and 4) a technology development phase that evaluates our solution and
commercializes it within two separate product lines. The end result will be a
suite of algorithms tailored to adolescents that detect objectionable content
within social media and identify problematic behavioral patterns or changes that
are indicative of impending risks over time. This work will enable real-time
online safety interventions that protect and empower teen internet
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.