* 1827314
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU Accelerated Vermont Advanced Computing Core
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Joshua Bongard, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2020
* USD 893,120.00

This project will enable interdisciplinary science through the acquisition of a
high-performance computer cluster, named DeepGreen. Based on cutting-edge
massively parallel graphics processing unit (GPU) technologies, DeepGreen will
be utilized by the over 300 users from six Colleges at the University of
Vermont, and throughout the Northeast. The unique hybrid architecture was
designed to optimize artificial intelligence (AI) applications and will allow
for rapid progress on problems of great societal importance. They include:
quantum computing, drug discovery and design, safe robotics, control of adaptive
crop pests, and new computer vision tools for use in the health care and
transportation industries. As an example, DeepGreen will allow the training of
neural networks on the world's largest brain imaging datasets of illicit drug
users, yielding novel health and policy strategies to combat the opioid
epidemic. A focus of the scientific and technical team is to broaden the number
of personnel able to exploit GPU hardware for problem solving, producing the
highly trained and diverse technical workforce required for the current and
future AI economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DeepGreen was designed by a team of
experts from the physical, medical, biological, computational, and agricultural
sciences, partnered with an experienced group of information technology
professionals. It will be capable of over 8 petaflops of mixed precision
calculations based on the latest NVIDIA Tesla V100 architecture with a hybrid
design allowing high bandwidth message passing across heterogeneous compute
nodes. Its extreme parallelism will facilitate research in three interconnected
areas: quantum many-body systems, molecular simulation and modeling, and deep
learning, artificial intelligence and evolutionary algorithms. DeepGreen will
forge transformative research pipelines. It will enable the study of thousands
of quantum entangled atoms, and millions of interacting components in biological
systems providing insights into structure-function mechanisms. Machine learning
and deep neural networks will exploit DeepGreen's Tensor Cores to solve diverse
problems. These problems include: the development of coarse grained potentials
for use in molecular dynamics simulations, real time dynamic processing of crowd
sourced decision making for robotics, genomic sequencing of invasive pests, and
feature recognition in medical imaging to distinguish cancerous tumors from
benign nodules. Software designed for use on DeepGreen will be released to the
public as open source, with other scientists and researchers being able to
immediately use and extend it. This project will also support the next
generation of data scientists. Training workshops focused on GPU computing and
machine learning frameworks, new university courses, and partnerships with
existing local NSF-funded graduate training initiatives, will drive broad
utilization of DeepGreen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.