* 1827460
* MRI: Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Studies of the Formation and Evolution of the Solid Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Mary Horan, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 512,231.00

Acquisition of a Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Studies of the
Formation and Evolution of the Solid Earth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic
processes operate on time scales much longer than human experience. The record
of these processes is recorded in the chemical and isotopic composition of Earth
materials. Naturally occurring radioactive elements provide the clocks that
record the sequence of events that led to the modern Earth. The primary tool
used to extract this information is the mass spectrometer. This award supports
acquisition of a mass spectrometer for the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism
(DTM) at Carnegie Institute of Science. The new instrument will measure rocks to
understand the history and nature of the Earth. It will improve the programs at
DTM and will be available for scientists and students to use. Visiting
scientists and students often lead their own geology research programs in the
U.S. and worldwide. The new instrument will further strengthen educational
opportunities for training the next generation of Earth
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund the purchase of a new
thermal ionization mass spectrometer for the geochemistry group at DTM. DTM has
a record, dating back to the 1950`s, of developing new techniques in isotope
geology and geochronology and applying them to a number of topics of importance
in the geosciences. The new mass spectrometer with high-gain faraday amplifiers
will expand current capabilities, particularly allowing measurement of smaller
sample sizes, and will also allow high-precision isotopic analysis of the decay
products of short-lived radionuclides including 142Nd, 182W and 53Cr. These
systems are providing a much clearer look at how the processes that accompanied
planet formation established major characteristics of Earth that persist to the
present day. The requested instrument will allow isolation of incompatible
measurement techniques between the new and existing instruments so that each can
produce the highest quality data possible. The new instrument also will continue
and expand training of the next generation of isotope geochemists in cutting
edge techniques that can be used to probe fundamental questions relating to
Earth formation and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.