* 1827486
* PFI-TT: Using nanotechnology to create a proof-of-concept prototype for noise-canceling in building ventilation systems.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Steven Mattson, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 246,191.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to increase the
economic competitiveness of the United States in the carbon nanotube thermophone
market, specifically beating other countries to market in the active noise
control arena. Ventilation noise in hospitals is detrimental to patient
recovery, in schools is detrimental to student learning outcomes, and in
communities is detrimental to restful sleep leading to increased stress. This
project develops a noise control product concept to significantly improve the
welfare of the American people in these areas. In addition to the beachhead
market of building ventilation, the technology has applications in the
automotive and heavy equipment industries, and in military stealth applications,
potentially protecting the lives of the American warfighter. This project will
enhance a partnership between academia and industry, potentially launching a new
start-up. This PFI-TT project will engage one graduate student and one post-
graduate student in active entrepreneurship while supporting participation of
women in science, engineering, and entrepreneurship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a prototype
for a coaxial active noise cancelation device in ventilation ducts using carbon
nanotube (CNT) thermophones. The technology provides an active silencer solution
that allows the occupant to customize sound in real time, a unique market
feature, with as much as an 80% size and weight reduction while improving air
handler efficiency over current passive silencer technologies. The coaxial
loudspeaker technology is enabled through carbon nanotechnology to create a
compact speaker with no moving parts. The product is a drop-in replacement to
existing duct systems and can be installed in line. Excessive noise from air
handlers is detrimental in schools, theaters, hospitals, and in communities near
industrial facilities. This technology aims to alleviate these noise burdens in
an economical and safe way. The prototype developed under this program will be
used to prove the technology to industry facility managers, value-added-
resellers, and building engineers, who are historically risk-averse in adopting
new technology. In particular, showing that the technology can be scaled to
large ducts (6" in diameter or more), that the device does not increase system
backpressure, and that it has significant lifespan with limited maintenance will
be key outcomes from this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.