* 1827820
* Hampton-Brandeis Partnership for Research and  Education in  Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Seth Fraden, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,600,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hampton University is a private
Historically Black College and University (HBCU) founded in 1868 with the
mission to educate African-Americans who would go out and teach and lead people
within their community. The university is a comprehensive institution of higher
education, dedicated to the promotion of learning, building of character and
preparation of promising students for positions of leadership and service. The
Hampton-Brandeis Partnership for Research &amp; Education in Materials (PREM)
between Hampton University and Brandeis University Materials Research Science
&amp; Engineering Center (MRSEC) includes the strengthening and expansion of
collaborative research and education between these two institutions. The overall
goal of the Hampton-Brandeis PREM is to increase recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of talented minority students in materials science and
engineering related fields. In addition, an important ancillary goal is to
increase the research capacity and productivity at Hampton. The PREM will
increase the number of African-American and women students in materials science
and engineering research careers and markedly expand the supply of scientists
and engineers contributing to innovation and discovery to fuel the growth of the
American economy. This will be accomplished by: (1) increasing the number of
undergraduate and graduate students participating in materials science research
activities, (2) implementing the PREM Path-to-Professorship (PtP) Post-doctoral
Fellowship Program to prepare a new cohort of early career faculty for HBCUs,
(3) developing a sustainable outreach program in materials science and
engineering for middle and high school students in the Hampton Roads region and
(4) increasing communication of materials science and engineering to audiences
across the continuum, from peers to general public, by all Hampton PREM
participants. The Hampton-Brandeis PREM's overall goal is to serve as a catalyst
for the recruitment and retention of talented students pursuing research careers
in materials science and engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hampton-Brandeis PREM research seeks to study
the photo-responsive, opto-active, and optoelectric properties of photonic
materials for microfluidic and optofluidic applications. The proposed research
for Thrust 1 aims to develop a new type of photoswitchable low-molecular-weight-
gelators by integrating dipeptide derivatives which are known to be versatile
self-assembly motifs, with a novel family of arylazopyrazole based molecular
photoswitches possessing metal binding functionality. In Thrust 2, opto-active
biomaterials will be designed and their interactions with cells will be studied
to assess their capabilities of being extracellular matrix surrogates, through
metrics such as degradation, growth factor release and adaptable/tunable
mechanical properties. Fluorogenic protease-sensitive peptide (FPSP) sequences
will be developed, and subsequently, the critical cross link density of FPSPs in
polyurethane casts will be determined to visualize/quantify cellular proteolytic
activity in real-time. Thrust 3, which focuses on opto-electronic materials,
will investigate mixed halide perovskites and semiconductors. The proposed
research on the development of mixed halide perovskites will include
purification studies of commercial precursors, solution-based synthesis, solid-
state mechano-chemical synthesis, and crystallization from the melt. Doping
studies using rare earth and transition metal ions will be performed to explore
improved long-term stability as well as extended emission wavelength coverage in
the UV-VIS and IR spectral region. In addition, the research will focus on the
characterization of silicon, compound semiconductors, and mixed halide
perovskite materials for optofluidic applications. The study aims to determine
the optical properties (emission, absorption, transparency, etc.), mechanical
properties to support microfluidic fabrication processes, and the electrical
properties for circuitry and heterogeneous interfacing of materials. Lastly,
research will be conducted to explore how the identities (science, racial and
gender) of minority materials science undergraduates and their participation in
PREM impact their recruitment, retention and achievement in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.