* 1827585
* PFI-TT: Rechargeable Battery Cell Testing with  magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Alexej Jerschow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project are the development
are to advance battery technology through an unprecedented type of diagnostic.
Batteries are at the heart of energy saving, energy efficiency, and energy
resilience initiatives, and thus directly contribute to health and wellness,
competitiveness, and national defense of the US. The participants (postdocs,
graduate students) working on this project will be trained in both science and
entrepreneurship, which will provide them with a unique preparation for their
next career steps. The new tool, based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), will
provide fast and nondestructive means of classifying, assessing, and validating
battery cells, and thus provide manufacturers and users a means of determining
changes in the inside workings of cells throughout the battery life. This new
possibility will help save costs, improve safety of battery usage (e.g. in cell
phones, cars, and airplanes), and leverage battery technology for next-
generation applications.

The proposed project will develop a proof-of-concept methodology for a new
diagnostic for batteries in a scalable version of the instrumentation and
implementation. Safety and capacity are the two most important characteristics
of advanced batteries, but battery testing is currently limited to techniques
that do not provide sufficient detail to properly assess the correct operation
of a device. The technique developed herein is based on magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), is fast, completely non-invasive and can be performed on
batteries while they are being charged or discharged. This proposal aims to
clear technological hurdles towards implementing the methodology on a small
footprint low-field and low-cost MRI instrumentation, which is an important step
towards commercialization. Furthermore, the technique will be optimized for
speed, tuned with regard to repeatability and reproducibility and will be
adjusted to provide specific battery fingerprints, which can be used to classify
cells. As a result, a proof-of-concept implementation of the technology will be
developed, and the work may result in industrial partnerships, intellectual
property development, and technology spinout.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.