* 1827263
* NSFGEO-NERC: Transforming understanding of paleomagnetic recording: Insights from experimental observations and numerical predictions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Our understanding of the way in which rocks record the geomagnetic field is
based on an analytical theory which makes the assumption that particles are
uniformly magnetized. The theory of magnetic remanence acquisition is at first
glance simple and suggests ways of studying past variations in magnetic field
vectors. When magnetic minerals cool in the Earth's magnetic field from above
high temperature, they acquire a thermal remanent magnetization (TRM). At
temperatures just below the Curie Temperature, the intrinsic atomic and
crystalline magnetic energies can be easily overcome by thermal fluctuations,
and the magnetic moment of a crystal is free to move between local energy
minima, coming into equilibrium with the external magnetic field. On cooling to
ambient temperature, there is a temperature at which the thermal energy is no
longer sufficient to overcome the barriers between local energy minima and the
magnetization is frozen in a particular configuration; the magnetization is
"blocked". The presence of weak magnetic fields (such as the Earth's) during
blocking, causes a slight bias in the net magnetic moment of an assemblage of
grains giving rise to a TRM that is parallel to and proportional in magnitude to
the applied field (assuming isotropic distribution of easy axes). From the
simple theory, natural remanence of thermal origin are nearly linearly related
to the field in which they are acquired for fields as low as the Earth's, and it
is in principle possible to estimate the strength of ancient magnetic fields. In
practice, however, recovering the ancient field strength is complicated. The
simple theory only pertains to uniformly magnetized material. Recent
breakthroughs in numerical modeling have opened new avenues for understanding
the nature of larger magnetic grains making it possible to estimate their
temporal and thermal stability. The opportunity now exists to combine
experimental and numerical approaches for a radical new understanding of
paleomagnetic recording, with the potential to transform how paleointensity
research is done, which is the goal of this project. The broader impacts of this
project include international collaboration that will be funded by NERC in the
UK, training of a named post doc and a graduate student in both modeling and
laboratory methods, broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM, development of foundational tools for the field paleomagnetism, and
creation of a database to be shared with the broader community via the MagIC
community database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific problems the
investigators wish to address are: 1) Existing theory predicts that thermal
remanence depends on a sample's cooling rate, yet there are claims in the
literature that many samples with larger grains show no cooling rate dependence.
It is unclear why there would be no cooling rate dependence, and therefore
unclear how to treat such data. 2) Existing theory also predicts that a
magnetization acquired at a temperature T should be demagnetized by zero-field
reheating to T. Failure of this "reciprocity" requirement has long been observed
but the causes and consequences are unknown. 3) Recent experiments have
demonstrated that, in contrast to the stability of remanences in small grains
over time, remanences in larger grains are unstable, exhibiting an "aging" over
only a few years that is unexpected from theory; what causes this aging is a
mystery. Solving these mysteries is key to cracking the problem of
paleointensity estimation. This proposal exploits new computational resources to
examine the process of remanence acquisition in order to transform how
paleomagnetic, and paleointensity experiments in particular, are
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.