* 1827282
* Oceanographic Technical Services, LDEO, 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 19,815,945.00

Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia University proposes to
support technical services on R/V Marcus Langseth as part of the U.S. Academic
Fleet which is scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS). R/V Langseth, a 235? seismic survey vessel purchased in 2005
from Western GECO to be operated as a geophysical research vessel (with some
additional general purpose oceanographic capabilities) is owned by the National
Science Foundation and replaced R/V Maurice Ewing, a 236? research vessel
operated by LDEO from 1990 to 2005.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDEO is requesting
funds to support both basic and specialized services for multichannel seismic
data acquisition. They propose to provide at least three technicians on each
seagoing research project to provide basic services and to maintain equipment,
calibrate sensors, and provide support for qualified users. Specialized services
include both 2D and 3D Multichannel seismic support and Mammal Mitigation
efforts for 2018. LDEO proposes to sail eight technicians for the 2D seismic
work and 10-12 techs for 3D. The budget in this proposal is for the first year
of a 5-year continuing grant. The first year of this award will be negotiated
with the Program and out-years will be estimated. Because ships are scheduled
annually, it is not possible to project NSF?s fraction of total usage in out
years. Therefore, budgets for Years 2 through 5 will be negotiated after receipt
of Annual Reports that detail those schedules and associated
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.