* 1827904
* MRI: Acquisition of a variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* James McGrath, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 187,250.00

The variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (VASE) to be acquired will provide
unparalleled thin film characterization capabilities for a host of research
projects in the Rochester, NY region. Examples of research projects include the
fundamental study of thermophysical properties of polymer thin films deposited
by a unique chemical vapor deposition technique, in situ characterization of
responsive coatings in biomedical devices, comprehensive characterization of
two-dimensional materials for photonic devices, and the study of laser-induced
damage in optical coating materials for high power laser applications. Twelve
research groups from the University of Rochester, Rochester Institute of
Technology, and the Laboratory for Laser Energetics have been identified as
users of the VASE tool. To further promote effective utilization of the VASE
tool and make it widely accessible resource, it will be installed in a general
user facility on the University of Rochester campus. Another key function of the
VASE tool is to support student education to prepare them for potential careers
in optics, semiconductors and photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
spectroscopic ellipsometry will be utilized for thin film materials of varied
optical properties. Mueller-matrix ellipsometry measures all 16 elements of the
Mueller matrix, which is the most complete description of a medium's response to
polarized light. This enables quantitative analysis of samples with complex
structure, such as optically anisotropic and depolarizing samples, while
retaining standard ellipsometry capabilities, which are sufficient for isotopic,
non-depolarizing samples. The specific instrument to be acquired is the RC2
ellipsometer, with additional enhancements to maximize its versatility and to
enable multidisciplinary research efforts. They include an auto-translating
stage for mapping of patterned surfaces and/or to assess film uniformity,
rotational stage to measure anisotropic samples at several angles relative to
the incident polarization, liquid cell for dynamic measurements of hydrated
(solvated) films, thermal stage to characterize film properties as a function of
temperature, environmental cell to measure films in controlled vapor
atmospheres, and an electrochemical cell for coupled in situ electrochemical
device characterization. The large sample stage and flexible physical
configuration of the RC2 ellipsometer will allow future development of custom in
situ characterization capabilities, ensuring the broad utility of this
instrument in research projects for many years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.