* 1827938
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for the Transformative Advancement of Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Subash Jonnalagadda, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Gustavo Moura-Letts from Rowan
University and colleagues Subash Jonnalagadda, Joseph Stanzione and Lark Perez
have acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a smart ambient
temperature probe. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such
as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance,
as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts several institutions in the greater South
Jersey area and allows participation of many STEM students. A plan to make the
current spectrometer available to institutions such as Cooper Medical School,
Rowan School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University at Camden, Rowan College
at Gloucester County and Rowan College at Burlington County is going to be
beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially aids
investigations on reaction development and mechanisms for metallooxazirine
mediated aziridination of pi systems and the syntheses of pharmacologically
relevant molecular scaffolds. The instrument is also used in developing and
characterizing small-molecule inhibitors of sRNA-Hfg chaperone protein binding
and in generating a library of monomers, polymers, composites coatings and
adhesives derived from renewable resources. In addition, it aids the development
and characterization of reverse micelles, the studies of signaling pathways that
mediate the S. cerevisae response to oxygen levels. The spectrometer benefits
studies of dynamics of the dissociated proton in acidic ionic liquids, and
measurements in studies of diffusion of ionic liquid
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.