* 1827220
* Collaborative Research: Record of UHP Terrain Exhumation Preserved in Shear Zones of the Western Gneiss Region (Norway)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Donna Whitney, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 316,047.00

According to the theory of plate tectonics, continents can collide against
others or dive under another plate (subduction) to depths of over 100 km. The
existence of rocks at the Earth's surface that have minerals that can only be
formed at great depths in the Earth's interior suggests that continental
subduction is a common process. The geological processes that are able to bring
rocks from considerable depth back to the surface, also known as exhumation,
remain enigmatic. This project focuses on a study of one of the largest and
best-exposed area in the world (the Western Gneiss Region of Norway) where these
so-called ultrahigh pressure rocks (UHP) are exposed. This study will examine
how this process of exhumation may have occurred in the past. Because large
blocks of UHP rocks have yet to be discovered in North America, they are
typically not readily available in teaching collections at U.S. colleges and
universities. One of the education activities in this project will be to create
a teaching module centered on UHP rocks that includes rock and thin section sets
to be used in petrology and related courses. The collections and teaching module
will be disseminated to 15 schools in collaboration with geoscience education
specialists in order to optimize impact and diversity, and help manage teaching
effectiveness and assessment. The project also includes a display and activities
using field photos and rock samples from the Western Gneiss Region to explain
plate tectonics and subduction zones to K-12 students visiting the Earth Science
and Mineral Engineering Museum housed at University of Nevada - Reno. In
addition, graduate and undergraduate students are to be trained in both research
and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rates and mechanisms of
exhumation of UHP terranes are still poorly known because the preservation of
UHP mineral assemblages is sporadic, and it is also a function of how reactive
the exhumed crust was. Two end-member modes of exhumation of UHP terranes have
been proposed: 1) education of a coherent and thus poorly reactive lithospheric
slab; and 2) return flow of a body of highly reactive UHP rocks along the
subduction channel. The Western Gneiss Region of Norway is an ideal terrane to
study these processes because it is transected by numerous 10-100 m scale shear
zones that offer a clear history of progressive exhumation based on outcrop-
scale crosscutting relationships and metamorphic overprinting in both the mafic
(eclogite/amphibolite) bodies and the host quartzofeldspathic gneiss. These
largely unstudied shear zones preserve the best record of pressure-temperature-
time-deformation (P-T-t-D) conditions during exhumation from mantle to crustal
depths and are therefore prime candidates for evaluating the proposed exhumation
models. Methods that investigate the petrologic and geochemical record within
the shear zones include: (1) detailed field mapping, from outcrop to regional
scale, incorporating microstructural analyses within shear zones from across the
Western Gneiss Region to determine progressive deformation-recrystallization of
minerals, including datable minerals; (2) Titanium-in-quartz thermobarometry to
trace conditions during ascent and decompression; and (3) petrochronology based
on high- and medium-temperature chronometers based on U-Pb dating using zircon
and monazite for the (U)HP part of the path and rutile and titanite for the HP
to amphibolite-facies portion of the path. Results provide significant new
insight into the P-T-t-D paths that are preserved in the geologic record of
exhumed UHP terranes, and more generally into the rates and mechanisms of UHP
terrane exhumation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.