* 1827401
* Collaborative Research: Calibration, Validation, and Application of Barium Isotopes in Marine Barite as a Tracer of the Marine Carbon Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Tristan Horner, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 12/31/2019
* USD 141,621.00

The ocean's biological pump refers to a set of chemical, physical, and
biological processes that redistribute carbon and nutrients from the sunlit
upper ocean to the deep ocean and seafloor. Globally, this pump has an important
role in modulating the air-sea balance of carbon dioxide and can thus impact
Earth's climate. However, reconstructing fluctuations in the strength and
efficiency of the oceans biological pump cannot be done directly because there
are so many variables in play and the ocean is so large. Thus, geochemical
indicators, called proxies, that have a specific measurable response to a
complex process are used. Most geochemical proxies for the ocean biological pump
are sensitive only to local conditions. This research involves the exploration,
calibration, and validation of a novel geochemical tracer (the stable isotopes
of barium in the mineral barite) that is hypothesized to be sensitive to
regional-scale biogeochemical processes. To examine this tracer, barite will be
separated from marine sediment cores from the Equatorial Pacific. Barite's
occurrence is widely interpreted as reflecting local biogeochemical processes
related to the ocean's biological pump. Thus, the proposed proxy has the benefit
of simultaneously revealing information on both local- and regional-scale
processes, though reliable interpretation of proxy signals first requires
calibration and validation in modern settings. This research sets out to do the
calibration and validation of this proxy in a set of cores from the Equatorial
Pacific Ocean. It is anticipated that the barium isotope approach will bridge
the biogeochemical scaling divide and enable more accurate reconstructions of
the biological carbon pump throughout Earth's history. Broader impacts of the
work include student training, building infrastructure for science by developing
a new biogeochemical proxy, engagement in the research of students from groups
underrepresented in the sciences, support an early career scientist, and support
of a researcher whose gender is underrepresented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on examining the utility of barium-
isotopic analyses of marine barite to reconstruct the ocean's carbon cycle over
regional spatial scales. The project involves a two pronged approach. Phase one
of the research entails calibration of the proxy itself by means of an extensive
survey of modern core-top sediments from the Equatorial Pacific. Samples of co-
located sediments and pore waters will be analyzed. Barite will be separated
from the cores via acid digestion and other separation techniques and examined
for purity using a scanning electron microscope and its integrated chemical
analyzer. Pore waters will be analyzed by standard wet-chemical techniques.
After ensuring purity of the barite samples, the barium stable isotopes of the
barite will be measured for each of the core tops. Phase two of the research
assesses the fidelity of the proxy during diagenetic alteration down core via
the analysis of co-located mineral separates and pore water geochemistry. This
stage of the work tests whether and how much barium-isotopic modification occurs
after burial on the seafloor. Results from phase one and two will be used to
establish whether the barium-isotopic composition of marine barite faithfully
records ocean biogeochemistry. If so, this project will have successfully
calibrated and validated a novel means to reconstruct regional-scale marine
carbon cycling, which will have utility over a range of
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.