* 1827151
* CC* Network Design and Implementation for Small Institutions: The Tommie Science Network- A dedicated research network for the University of St. Thomas
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Charles Nguyen, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 390,671.00

The University of St. Thomas, in conjunction with the University of Minnesota's
Gopher Science Network Team, is building the Tommie Science Network, a dedicated
research network that transforms the campus research environment by providing a
reliable and secure high-speed research network capable of achieving sustained
transmission rates of up to 100 Gigabits per second (Gbps) between campus
research locations and Internet2 (I2). This project creates efficiencies in end-
to-end workflows between existing instrumentation facilities and research
centers, centralized computing and data storage facilities, and partner
institutions. It significantly increases bandwidth available to researchers,
allowing the St. Thomas community to fully participate in collaborative, global
research activity, and provides a world-class working environment for professors
and students to practice distributed research and collaboration techniques to
learn skills they will use in their future employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Tommie Science Network connects Owens Science Hall, O'Shaughnessy Science Hall
and the St. Thomas E-learning and Research center (STELAR) via high-speed access
layer switches linked to the network core at 80Gbps. Traffic on the Tommie
Science Network then bypasses the firewall to connect directly to I2 at 100Gbps
via the Northern Lights Gigapop. Laboratories and research locations in the
science halls and STELAR are connected at 10Gbps to the access layer switches.
Globus File Transfer Protocol is used to allow secure, reliable high-speed
transfers between the science buildings, the DMZ, and I2. PerfSonar is used to
monitor performance between the science buildings and the and Science
Demilitarized Zone (Science DMZ) as well as from the DMZ to Internet2. The St.
Thomas networking staff is responsible for ongoing
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.