* 1827761
* EDGE:  High Efficiency Identification of Products of Homologous Recombination in Plants as a Tool to Test Gene Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kira Veley, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,038,761.00

This project will develop a new method to facilitate and accelerate the
identification of successful products of homologous recombination (HR) in crop
plants. This method is based on advances in 'genome editing', a revolutionary
technology that promises the ability to introduce genetic improvements or novel
functionality to genomes where genetic resources are currently limited.
Applications in plants that require replacing an endogenous piece of DNA with
another DNA sequence are possible but are very inefficient due to very low rates
of HR. The technology developed in this project is designed to overcome this
bottleneck, with the aim to advance organismal biology by greatly facilitating
the testing of gene function through direct modification of a broad range of
genes of interest. Such advances will contribute to improvements in the
understanding of the genomes-to-phenomes relationship. This could, for example,
accelerate the development of plants with improved resistance to pathogens, or
enhanced crop yields. The project will carry out experiments to further develop,
test, validate and improve this technology and its application, first testing
the components of the system, then applying what is learned to single and
multiple targets. The work will test the system in cassava and foxtail millet,
as well as in model flowering plants. Broader impacts of the project include the
wide dissemination of the method for the improvement of crop plants and other
species, plus the training of students via integration with long-running and
successful undergraduate internship program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus specifically on techniques to facilitate and accelerate the
identification of successful products of HR by reporter-based methods using
transcriptional activation. The approach combines insertion of a repair template
(containing the desired genome edit and a selectable marker) with methods to
rapidly find a desirable, rare HR event - the proverbial "needle in a haystack".
Data from cassava demonstrates that this is an effective method for developing
molecular and genomic tools for orphan crops and those lacking robust genomic
resources. The work will be done in cassava, Arabidopsis, and Setaria as the
primary species for analysis, because a demonstration in these species would
support broad utility in eudicot and monocot species, including most crops. The
questions to be addressed by this project include: 1) whether the efficiency of
HR can be improved by focusing on selection of the products; 2) whether HR-based
approaches be used to successfully tag non-coding RNAs such as microRNA and
tasiRNA precursors; and, 3) whether it is possible to develop efficient
processes for high-throughput, library-based knock-ins. The project will develop
an approach for a key functional genomic tool (improved selection of products of
HR) to enable direct tests of hypotheses about gene function in diverse
organisms. Project members will be trained broadly in plant biology and
genomics, gene function and functional genomics, and computational methods. All
resources generated in this project will be made available for use.
Specifically, constructs will be deposited in nonprofit global plasmid
repositories and web-based tools will be designed to enable users unfamiliar
with genome editing to successfully design custom components of SureFire for
application to their organism(s) of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.