* 1827386
* Managing the Honor and Stigma of Disjunctive Identities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Sara Dickey, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 98,425.00

The research supported by this award investigates social groups that have highly
disjunctive identities. Disjunctive identities are two or more shared forms of
identity that are ranked very differently. The researcher asks how these groups
and the people in them manage how they see themselves and the social status
assigned to them, and how outsiders respond to those management efforts. Such
groups often wish to present their more highly ranked identity as a visible
public face, yet they may simultaneously wish to preserve the traditions and
values of their other, less esteemed identity. While a wide range of research
has explored the experiences of individuals, families, or even larger subsets of
groups with disjunctive identities, almost no research has been carried out
among entire groups who consciously and intentionally bear one identity
considered high status and the other considered much lower. This research will
help policy-makers, practitioners, and social scientists understand how social
groups live with and manage disjunctive identities, as well as provide models
for how such groups may promote their own interests.

This research will take place in Madurai, South India, where the researcher,
anthropologist Dr. Sara Dickey of Bowdoin College, has carried out ethnographic
fieldwork since 1985. She has chosen to focus on the case of the Hindu Nadars,
because they have historically occupied one of the lowest ranks in the caste
system but today also form one of the wealthiest groups in the region, well-
known for public philanthropy such as building hospitals and schools. The
researcher will focus on the role of Nadar community organizations, which, for
more than a century, have actively tried to control the types of Nadar behaviors
and values that are made visible to the larger public and the debates about
values and identities that occur within these organizations. The researcher will
gather data with a mix of ethnographic methods, including participant
observation, the collection of oral histories, interviews, and archival
research. Findings from the research will elucidate the extent to which economic
success and cultural sophistication can mitigate social discrimination, and how
recent developments, such as economic globalization, have affected this process.
Results may provide models for U.S. settings and may suggest new approaches to
help under-represented students manage disparate identities and thereby enhance
academic and social success.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.