* 1827245
* CREST-PRF: Optimization of Joint Inversion of Geophysical Data to Improve  3-Dimensional Models of Earth Structures
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Azucena Zamora, Zamora                  Azucena
* Fellowship Award
* Emanuel WAddell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Optimization of Joint Inversion of Geophysical Data to Improve 3-Dimensional
Models of Earth Structures

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Cyberinfrastructure for Sharing resources
to Advance Research and Education (Cyber-ShARE) Center of Excellence at the
University of Texas at El Paso. Earth sciences aim to determine the interior
composition of the Earth by using a wide array of methods to understand its
changes throughout the millennia and predict possible future behavior. For
example, regions with relatively low seismic activity have experienced
earthquakes due to motion of tectonic faults within the Earth's dynamic
interior. Moreover, atypical plate tectonic processes, such as the breaking of a
subducting oceanic plate that occurred with recent Mexico earthquakes in
September 2017 make understanding the complex processes imperative to avoid
future catastrophes. This research project will characterize the location and
condition of seismological faults and the current state of ancient strains in
the lower crust and address fundamental questions about the tectonic evolution
of the Earth. Specifically, the project will develop and improve 3-Dimensional
(3-D) Earth models in targeted regions through the optimization of the joint
inversion of complementary seismic (surface wave group velocities and
teleseismic P-wave receiver functions) and non-seismic (Bouguer gravity
anomalies) datasets. The combined resolution of these datasets will allow
pinpointing of key features within the subsurface that may be overlooked by the
geophysical surveys. Early college, high school and traditional K-12 students
will be engaged in this project.

The proposed research will develop and apply numerical optimization to improve
the resolution of 3-D Earth structure models. Although important methods have
been previously developed to optimize the results obtained from the inversion of
complementary datasets for increasingly complex geological environments, recent
more powerful mathematical tools have provided evidence that constrained
optimization techniques can greatly improve final structural models for the
interior of the Earth. The use of primal-dual interior point methods for the
joint inversion of seismic and non-seismic datasets can provide further
improvement to 3-D imaging of the Earth by constraining the solution space and
focusing only on feasible structural models. Part 1 of this project involves the
development of computational algorithms to optimize the results obtained from
the joint inversion of multiple datasets. In Part 2, the processes involved in
the optimization will be analyzed to determine the optimal and most cost-
effective division of work to simultaneously execute the code (parallel
programming) in a multi-core environment. These algorithms will be applied to
datasets from Colombia to obtain a new tectonic understanding of its complex
substructure-characterized by a unique geological setting where the Cocos,
Caribbean, and South American plates converge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.