* 1827433
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement System VersaLab for Research in the Areas of Spintronics and Advanced Nanostructured Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* David Brook, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,659.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program is to support the
acquisition of the Physical Properties Measurement System VersaLab by Quantum
Design. This instrument will be used in a variety of research areas to perform
electrical, magnetic, and thermal measurements over a wide range of applied
magnetic fields and temperatures. Thus, this will enable research to be
conducted in cutting-edge technologies such as nanoelectronics, molecular
magnets, organic semiconductors, non-volatile memories, photovoltaics, solid-
state batteries, materials for post-silicon electronics, and biomedical
technology. It will be used by faculty from the Physics & Astronomy, Chemistry,
Materials, Mechanical, Biomedical, and Electrical Engineering departments at San
Jose State University (SJSU). The VersaLab will foster collaboration across
multiple departments within SJSU, as well as between SJSU and surrounding
universities, community colleges, private sector, and national labs. The
instrument will be incorporated into the curriculum of several SJSU laboratory
classes with the goal to improve undergraduate and graduate STEM education. We
hope that by involving undergraduates in research at an early point in their
education, we may attract more of them into the field of STEM, particularly
women and underrepresented groups. SJSU has one of the most diverse student
populations in the United States and has been recognized as a Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI) and an Asian American Native American Pacific Islander Serving
Institution (AANAPISI). VersaLab will significantly improve research and
education of minority students, enabling them to pursue technical careers in
Silicon Valley or obtain graduate degrees.

Physical Properties Measurement System VersaLab from Quantum Design is a user-
friendly, cryogen-free cryocooler-based, and fully automated turn-key
instrument. It is perfect for accomplishing many types of materials
characterization in a magnetic field up to 3 Tesla and over a temperature range
50-1000 K. It consists of the Base system and add-on options for magnetometry,
and measurements of ac magnetic susceptibility, ferromagnetic resonance,
electrical transport, thermal transport, and heat capacity. This will support
studies of magnetic materials for spintronics applications, inverse spin-Hall
effect, organic spintronics, molecular magnetism, semiconductor nanostructures
for energy production, electrical and thermal conductivities of hierarchical
materials, solid state batteries, tissue-mimicking materials, and multiple other
projects. VersaLab instrument will greatly enhance present material
characterization capabilities at SJSU and open new directions in the research of
the involved faculty. The ability to fully characterize magnetic, electrical,
and thermal properties of materials is critical to many of the SJSU faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.