* 1827353
* Meeting: 6th Pan American Plant Membrane Biology Workshop, Vancouver, Canada, June 24-28, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Plants provide this planet with the air we breathe and the food we eat. We
consume plants either directly, or by eating animals that have been fed with
plants. Therefore, life on earth would simply not be possible without plants.
The calories, amino acids, vitamins and mineral ions our bodies require are
taken up by plants from the environment or they are made within plant cells
after uptake of some of the building blocks. Plants use these nutrients for
growth and the production of edible organs such as tubers and seeds. However,
abiotic stresses, including soil mineral limitation, drought and high
temperature, and biotic stresses such as pathogen and insect pest attacks
provide a threat to plant food production. But how can plants achieve mineral
ion uptake, even under stress, and how are they able to use the nutrients and
produce the tissues and organs needed for the human food supply? Plants have
evolved specific membrane proteins that can sense and transfer environmental
signals, as well as recognize and transport mineral ions from the outside
environment into the cell. Novel scientific approaches have revolutionized our
understanding of the structure and function of plant membranes, and this
workshop will address important breakthroughs in membrane biology with respect
to signaling, nutrient transport and plant growth. We expect that the scientific
interactions will promote discussions on how to meet the challenge of feeding
the global community of tomorrow and will facilitate advances essential for food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 6th Pan American Membrane Biology Workshop
will be held in Vancouver, BC, Canada from June 24-28th, 2018. It will focus on
topics covering important breakthroughs in plant membrane biology and their
importance for plant growth and adaption to environmental stresses. Given the
importance of membrane biology and its potential to continue to make
groundbreaking discoveries, there is pressing scientific demand for
opportunities to communicate and interact. This meeting will be both stimulating
and timely, and specific objectives are (1) to organize and support knowledge
exchange and discussions on the latest scientific advances in membrane biology
research, including in areas related to plant membrane structure, transport,
protein trafficking, and signal transduction, (2) to promote interactions
between scientists and trainees to share new discoveries in the field of
membrane biology as it relates to plant growth, development and nutrition, and
to enhance training and new collaborations that will move the field forward and
(3) to directly involve newly independent scientists and trainees, with emphasis
on diversity and gender. The workshop agenda will include discussions for
trainee mentorship, publication strategies and emerging areas of plant membrane
biology in a supportive setting to promote trainee and established researcher
interactions. The broader impacts of this meeting are manifold. It will promote
participation of groups underrepresented in science and support diversity in the
plant biology community by connecting the trainees with senior scientist role
models. It will further provide access to cutting edge science and advance
knowledge in membrane biology essential for plant production. This workshop
award is supported by the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.