* 1827020
* IRES Track I: US-Japan Collaboration on Organic Electronics Research and Education
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Madalina Furis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,161.00

Materials scientists from the University of Vermont will partner with engineers
and physicists at Yamagata University (Japan) for an IRES program that will
foster and nurture a new generation of interdisciplinary materials scientists.
At the end of the program participants will be equipped with key experimental
skills and background tailored for the specific needs of organic electronics
research and technology that bridge physical chemistry, chemical engineering,
and condensed matter physics. Three PhDs and twelve undergraduate US students
will spend ten weeks working in teams with the Japanese mentors and their
students on interdisciplinary projects specifically designed to leverage the
ongoing collaboration on small molecules electronics between the US and Japanese
participants. The students will learn specific experimental techniques while
immersed in a new, culturally -distinct collaborative environment. They will
gain unprecedented access to fabrication and characterization techniques
inaccessible at their home institution. Students will undergo a two-week
intensive language training specifically focused on laboratory work
communication and become part of the cultural immersion activities at Yamagata
University. The group also benefits from the contribution of a school of
education faculty member that will conduct assessment activities resulting in
best practices recommendations for a Global Scientist certificate offering at
the University of Vermont. A semester -long recruitment plan will focus on women
and minorities from small or HBCU colleges in the northeastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the past ten years, synthetic chemistry efforts
that produced soluble derivatives of small molecule semiconductors led to
macroscopically-ordered crystalline thin films and scalable, cost-effective
roll-to-roll processing techniques that promise a future where flexible, bio-
integrated, or disposable electronics may play a significant role in our
everyday lives. Though these advances have been incredibly significant, the
performance metrics of organic semiconductor-based transistors, LEDs, and solar
cells are still far behind (to varying degrees) their crystalline inorganic
counterparts. The scientific and engineering communities are at a turning point
where the next major step forward can only be realized with novel
interdisciplinary approaches based on a fundamental understanding of the
electronic and excitonic properties. &lt;br/&gt;The Vermont -Yamagata IRES
partnership will foster and nurture a new generation of interdisciplinary
materials scientists, that will become experts ready to tackle the grand
challenges of small molecule electronics. The underlying scientific theme of the
student projects investigates correlations between long-range order, the nature
of intermolecular interactions, and electronic properties in small molecule
families. It seeks ways of exploiting these correlations towards establishing
design rules for optimization of electronic and excitonic properties of small
molecule thin films. Such design rules lead to avenues for affordable,
sustainable, organic device platforms for a variety of applications including
photovoltaics, flexible electronics, and bio-interfacing. The proposed
experimental work will also trigger theoretical questions related to bridging
the quantum chemistry body of knowledge with condensed matter approaches that
take into account long range interactions, thus building an interdisciplinary
model for excitonic and charge carrier behavior in these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.