* 1827652
* PFI-RP: From the Ground Up: Using Soft Robotic Sensors to Create a Foot and Ankle Wearable that Accurately Captures Real-time, Kinematic and Kinetic Data During Athletic Training
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Raj Prabhu, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,145,628.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will advance the
health and welfare of the American public by using a new type of wearable
technology solution. This liquid metal sensors-based wearable is designed to
move human movement evaluation from laboratory environments to where people
normally perform work: the real world. This project will create an affordable
foot-ankle wearable to properly assess wearer gait and leg symmetry for people
of all shapes and sizes without requiring expensive, bulky equipment or a
practitioner's expertise. Moreover, the proposed tool is accurate, yet is also
accessible meaning that this capability could improve quality of life via proper
prognosis and diagnosis within competitive athletics as well as for medical
patients during real-world task assessments. This project can also be used to
support the national defense of the United States by providing the ability to
assess movement measures, such as step count, acceleration, and ground reaction
force estimation of military personnel, aiding in tactical planning and
identification of oncoming injuries to limb segments. Over time, joints will
fatigue and failure to identify these stressors can have a severe impact on the
battlefield just as in the practice courts or industrial environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project repurposes soft robotic sensors to
accurately and noninvasively capture movement and force data in near real-time
at the foot-ankle to provide meaningful performance and risk assessment for
tailoring training regimens. This wearable solution is in response to collegiate
and professional-level strength and conditioning coaches and trainers desire for
a precise solution that captures movement data "from the ground up". The
proposed solution will accurately capture ankle kinematic and kinetic data
outside of the lab, giving coaches, trainers, medical staff, and researches a
wealth of information that was previously not available or trusted by field
practitioners. Intellectual merits include: (a) expanding state-of-the-art
wearable solutions to measure absolute foot-ankle angles, (b) using custom
liquid metal sensors to measure foot forces, and (c) combining complex angle and
force measurements into machine learning systems estimating ankle injury risk
thereby allowing practitioners to effectively monitor repetitive movements. The
project goal is to create an accurate yet affordable wearable system that can
identify potential risks of the most common injury, ankle strain. Collegiate
student athletes will be used for design validation as initial project scope is
designed for competitive sports; however, the solution will be expandable to
industrial and military repetitive motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.