* 1827177
* CC* Integration: End-to-End Performance and Security Driven Federated Data-Intensive Workflow Management
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Data-intensive science applications in research fields such as bioinformatics,
chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;and material science are increasingly becoming multi-domain
in nature. To augment local&lt;br/&gt;campus CyberInfrastructure (CI) resources,
these applications rely on multi-institutional resources&lt;br/&gt;that are
remotely accessible (e.g., scientific instruments, supercomputers, public
clouds).&lt;br/&gt;Provisioning of such federated CI resources has been
traditionally based on applications'&lt;br/&gt;performance and quality of
service (QoS) requirements. This project aims to augment&lt;br/&gt;traditional
resource provisioning schemes through novel schemes for&lt;br/&gt;formalizing
end-to-end security requirements to align security posture&lt;br/&gt;across
multi-domain resources with heterogeneous policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the end-to-end multi-domain security design
for&lt;br/&gt;scientific applications by defining and formalizing security
specifications along an application's workflow lifecycle stages.&lt;br/&gt;The
research work will advance the current knowledge for a CI engineer in the
following areas:&lt;br/&gt;(i) how to intelligently perform resource allocations
among private and public cloud locations;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) by streamlining end-to-
end security posture across domains that are constructed via dynamic network
services; and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) how to "bring your own compute" programs in large
facilities to reduce turnaround times in a secured and policy-compliant
manner.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting security formalization and alignment schemes
will be implemented as a security middleware coupled within a unified resource
broker framework that: (a) operationally integrates various software tools and
systems such as perfSONAR, OpenStack, iRODS and Shibboleth; and (b) supports
prototypes of web-portals and actual users (e.g., researchers and educators)
within usability evaluation and validation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.