* 1827966
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope at Carleton College
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Steven Drew, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 437,589.00

A New Scanning Electron Microscope for Carleton College Will Study Big
Scientific Questions and Train Young Scientists&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will be used to purchase a new scanning electron microscope (SEM) at Carleton
College. The faculty at Carleton and nearby St. Olaf college will use the SEM to
continue excellent training and education to the next generation of scientists
with classes and research. The new SEM will be used to address scientific
problems in the Earth sciences including the geologic history of western North
America and Alaska, studies of ancient climates, and large faults similar to the
San Andreas Fault in California. This equipment will also help answer questions
in chemistry that will help to produce useful chemical products and will help
describe air pollution. In addition, the instrument will be used to train
undergraduate students in state-of-the-art analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carleton College will use this Major Research
Instrumentation award to acquire a new variable pressure scanning electron
microscope (SEM), color cathodoluminescence (CL) detector, and electron-
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system. This new facility will allow the faculty
at Carleton and nearby St. Olaf College to continue to offer high-quality and
effective training of the next generation of scientists through authentic
research activities in courses and through advanced undergraduate research
including senior thesis research projects. The capabilities of the new SEM
facility will help address outstanding scientific questions in the Earth
sciences including the plate tectonic history of western North America and
Alaska, the reconstruction of past climate and seawater properties, and the
behavior of large scale faults similar to the San Andreas Fault in California.
This equipment will also help answer fundamental questions in chemistry that
have implications for the use of inexpensive mixed metal oxide thin films as
catalysts for the photoelectrochemical production of valuable chemical products,
and for the characterization of particulate matter in air pollution associated
with cooking in Ethiopia and other developing countries. The acquisition of the
new SEM will enhance research and research training at Carleton and St. Olaf. It
will improve the research capacity of at least seven faculty members, four
departments and two colleges, 15 courses, and about 700 students. The SEM will
occupy a newly renovated space in Carleton`s new Science Complex. One of the
primary goals for the Science Complex is to bring together faculty and students
from a variety of disciplines into collaborative spaces where our disciplinary
and multidisciplinary research efforts are more visible to one another. The new
SEM will foster research collaboration between Carleton and St. Olaf. The
instrument will be very important to the new and growing Environmental Studies
Department at St. Olaf, which made three new tenure-track hires in 2017. Because
St. Olaf has no formal geology department, collaboration with Carleton offers an
extended community of St. Olaf faculty and students interested in the Earth
sciences. In addition, having a modern SEM facility available to support new
faculty at St. Olaf will also allow them to build course-based research
activities into their growing Environmental Studies
major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.