* 1827831
* MRI: Acquisition of an Integrated Bionanomaterials Characterization and Imaging System for Research and Education Initiatives in Bioengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Alexander Lippert, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2019
* USD 351,687.00

This award is to purchase a bio/nanomaterials characterization and imaging
system, which will be used by seven North Texas academic research institutions.
The proposed instrument offers multi-functional capabilities by integrating a
confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM), atomic force microscope (AFM), and
digital light processing (DLP). This new system will enable 20 research groups
to perform material imaging, manipulation, and property measurements of
synthetic and biological nano/microstructures with optical, electrical,
mechanical, and thermal stimulations in both ambient air and liquid
environments. The equipment will be housed at the Biological, Actuation,
Sensing, and Transport Laboratory on Southern Methodist University campus, a
centralized location in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in this state-of-the-art facility,
allowing students to build a rich foundation for studying biological cells and
organic/inorganic nano/microstructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
imaging instrument will benefit a number of ongoing research projects. The DLP
system will provide fully controllable patterns of light, where the CLSM-AFM
system will improve the capability of property measurement of biological and
synthetic materials. The use of the CLSM-AFM-DLP will broaden the capability of
research in molecular dynamics, bacterial swarms, flagellar mechanics,
biologically-inspired robotics, determination of dielectric and mechanical
properties of biological cells and materials, laser-assisted
micro/nanofabrication, and imaging reactive oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur species.
This instrument can lead to important findings for nature-inspired technology
and enable future research in various areas: 1) advanced imaging and property
measurement of organic/inorganic nano/microstructures, 2) spatial light
modulated techniques for live cell imaging, 3) thermal transport and wettability
of some low energy surfaces at the liquid-solid interface, and 4) electrical
investigation of bio-templated advanced
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.