* 1827159
* PFI-TT: Prototyping a Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Single-Carrier Modulation Turbo Transceiver for Robust Underwater Wireless Communications.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Yahong Zheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is enabling reliable
wireless communications in several underwater technology markets which include
ocean exploration and discovery, underwater recreation, fishery industry, subsea
oil and gas industry, underwater environmental and infrastructure monitoring,
and military. The project aims at increasing reliability and information data
rates in underwater wireless communication links by an order of magnitude over
existing technologies. When applied to Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) and
wireless sensor networks, the proposed technology leads to great potential in
reducing operational costs, improving efficiency, reducing safety risks, and
enabling new capabilities such as Internet of Underwater Things (IoUT). The
development of multidisciplinary education and student training from both
engineering and entrepreneurial perspectives further impacts the next generation
workforce by attracting women and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project bridges the knowledge gap
between Matlab post-processing and real-time hardware implementations of
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) Turbo transceivers. A MIMO transceiver
transmits multiple data streams via multiple transmit elements to increase data
rate, and uses multiple receive elements to improve the reliability. The past
research of the principle investigator have demonstrates via ocean experiments
and post processing that Turbo receiver is effective in combatting hostile
underwater acoustic communication channels by utilizing advanced error-
correction coding and channel equalization. The main goal of this project is to
design and validate a prototype that demonstrates real-time operation of the
MIMO Turbo transceiver in underwater acoustic environment, achieving 50 - 100
kilo-bits-per-second (kbps) information data rate over 1 - 10 km distance and at
99.99% reliability. This is at least an order of magnitude improvement over
existing underwater acoustic communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.