* 1827535
* PFI-TT: Automated Platform for Drug Testing in Human Heart Cells Using Light
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Emilia Entcheva, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project on the economy and
public health in the United States will be achieved by providing drug and stem-
cell researchers and developers with a superior yet low-cost technology for
detection of adverse effects on the heart to deliver cheaper, more effective,
and safer drug treatments. Drug development is expensive ($2.6 billion per drug)
and a high-risk process, where inadequate assessment of failures prior to
clinical trials and market approval can result in loss of human life and come at
great financial losses to investors, termination of employees, and potential
outsourcing to developing countries. The proposed technology will improve
failure prediction during early preclinical testing, where future adoption of
the commercialized product will reduce drug development opportunity costs. It
will also enable the pursuit of more challenging projects, including
personalized therapies and therapies tailored for specific patient populations,
e.g. considering sex, race or other characteristics when testing a new drug
treatment. The female team behind the technology is committed to the successful
establishment and growth of a company with a goal to help improve diversity in
the STEM-related startup field, and serve as allies and role models for future
STEM entrepreneurs from all backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop technology for basic and translational work in
cardiac electrophysiology. It will empower mechanistic studies of potentially
lethal heart arrhythmias by yielding high-content high-quality information about
cardiac electrical dysfunction, relevant for the discovery of new antiarrhythmic
therapies. The integration of optogenetic methods and optical imaging offers
high-throughput functional assessment and enables personalized solutions in drug
screening. The unmet needs and advantages offered by the technology include
compatibility with human stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes and tissue constructs,
provision of controlled pacing conditions while gathering multiparameter spatio-
temporal information for better predictions of drug attrition, and low-cost. The
following challenges in the translation to commercial applications are
addressed: 1) determine the optimal optical configuration for a stand-alone
prototype that is low-cost, compact, and customizable with user-friendly
software; 2) establish the workflow for scientifically valid (double-blinded and
controlled) assay designs using the system; 3) identify key measurements
(biomarkers) and algorithms to predict how in vitro data translates to in vivo
clinical outcomes (endpoints). This will result in a free-standing prototype
that can be easily integrated into established workflows, an expanded library of
compounds tested in a blinded, controlled study, and arrhythmia prediction
software that utilizes measured data to stratify cardiotoxicity
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.