* 1827726
* PFI-TT: Pushing the limits of color quality and efficiency in solid state lighting with colloidal quantum dots.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this proposal rests in improved
luminescent materials that can increase the efficiency and the color quality of
light emitting diodes (LEDs) and luminescent displays. The conversion of
electricity to warm natural light in a lighting application depends heavily on
the performance of red emitting materials, while the performance of cutting edge
luminescent displays, including microdisplays and televisions, can be improved
by narrow band red and green emitters. So called "quantum dots" can be optimized
to produce a desired luminescence wavelength and the stable, bright luminescence
required by these applications. If quantum dots can be manufactured in a cost
effective manner and withstand the harsh conditions found on LED chips, they
would simultaneously improve the color, efficiency, and cost of lighting and
displays. This would lead to more rapid penetration of these technologies and
save up to 1% of global energy or more. The successful implementation of quantum
dots in lighting and emissive displays will therefore increase the economic
competitiveness of the United States, while enhancing the health and welfare of
the American public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project uses novel and
highly tunable synthesis reagents to optimize high performance quantum dot
architectures. The method utilizes a patented "one pot" synthetic strategy and
patented synthesis reagents that are inexpensive, air stable, and nontoxic and
have tunable conversion kinetics. The approach controls quantum dot structure
with levels of precision not possible previously, an important advance from
traditional quantum dot synthesis; a notoriously Edissonian process of trial and
error. The novel reagents and the "one pot" synthesis produce quantitative
reaction yields, facilitating a highly scalable method that reduces the
challenge of quantum dot manufacturing on scales required for broad adoption in
solid state lighting and emissive display markets. These quantum dots will be
encapsulated and tested on LED chips to determine their long term stability.
Outer layers of the quantum dots will be optimized to improve this long term
stability and to enhance their performance on LED chips used in display and down
lighting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.