* 1827795
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - Cal Poly Pomona I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

This project, from California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP),
establishes an NSF I-Corps Site. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds teams recruited from faculty
research labs, student research projects and National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) Technology Transfer/Startup Programs to engage in
entrepreneurial training and customer discovery with the aim of learning about
and experiencing lean startup methods. The site is supported by a network of
faculty and industry mentors who serve as advisors to teams. The goals of the
CPP I-Corps Site are to prepare teams to qualify and succeed in the I-Corps
National Program and to develop a local innovation ecosystem to bolster the
national innovation ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CPP Site provides
opportunities for under-represented minority (URM) and low-income students to
collaborate with faculty researchers and industry mentors to transition
scientific discoveries and other Intellectual Property into the market place.
CPP, is a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and an Asian American and Native
American Pacific Islander Serving Institution (AANAPISI). Successful
implementation of the program could serve as a model for other institutions that
serve large populations of URMs and students from low-income communities,
including other HSIs and AANAPISIs. This project also has the potential to
contribute to the economic development of the City of Pomona and the San Gabriel
Valley Region in eastern Los Angeles County, an area significantly below state
and national averages on major indices of economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.