* 1827984
* MRI: Acquisition of 512-channel integrated stimulation and recording system for human neurophysiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Daniel Friedman, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 126,840.00

This Major Instrumentation Grant supports the acquisition of a 512-channel
integrated stimulation and recording system for human neurophysiology research
at the NYU Comprehensive Epilepsy Center (CEC). Each year, 50-80 patients at the
CEC undergo intracranial electrode monitoring and surgical removal of brain
tissue to treat medically refractory epilepsy. The surgery involves making a
small craniotomy in the skull and implanting electrodes in the brain that are
used (1) to monitor neurophysiological brain activity during seizures and (2) to
stimulate different regions of brain to understand their importance for
cognitive, sensory and motor tasks. With this information, clinicians make
informed decisions on what regions of the brain can be safely removed to treat
the patients' epilepsy, while sparing critical functions. Having patients with
electrodes temporarily implanted in their brain enables the unique opportunity
to study both human cognition and epilepsy in a manner that is not possible with
non-invasive tools such as brain imaging. With rapid improvements in electrode
technology, the number of electrodes in each implanted device continues to grow
and offers researchers even more detailed information about brain function in
normal cognition and disease. To maximize the information available from each
electrode, it needs to be independently connected to a stimulation and recording
system. At present, the clinical system at the CEC cannot support the total
number of electrodes in both clinical and research devices, leading to
compromises in the research data. Moreover, some newer electrode technologies
are not compatible with the current system. Thus, valuable information is lost.
This award will enable the CEC to purchase a piece of equipment that has the
capacity to measure from and stimulate 512 isolated electrode channels, ensuring
no information is lost and bearing the promise of a more detailed and complete
understanding of brain function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NYU has built an
incredibly productive research program around the human intracranial electrode
patient population. Research is broadly focused on understanding language,
memory, sleep, and epilepsy in the human brain. While the clinical value of the
research is clear, the work also provides insight into the "normal" functioning
of the human brain and thus falls within the scope of NSF supported science. For
example, scientists working with the CEC have been able to provide deep insight
into questions such as how language is processed by the brain and how memories
are formed and subsequently strengthened during sleep. The intracranial research
program at the CEC is highly collaborative and involves partnerships with
scientists and clinicians across NYU as well as at multiple research institutes
around the country. Patients are engaged in sensory, cognitive, and motor tasks
and researchers measure activity in the brain to understand the neural basis of
cognition. This award will not only expand the amount of information researchers
can measure from a single patient, but also enable them to stimulate and perturb
the brain during task performance to uncover causal brain-behavior relationships
previously inaccessible in humans. Moreover, the technical expertise and
interests of the collaborative group of researchers working with the CEC span a
wide range and include non-invasive neuroimaging in humans and novel electrode
technologies in animals. The capability to compare many channels of human
intracranial recording with cross-species electrophysiological recordings in
animal models will expand capabilities for translational research and accelerate
the pace at which medical technology develops in the lab and can be brought to
the bedside to improve clinical care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.