* 1827313
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer to Serve as a Regional Resource
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Travis Denton, Whitworth University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 325,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Kraig Wheeler from Whitworth
University and colleagues Jamie Manson from Eastern Washington University,
Matthew E Cremeens from Gonzaga University and Travis Denton from Eastern
Washington University have acquired a single crystal diffractometer. An X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule. This includes bond distances and angles.
This provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
In one project, the research targets molecules that may serve as quantum
magnets. In a green chemistry approach, catalysts containing iron are being
synthesized that can replace other less expensive metals. Chalcones, materials
with biological activity beneficial for anti-inflammation, are being studied.
The diffractometer is used in a collaborative network to train and to provide
undergraduate and graduate students with the principles of crystallography. The
following institutions are the main members of the network: Whitworth
University, Gonzaga University, Eastern Illinois University, Oakland University,
Knox College, Eastern Washington University, and Washington State University.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. It especially impacts studies of molecular recognition profiles of
quasiracemic materials. Medicinal-relevant chalcones are being investigated as
well as the design of small organic molecules as possible pharmaceutical
chaperones. The diffractometer is used in structure analyses of iron catalysts
supported by alpha-diimine ligands. This instrument also serves projects
developing near-infrared active materials. It is used in research to design
small molecule inhibitors of cytochrome 450 2A6 that have potential for use in
stopping smoking&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.