* 1827040
* IRES Track I: USA-China: International Research Experience for Native American Students in IoT Enabled Environmental Monitoring Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Kerry Hartman, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,920.00

This IRES project is co-funded by OISE and EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twelve
Native American students from five Tribal Colleges in the state of North Dakota
will participate in a six-week summer program over the course of three years.
Each year, four students will form a cohort and participate in pre-training in
the U.S. and then visit and study at the host University in Beijing, China for
five weeks. All three student cohorts will focus on one unifying topic -
building and testing an Internet of Things (IoT)-enabled environmental
monitoring system. During the course of the research training and after the
project is finished, a deep and comprehensive evaluation will be conducted to
assess three key aspects of the program: 1) instructional training and research
experience, 2) global professional and cultural experience; and 3) student
mentoring. This program will greatly benefit participating students. This is an
international learning experience that may be the key highlight of student
participants' academic careers, which may be especially true for Native American
students, as they have less chances for performing research abroad. The program
will provide participating students with unique opportunities to become
globally-engaged scientists and to build their international scientific
networks. There are five Tribal Colleges in the state of North Dakota that
represent historic tribal nations. The recruitment of this program from these
Tribal Colleges will ensure a regionally diverse student group will receive
international mentoring and research-based education. In many large cities of
U.S., there are environmental problems similar to Beijing, so the monitoring
technology learned by participating students will provide valuable reference and
an essential technology reserve. The participating students will build peer-
mentoring skills and learn about the unique culture and traditions of China from
Beijing, the culture center of China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants
will learn to design advanced environmental monitoring systems that integrate
energy harvest and remote control, which can track all four categories of
environmental contaminants including metals, radioisotopes, volatile organic
contaminants, and biological contaminants. In this project, tasks for student
participants include sensor developments, interface circuits designs, wireless
sensor network designs for Internet of Things (IoT)-enabled systems to realize
environmental monitoring, testing the proposed monitoring system on laboratory
and field sites, and making reliability-based lifetime analyses. The proposed
system is a much-needed technology for environmental decision-making that will
help substantially reduce ecological and human-health threats from environmental
problems, and the implemented prototype and test data will be a significant
reference for the other academic researchers and industrial developers.
Evaluation data collection will occur sequentially using a combination of
qualitative and quantitative data measurements to assess the effectiveness of
the program. The primary goals of this program are to: 1) provide students with
training and mentoring in international-based engineering applications that will
create a positive effect in their professional and personal lives, 2) create
Native American experts in environmental monitoring and protection, and 3)
improve specialized environmental management in the remote
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.