* 1827935
* Standard Grant: Public Deliberation on Gene Editing in Wild Populations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Gregory Kaebnick, Hastings Center
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 629,182.00

This award supports a research project that studies two questions having to do
with public deliberation about projects that are in development to use
technologies to modify populations of wild organisms, in some cases by creating
and releasing large numbers of modified individuals. The first question
addresses what kinds of genetic-modification projects should involve public
deliberation, and the second addresses how deliberation should be conducted when
it is warranted. The overarching goal of the project is to develop politically
legitimate and trustworthy decision-making processes for good use of
technologies to modify populations of wild organisms, meaning processes that
include mechanisms for incorporating society's values about what may and should
be done to the shared environment. This project will offer recommendations to
those in science and policy-making concerned about public deliberation, in
addition to advancing scholarly understanding of public deliberation. In
addition, it will generate products for educational use, thereby helping to
educate the next generation of scientists about the governance challenges that
surround emerging bio-technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic modification
projects that modify populations of wild organisms have significant potential
benefits, risks, and uncertainties, both for human welfare and for aspects of
the shared environment that are valued in themselves. The objective of this
research project is to address two overarching questions about broad public
deliberation: For what kinds of projects to modify populations of wild organisms
should public deliberation be conducted, and where deliberation is warranted,
how should it be conducted? Given the values at stake, it is essential to have
guidelines concerning which projects require deliberative public engagement; it
is essential to know when the public should have opportunities to think
collectively and to have a voice concerning both whether and how such genetic-
modification projects are to be implemented, including how broadly such
deliberations should occur (only in communities where organisms might be
released, or more broadly, even nationally or internationally). This research
project will use case-based analysis by an interdisciplinary work group and it
will provide a synthesis of the group's findings with pertinent literature. The
results will advance the study of public deliberation; it will generate and
disseminate recommendations about public deliberation to audiences in academia,
science research, policy-making, and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.