* 1827720
* PFI-TT:Development of an efficient fiber interface for Integrated lithium-niobate Modulators.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to enable better
connectivity and big data revolution. High-speed optical fiber links are
responsible for transmitting enormous amount of data and are the backbone of
internet. However, the existing optical networks, that transmit our multimedia
emails, music and video streaming, cannot meet the demands for more bandwidth
and reduced energy consumption. One of the limiting factors is a modulator
device that converts information from electrical to optical domain. This program
will address this, and develop a fully integrated and packaged modulator
prototype that will meet the societal needs for better connectivity. The target
markets for the technology will be providers of computer and telecommunication
network equipment, data- and computing-center owners, and network-service
providers. In addition, the research community, specialty measurement equipment
manufacturers, and defense contractors, will benefit from the developed
technology. The program has a theoretical and experimental component and
addresses both fundamental and engineering aspects of photonics,
optoelectronics, and communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will address the efficiency with which light can be brought onto a
lithium-niobate modulator chip. As recently demonstrated, thin film lithium-
niobate photonic platform allows for realization of high speed modulators (&gt;
100 GHz) that operate at low voltages (~ 1 V) and feature very low loss, and
that therefore can meet the demands for better connectivity and higher data
rates. However, due to their sub-micron scale, these modulators cannot be
efficiently connectorized to optical fibers, which results in large optical
losses (&gt; 7 dB/ facet). This significantly affects the usefulness of these
devices, and limits them to laboratory demonstrations, only. To address this,
the team will develop techniques to reduce coupling efficiency to ~ 1dB/ facet,
and use this to develop fully packaged and pig-tailed modulator prototype. These
will then be benchmarked against the state of the art technologies, as well as
for customer development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.