* 1827139
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: The Roadrunner High-Performance Science, Engineering, and Business DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Brent League, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

World-class research in cyber security, bioinformatics, cloud computing, machine
learning, artificial intelligence, real-time computing and other related areas
requires efficient and often near-immediate access to large data sets in order
to reduce the time from theory to discovery. In addition, discoveries are often
interdisciplinary and multi-institutional. As a result, a critical enabling
feature for impactful, collaborative research is a dedicated high-speed network
that is omnipresent across a campus. The University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA), a Hispanic Serving Institution, is implementing a dedicated research
network (DMZ) to facilitate data-intensive computation and research
collaboration endeavors. This infrastructure fills a gap that currently exists
in the "last mile" bottleneck from a research lab to the DMZ.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project calls for installation of 10
Gb/s switches across campus that, in concert with the dedicated research
network, provide 5-10X faster data transfer rates. These improvements foster
access by UTSA faculty and students to the campus' high-performance computing
facility, high-speed data storage, and visualization laboratory as well as the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) in Austin, Texas. The new network also
enhances experiential learning activities such as UTSA's annual CyberPatriot
competition, undergraduate research projects in cloud and high-performance
computing, cloud computing ELab training for undergraduates, as well as
certification programs such as the Master's level certification in cloud
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.