* 1827521
* PFI-RP: Development of Delivery Devices to Enable Cell Transformation or Preservation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Paula Bates, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 996,110.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will arise from the
development of new devices that efficiently and uniformly transport molecules to
the inside of cells. Many large or charged molecules do not easily penetrate the
outer layer of cells and are not able to access the components inside the cell.
This is a problem because delivery of certain molecules (including sugars,
proteins, DNA, or RNA) to the inside of cells would allow better methods for
modifying and storing cells. Examples of how this could be useful include a
nature-inspired process for preparing freeze-dried cells so they can be stored
at room temperature and rehydrated on demand, which would be useful for both
research (cell lines) and medical treatments (red blood cells). If successful,
these activities will increase the economic competitiveness of the United States
through new product development, company formation, and training opportunities.
Our research could advance public health and support national defense by
improving cancer therapy and providing dried blood for military field use, space
travel, and emergency preparedness. This project is also designed specifically
to enhance relationships between academia and industry, and to encourage
participation of women and individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is expected to advance
knowledge in many areas, including ultrasound-mediated sonoporation,
microfluidics, and cryobiology. Our ultimate goal is to develop integrated
ultrasound-microfluidic devices for optimal delivery of cell-impermeable
molecules to a variety of cell types. Current methods are not ideal for numerous
reasons including low transfection efficiency and toxicity. We plan to develop
devices that can be used for the following applications: (1) intracellular
delivery of cryoprotectant molecules (such as trehalose) to red blood cells or
to cultured cell lines so that cells can be frozen, dehydrated, stored at
ambient temperature, and then rehydrated without substantial loss of viability
or function; and (2) intracellular delivery of biomolecules (DNA, RNA, or
protein) to cultured cells or primary cells for use in research or therapy.
Parameters to be optimized include microfluidic designs, flow rate,
cryopreservation or transfection solutions, and methods for sonoporating,
freezing, drying, and recovery. The success of our approach will be determined
by evaluating multiple factors, such as loading, viability, and function. This
is an academia-industry partnership project where university researchers and
industry experts will work together to maximize the speed of development and the
likelihood that the project will result in a commercially viable
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.