* 1827870
* Collaborative Research: Filling in the Central Himalayan Seismic Gap: A Structural, Neotectonic, and Paleoseismic Investigation of the Western Nepal Fault System
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Sean Bemis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 203,118.00

The 2015 Gorkha Mw 7.8 earthquake, which caused 9,000 fatalities, resulted from
rupture along a megathrust - the Main Himalayan thrust - where the Indian sub-
continent subducts beneath deformed Himalayan belt and the Asian continent. Most
megathrust fault systems, where one tectonic plate is being forced underneath
another tectonic plate, occur deep beneath the world's oceans where observations
are limited due to difficult submarine access. These systems produce the largest
recorded earthquakes in the world and typically consist of a primary fault and
additional splay faults that work together to accommodate collision between the
tectonic plates. A recently discovered complex fault system west of the Gorkha
epicentral region, the Western Nepal Fault System (WNFS), appears to play a
major role in accommodating the Himalayan collision and poses a major seismic
hazard for a large region of Nepal. This project will document the long-term
rate of motion, determine the timing and location of prehistoric earthquakes,
and map out the full extent of the WNFS. The data will be used to develop
constraints on the seismic hazard exposure of regional populations and provide
recommendations for low-cost, sustainable, and culturally sensitive earthquake
risk mitigation strategies. The project would advance other desired societal
outcomes such as full participation of women in STEM, increased public
scientific literacy and public engagement with STEM through participation in
local public outreach activities, development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce through undergraduate and graduate student training, and
fostering international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic and
geophysical observations have long shown that areas of oblique plate convergence
tend to form slip partitioned systems, where the basal megathrust accommodates
margin-perpendicular convergence, and a strike-slip splay or backarc fault
accommodates margin-parallel motion. Given the curvature of most convergent
margins, convergence obliquity often varies along strike, becoming zero at some
point. However, because these zones are usually inaccessible in offshore
subduction zones, the kinematics and earthquake cycle behavior of these splay
faults are poorly known. This project targets the newly discovered Western Nepal
Fault System as a major, subaerial, well-exposed splay fault system within the
Himalayan thrust wedge that appears to transfer dextral strain from the
Karakoram Fault in the obliquely convergent northwest Himalayan backarc to the
central Himalayan forearc where convergence is primarily margin-normal. The
objective of this project is to test multiple working hypotheses that use the
deformation patterns of the WNFS to constrain models of fault segmentation and
linkage for regional slip-partitioning and splay faulting models: (1) strong
strain partitioning hypothesis in which the WNFS is a well-connected system of
active faults that transfer slip from the Karakoram- Gurla Mandhata/Humla fault
system in the northwest, across the thrust wedge, and branches with the Main
Frontal Thrust at the front of the wedge; (2) weak strain partitioning
hypothesis in which the WNFS is a collection of disconnected faults that broadly
accommodate arc-parallel strike-slip faulting and northwest translation of the
Himalayan arc sliver; and (3) thrust faulting and oblique ramp hypothesis in
which the WNFS is a collection of faults that accommodate shortening within the
thrust wedge. To address these hypotheses and leverage new constraints on
regional seismic hazard, the research team will carry out a three year
multidisciplinary investigation consisting of three primary components: (1)
structural geology, neotectonics, geomechanics, and geochronology with
paleoseismology to constrain (a) the geometries and kinematics of active fault
systems, (b) displacement magnitude, (c) fault slip rates, and (d) historical
patterns of strain release using paleoseismology; (2) an updated probabilistic
seismic hazard and risk analysis integrating the results of the geologic
studies; and (3) a benefit-cost analysis of structural and non-structural
vulnerability-reducing strategies at household to community scales to provide
recommendations for reducing risk and promoting resilience through mitigation
and recovery. The active fault mapping, slip rate, and paleoearthquake data are
also fundamental components of seismic hazard analyses. Working with Nepali
collaborators, the results will be used to provide updated probabilistic seismic
hazard analysis and develop practical mitigation strategies for a region widely
thought to be at heightened seismic risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.