* 1827176
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with EDS and EBSD Capabilities to Enhance Teaching and Research at Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Lewis, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 425,829.00

Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with EDS to Enhance Teaching and
Research at Indiana University of Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scanning
Electron Microscopes (SEMs) create detailed images of tiny objects. SEMs can
image biological and geological samples and man-made items (modern and
historical). With another instrument (Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy-EDS)
attached it can determine chemical compositions. This grant will purchase an SEM
with EDS for Indiana University of Pennsylvania. The SEM-EDS system will be an
important tool for faculty and students at all universities and local industries
in the region. The new instrument will enhance research and education
capabilities in an underserved area of western Pennsylvania. The SEM-EDS will be
used in scientific research and as a training tool for undergraduate and
graduate students in a many science and technology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the ability to image objects at nanometer to
millimeter scale, Scanning Electron Microscopes (SEMs) are the standard tool for
scientific research of microscopic features. The addition of Electron Dispersive
Spectroscopy (EDS) allows for collection of semi-quantitative compositional data
and elemental mapping. This grant will purchase a research-grade
ThermoScientific Prisma E SEM with an Oxford EDS system, along with some
ancillary equipment, for Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP), which will be
transformative to IUP and the surrounding region, immediately elevating research
productivity of active scholars and their predominantly undergraduate trainees.
The SEM-EDS system will be available for faculty and students at all
universities in the region and to local industries, creating a regional effect,
increasing research capabilities and productivity throughout western
Pennsylvania. This grant includes senior investigators and their students from
departments of Anthropology, Biology, Chemistry, Geoscience, and History who
will use the SEM-EDS in a wide range of research topics, including: 1)
quantifying crystallization within volcanic deposits (tephra, lava, and diabase
sills) and lab crystallization experiments, 2) characterizing solid-state
mineral chemistry and crystallography in semiconductor materials, 3) identifying
diatom taxonomy to determine temporal variability of the silica and carbon
cycles in both freshwater and marine systems, 4) analyzing Roman ceramics to
investigate (pre)historic trade connections, 5) analyzing tooth-tooth
interaction and tooth-food interaction in extinct (fossils) and living
vertebrates, 6) characterizing ash morphologies from tree wood and nuts found at
archaeological sites to correlate vegetation response to changing climate, 7)
analysis of fine-grained aerosols (&lt;2.5um) to examine air-quality, and 8)
studying rapid tectonic exhumation. The acquisition of the SEM-EDS will
immediately enhance the regional research environment by promoting new
collaborations on campus, across campuses, and with industry and non-profit
partners. The instrument will also be used as a training platform for
undergraduate and graduate students to learn modern, state-of-the-art analytical
techniques used in a large variety of science and technology
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.