* 1827116
* CC* Integration: Service Analysis and Network Diagnosis (SAND)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Gardner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 499,673.00

Increasingly, science has become a "team sport" with projects less likely to be
conducted by a single investigator or university group but with multi-
institution collaborations spanning many universities and national laboratories.
As these collaborations have become data-intensive, highly-performant network
links connecting their distributed science platforms have become increasingly
important. While true across all science, some collaborations, like those at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, transfer millions of gigabytes across
global networks today and anticipate orders of magnitude increases within the
next decade. Without performant networks and efficient data transfer and access
services, the time to science will be greatly compromised. In this context,
high-speed, long-distance networks see their performance degrade surprisingly
quickly in the face of modest error rates. Accordingly, network engineers and
researchers use sophisticated tools to monitor the network and transfer
services. Without a means to aggregate and correlate network tests, performance
measurements, and application response, they at best can only reveal a small
piece of the overall problem. This project focuses on techniques that better
combine, visualize, and analyze disparate network monitoring and service logging
data, providing a comprehensive picture critical to the engineers and scientists
relying on the network. This will allow problems to be located and fixed more
quickly, reducing the time to science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "CC*
Integration: Service Analysis and Network Diagnosis (SAND)" project brings
together an experienced team that has been working for more than a decade on
wide area data transfers for large scale science. The project develops a network
monitoring archive and analytics platform, SAND-NMA, which integrates widely
used data analytics tools (such as ElasticSearch, Kibana and JupyterLab) with
infrastructure components (perfSONAR, HTCondor) and application sensors. Data
from disparate sources are published to a messaging bus providing low-latency
metrics describing the performance of research platforms on a global scale.
Exploratory work is performed to provide engineers with pragmatic tools to
identify and locate problems and perform analytics to understand the long-term
evolution of network and higher level service performance. Programming
interfaces allow external cyberinfrastructure (such as workflow management
systems) to incorporate the network monitoring feeds into their decision making
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.