* 1827072
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: U.S. - Cameroon Collaboration Investigating Anthropogenic Perturbations on Carbon Cycling in an Urbanized Tropical Estuary
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Henry Agbogun, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,426.00

The proposal is co-funded by OISE, EPSCoR and GEO
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will support US students and
provide international education, training and research in marine geochemistry
and carbon cycling in a tropical estuary (Douala Estuary) in the Atlantic coast
of Cameroon, West Africa. During this study, faculty and students from the
University of Delaware, a PhD granting institution and Fort Hays State
University, a non-PhD granting institution will partner with faculty and
students from the University of Douala and the University of Yaound 1 in
Cameroon. Over the next three years, 9 undergraduates and 3 MS students will
travel to Cameroon to conduct hands-on, field-based research that is focused on
investigating the effects of agriculture, urbanization, industrial and shipping
activities on carbon cycling in the Douala Estuary. The objectives are to (1)
document pollution in the water column and sediments and (2) assess if and how
the human activities and pollution affect carbon dioxide production in water
column and sediments. Data acquired by the students will provide important
information to assess the role of the Douala Estuary in carbon cycling and
provide valuable information to model the movement of carbon at the local,
regional and even global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will
provide undergraduate and graduate students with the opportunity to conduct
faculty mentored, hands-on research in an apprenticeship-type model. Different
aspects of the project will form the basis of undergraduate research topics and
graduate student theses. A goal of our IRES program is to attract
underrepresented minority students and mentor them to develop self-confidence,
independent and critical thinking skills necessary to excel in a research and in
careers in the geosciences. By interacting with Cameroonian peers, the US
students will enrich their cultural experience, build personal and professional
networks and establish relationships that will form the core of future
international research collaborations. The results of the students' projects
will provide scientific input that will be useful for designing sustainable
management programs for the use and protection of estuarine
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon in estuaries are an integral part of the
global carbon cycle. The US Carbon Cycle Research Program identified carbon
contributions from estuaries to the atmosphere as a critical area for research.
Much research on carbon cycling has been conducted in estuaries in temperate
regions. To date, there are no studies of carbon cycling in tropical estuaries
of Africa and even less is known about how agriculture, urbanization, industrial
and shipping activities polluting theses estuaries affect the carbon cycle. Few
estuarine studies are based in Africa, despite the high human population along
the coast and extensive human alteration of estuarine ecosystems. The US Carbon
Cycle Research Program identified carbon sources and fluxes to and from
estuaries as a critical area for research because estuaries link the
terrestrial, ocean and atmospheric carbon reservoirs. Yet, the role in local,
regional or even global carbon cycling from tropical estuaries in sub-Saharan
Africa which receive far greater amounts of organic carbon and pollutants
compared to temperate and high latitude estuaries is unknown. To fill this
knowledge gap, for six weeks and over a three-year period, US students and their
Cameroonian peers will conduct field based research to elucidate how
anthropogenic activities (agriculture, urbanization, industrial and shipping)
that pollute the Douala Estuary with nutrients (e.g., nitrates) and metals
(Cadmium) affect carbon cycling in the water column and sediments. The
anticipated results of this project will provide important information to assess
the role of the Douala Estuary in carbon cycling and provide valuable data for
carbon cycling modelling at the local, regional and even global scale. Students
will test the hypothesis that anthropogenic pollution in the Douala Estuary
increases bio-productivity in the water column and sediments, alters the cycling
of carbon and increases the flux of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By interacting with Cameroonian peers, the US students
will enrich their cultural experience, build personal and professional networks
and establish relationships that will form the core of future international
research collaborations. Finally, the results of student projects will provide
scientific input that is useful for designing sustainable management programs
for the use and protection of estuarine resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.