* 1827287
* An investigation on flame-front instability in laminar and turbulent flames
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Chung Law, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2021
* USD 292,500.00

Combustion in modern high-performance engines, such as automotive and aircraft
engines, occurs at high-pressure turbulent conditions. Engine efficiency and
reliability strongly depend on flame dynamics, which can be intrinsically
unstable in such extreme conditions. The proposed research will characterize the
role of flame-front instabilities on flame propagation in engine-relevant
conditions. This knowledge is needed for optimizing modern engines, especially
at high pressures and high turbulent conditions. Using a unique dual-chamber
vessel, which allows high-pressure investigations, the experiments will be
targeted to extend our current knowledge on flame-front instabilities in both
laminar and turbulent flames. Results from this study can be extended to other
problems, such as large-scale fire-whirl dynamics in wildland and urbane fires,
which are intrinsically turbulent even the combustion is at atmospheric
pressure, in addition to the astrophysical phenomena of the supernova explosion
with cosmic intensity. This project will engage graduate and undergraduate
students who will be exposed to advanced diagnostics while studying the basic
combustion physics and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program aims
to understand and quantify the fundamental dynamics of different modes of
intrinsic flame-front instabilities of propagating flames in either quiescent or
well-defined turbulent environments. Such an understanding is rather immature at
present but is required for the further advance in the design and optimization
of modern combustion engines. The investigation includes experimentation on
spark-ignited, spherical flames at high- and constant-pressure conditions using
high-speed high-resolution optical diagnostics. The uniqueness of this study is
the well-controlled, well-characterized, high-pressure environment. In such
environments, prominent hydrodynamic cellular/wrinkling flame-front structures
are manifested and can be precisely quantified using optical diagnostics in
unprecedented details. The understanding is facilitated by acquiring high-
fidelity experimental data and by quantitatively defining and assessing various
stability parameters. This work will characterize global and local length scales
for different modes of flame propagation under conditions of isolated
instability, isolated turbulence, and their coupled influences. Since the
proposed study includes both experimental and theoretical investigations, it
will provide the essential synergistic experience in the design and data
interpretation of both components, leading to advances in the knowledge of high-
pressure turbulent combustion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.