* 1827429
* Is there a Pangean suture zone in southeastern New England?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yvette Kuiper, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 197,082.00

Ever since Tuzo Wilson asked whether the Atlantic Ocean closed and then reopened
in a famous 1966 paper in the journal Nature, this idea has been generally
accepted and explored. It is well established that ~180 million years ago the
Atlantic Ocean opened along approximately the same line as where the continents
around the pre-Atlantic Ocean had closed and formed supercontinent Pangea by
~250 million years ago. This supercontinent included the Americas to the west
and Eurasia (Europe and Asia) and Africa to the east of the Pangean suture zone.
It is possible, however, that some continental fragments were transferred from
Eurasia/Africa to the Americas and/or vice versa, if the Atlantic Ocean opened
anywhere along a line that did not follow the suture zone. To date, this has not
been demonstrated. The eastern New England Appalachians consist of a collage of
microcontinents that collided with and became part of North America between ~470
and ~360 million years ago, before the formation of Pangea. One of the last of
these arriving microcontinents, the Avalon terrane, is interpreted to constitute
southeastern Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and southeastern Connecticut.
Recently, the principal investigator and coauthors of a 2017 paper published in
the journal Geology discovered a fragment of West African (Moroccan) crust in
offshore Massachusetts that was stranded during the breakup of Pangea. Careful
review of existing data for what has been interpreted as the Avalon terrane of
southeastern New England suggests that part of it may in fact be part of this
West African fragment. The purpose of the proposed work is to test this
hypothesis. If true, southeastern New England will be the first known location
where the major Pangean suture zone is exposed on land. It may become the first
location where geologists and geophysicists who work in the Appalachians, West
Africa and beyond can come together and study the main suture zone that formed
the most recent supercontinent. Bedrock geologic maps and our understanding of
the geology of Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut and the northern
Appalachians may change significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that part
of what is generally accepted to be the southeastern New England Avalon terrane
may actually be a west African fragment that remained after the breakup of
Pangea has not previously been explored, because Avalonian and west African
rocks have similar characteristics and ages. However, the ages of zircon in
sedimentary and granitic rocks distinguishes them. For example, Avalonian rocks
have a strong affinity with approximately one billion year old crust, and West
African rocks with approximately two billion year old crust. Therefore, one
billion year old zircon is common in Avalonian sedimentary rocks, where they
were deposited as grains of sediment, and in Avalonian granitic rocks, where
they were incorporated in the granitic melt as it penetrated the crust. The same
is true for two billion year old zircon in West African rocks. At the latitude
of Boston and to the north, existing data are indicative of the Avalon terrane.
To the south, existing data are sparse and can be interpreted either way. The
purpose of the proposed work is to analyze the ages of zircon grains in
sedimentary and granitic rocks from the area south of the latitude of Boston to
understand their origins and affinities. Where no bedrock is exposed, samples
from existing drill core will be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.