* 1827790
* EDGE:  Tools for studying gene function in voles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Devanand Manoli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,600,000.00

Different rodent species live in all parts of the world and lead various
lifestyles from a solitary existence to taking part in complex societies. As a
result, rodents are useful for investigating the biological explanations
underlying different social behaviors in different species. The goal of this
project is to develop the tools and resources needed to discover the genes that
contribute to behavioral diversity. The investigators focus on two vole species
that differ dramatically in their social behavior, monogamous prairie voles and
polygamous meadow voles. They develop methods to alter genes in these animals,
deliver new genetic material to the brain by intravenous injection, and
manipulate genes in particular brain regions and cell types. These tools are
made available to the broader scientific community via online resource
dissemination, presentations at national meetings, local workshops, and hands-on
lab sessions with the goal of extending these tools to scientists studying other
rodent species. In addition, the investigators incorporate undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral trainees in the development process, generating a
cohort of scientists who are versed in understanding the impact of genes on
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal of biological investigation is to
understand the organizing principles of natural variation. To accomplish this
goal requires causal manipulations of non-traditional model species. Wild
rodents offer opportunities to pursue such research. They are behaviorally
diverse, yet allow researchers to use many of the same tools developed for model
organisms. Voles of the genus Microtus stand out as popular study subjects. They
vary in mating system, social attachment, and other behaviors that cannot be
studied in traditional laboratory species. This project addresses a current
bottleneck in integrative research with voles: the lack of technologies to
directly interrogate neurogenetic function. To address this, the team of three
investigators: 1) Optimize tools for germline manipulation of Microtus embryos;
2) Develop an intravenously deliverable genetic vector; and 3) Test methods for
post-mitotic gene manipulation in cells and regulatory circuits. The team
disseminates these advances via national meetings, workshops, trainee exchanges,
and online resources. The investigators also train undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral researchers, developing a cohort of scientists versed in these
technologies. Initial proof-of-concept manipulations focuses on oxytocin and
vasopressin systems, and the materials generated are of immediate use to the
vole research community. However, the challenges addressed are similar to those
faced in other non-model rodents; developing these tools promises to transform
the integrative study of genes and behavior more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.