* 1827477
* SBP: Glass Ceilings to Diversity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Daniel McFarland, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 560,407.00

This project studies what allows underrepresented groups to break glass ceilings
in (1) becoming professors and (2) the reception of their innovative ideas.
Women, minorities, and international students become professors at significantly
lower rates than their counterparts. Even if they become professors, their
scientific innovations may be received differently than those of others. These
glass ceilings are studied by investigating the factors that affect whether over
1.2 million US doctoral recipients (1977-2015) become professors, and whether
they become professors with long lineages of subsequent students who go on to
become faculty themselves. Also studied is whether diverse individuals bring new
concepts and new conceptual relations and expand the body of research in new
directions. The project also examines factors that affect the citation and
reception of research (net of its contribution), with attention to the work of
diverse scholars. Findings will show how barriers to diversity in higher
education may be lowered and overcome and what policy levers can be used to
enable equal access to the professoriate and to the creation of scholarly ideas,
to the benefit of science and the national welfare more generally. This project
was supported jointly by the Education and Human Resources Core Research
Program, the Sociology Program, and Science of Broadening Participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Going beyond previous studies, this project follows
doctoral recipients and their careers and considers all scientific fields and
multiple demographic groups. The data for this study encompass almost all
scientists that entered US academia from 1977-2015. The anchor data set of
degree recipients is augmented by data on their authoring activities and
enriched by demographic data, academic field, and citations. Questions relating
to innovation are investigated by extracting data concerning the content of
publications. Following linking of the various data sets and cross-validation,
statistical analyses are used to investigate the principal questions of the
study. Contributions of the study include data to be publicly available, methods
for processing and analyzing similar data, and findings concerning the glass
ceilings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.