* 1827905
* MRI: Upgrade of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Support Research, Research Training, and Chemical Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Seth Friese, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 265,196.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Jose Juncosa from Salisbury
University and colleague Seth Friese have upgraded the console of a 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer and equipped the resulting spectrometer with an automatic changer
that allows students to collect data on multiple samples. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts student researchers who coauthor papers and
present their results at local and national conferences. The spectrometer
promotes enhanced research opportunities in its outreach, and empowers future
generations in science and engineering. The NMR spectrometer has a direct impact
on the quality and productivity of research and research training activities in
the broader geographic region, particularly the lower Eastern Shore of the
Delmarva Peninsula. The spectrometer is shared with researchers at the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore, a neighboring Historically Black College
and University (HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially aids in the characterization
of synthetic agonists for the serotonin receptor denominated 5-HT-24 and the
design of new nitrogen-containing donor ligands. The spectrometer is used to
characterize alkaloids synthesized using oxazolium salt transformations and to
identify genes and enzymes. The instrument helps researchers developing
switchable magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents used in conjunction with
MRI scanning devices and for the analysis of synthetic 2-oxopyrroline enaminone
hybrid analogues. The NMR spectrometer is also utilized on the search for
bioactive microbial natural products and for hybrid antioxidants/muscarinic
agonists which are agents that activates the activity of the muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor in cell membranes of certain neurons and other
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.