* 1827180
* IRES Track 1: Baja Basins International Research Experiences for Students in Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Tina Niemi, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,997.00

The goal of this Baja Basins International Research Experiences for Students
(Baja Basins IRES) project is for undergraduate student participants to develop
skills in conducting and communicating scientific research, to utilize an
integrative field and lab research approach using digital technology and modern
analytical lab equipment, and to learn international cooperation by
collaborating side-by-side with Mexican students, professors, and mining
professionals to address research questions on the tectonic evolution of
economically important rift margin basins in Baja California Sur, Mexico. Each
year of this three-year program, a cohort of ten undergraduate students will be
hosted by Minera Boleo mine for four weeks in January in Baja California Sur,
Mexico. Students will conduct geologic fieldwork in topical groups (basin
analysis, volcanology, neotectonics, and mineralogy) that will be co-mentored by
Mexican and U.S. faculty. Field samples will be sent for geochemical,
petrographic, and geochronological analyses. Then in July of the same year, Baja
Basins IRES students will reconvene for collaborative lab work and data analyses
at the University of Missouri-Kansas City. This will culminate in preparation of
student abstracts and poster displays for a local symposium. Clear educational
outcomes and career goals will be measured by appropriate assessment strategies.
We will recruit junior undergraduate geoscience majors both nationally and
regionally near our home institutions, as this will facilitate the participation
of under-represented minority, first-time college, and veteran students who
often remain close to their hometown when pursuing higher education. Our
collaboration with Mexican colleagues and mining professionals, and the
international nature of the fieldwork will provide an unparalleled avenue for
cultural enrichment for the students as well as an experience in global
cooperation that will be invaluable for a student's future success in an
increasingly global workforce and economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Baja Basins
International Research Experiences for Students (Baja Basins IRES) project will
provide ten undergraduate student a year with the opportunity to investigate
basins located along the central Gulf of California rift in Baja California Sur
Mexico, an area that has not been thoroughly mapped within the framework of
tectonics and thus provides an excellent field location to study the progressive
evolution of a rifted continental margin and its unique continued magmatic
activity and economic mineralization. The young geologic age of the sedimentary
basins, excellent exposures, and field access, as well as sedimentary fill with
numerous tuffs and uplifted terraces dateable by radiometric and OSL methods,
make it ideal for resolving the rates of development of structures and resulting
depositional systems. This Baja Basins IRES program will provide students with
an unprecedented opportunity to collaborate internationally with mentors from
our partner universities in Mexico (Universidad Autonoma de Baja California Sur
and Universidad de Guanajuato) and several mining companies. Students will
develop field and laboratory skills in basin analysis and tectonics in a
volcanic-sedimentary sequence that is geologically interesting, economically
important, and culturally diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.