* 1827654
* R/V Pelican Ship Operations CY18-23
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Joseph Malbrough, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,493,858.00

LUMCON operates the state owned oceanographic research vessel Pelican. This
vessel has sailed throughout the Gulf of Mexico, U.S. east coast and Caribbean
in support of a wide variety of science research projects sponsored by NSF, U.S.
Navy, NOAA, and other Federal and State Agencies. Seagoing research scheduled
for 2018 will cover a wide range of scientific disciplines such as ocean
acidification, hypoxia and benthic community energy
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by R/V Pelican for NSF has
been peer-reviewed, each with unique intellectual?s merits. Wei-Jun Cai's
research aims to further the understanding of the processes influencing ocean
acidification in coastal waters subject to eutrophication and hypoxia both in
the Gulf of Mexico and river-dominated shelf ecosystems
globally.&lt;br/&gt;Craig McClain's Wood Falls project is to test changes in
carbon availability and the impact on marine biodiversity. The research will
reveal much about wood-fall biomes in the deep sea, one of the least studied
systems in the ocean. The impact of the rate of carbon uptake on ecological
processes which has been rarely evaluated will be examined. Jason Sylvan RAPID
research data from this project will allow managers to predict current and
future storm events which are likely to induce reef mortality due to freshwater
accumulation, by tracking of low salinity water masses. This research will
provide unprecedented resolution on how hurricanes and other&lt;br/&gt;extreme
storms events may trigger cascading interactions among water chemistry
intimately resulting in coral reef decline. Kelly Robinson's RAPID research will
examine how plankton in the NW GOM respond to large floodwater plumes associated
with Hurricanes. This project will investigate the short and mid-term
effect&lt;br/&gt;of Harvey on plume on planktonic community composition and
trophic interactions in that system. Building earlier data and from historical
datasets in the region, plankton assemblages, abundance and food web
interactions will be assessed after the event. Kristen Thyng aims to get a
better understanding of how Galveston Bay will respond to the extreme freshwater
forcing event of Harvey. Measuring the quantification of residence time of FW in
the Bay, identification and characterization of the salinity structure of the
plume will assist in establishing the time scales require to reintroduction of
salt into the Bay. This study will allow for a more accurate prediction of
baroclinic circulation, which controls transport and fate of pollutants
introduced into the flood waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jason Sylvan will
synergize with NSF REU programs at Boston University and Texas A&amp;M
University, providing transformative research experiences for undergraduates.
One post-doc,4 graduate students, a technician and 5 undergraduates will be
involved in all aspects of the research. Scientist from FugroGeos and Wood Hole
Group will study currents and large ocean gyres in the Gulf of Mexico that
breaks off from the northern LOOP current and travel westward toward the Texas
coast. The results will benefit the&lt;br/&gt;operators of production facilities
worldwide. Summer cruises will have a MATE sea-going intern working alongside an
R/V Pelican Marine Technician. Other long-term studies have used the Pelican to
characterize and evaluate important fisheries resources in the northern Gulf of
Mexico. The NOAAfunded SEAMAP cruises have used the Pelican for 25 years to
survey bottom fish resources from the Mississippi River to the Texas-Louisiana
border. Another NOAA program under the leadership of Nancy&lt;br/&gt;Rabalais at
LUMCON has used the ship for the last 28 years to survey large areas of hypoxic
bottom waters in the Gulf of Mexico in order to better understand the impact
this phenomenon has on the local commercial and non-commercial marine resources
in this region. The Pelican has been involved in a number of marine education
and public outreach activities throughout the region. The NOAA Hypoxia cruises
of Nancy Rabalais continue to provide access to the Gulf of Mexico for media
representatives and serve as a platform for graduate students conducting their
research. Campbell will invite students to participate in a hypoxia cruises
which will study the physical and&lt;br/&gt;biogeochemical processes that
control and maintain the hypoxic zone in the northern Gulf of
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.