* 1827082
* RCN-UBE Incubator: The Biological and Environmental Data Education Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Andrew Kerkhoff, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2022
* USD 72,361.00

The Biological and Environmental Data Education (BEDE) project seeks to create a
community of biologists and data scientists dedicated to empowering
undergraduate instructors to bring data science into biology and environmental
science curricula. All scientists must now, to some extent, be data scientists--
they must manage, analyze, and communicate about data in the context of
collaborative, reproducible research. Furthermore, future professionals will
need to have data science skills to deal with urgent problems in agriculture,
environmental management, and public health. However, most students in biology
and environmental science graduate with little data science experience. The BEDE
Network will help address this need by focusing on developing the technical
skills, curricular resources, and pedagogical confidence of undergraduate
instructors so that they can more intentionally include core data science skills
in their classes and labs. By engaging an inclusive community of scientists and
biology and environmental science educators, BEDE will develop training
workshops, curricular materials, and best practices that can be adopted by
educators at almost any institution and in almost any
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology and environmental science have been
fundamentally reshaped by recent technological advances, including increased
computational power, sensor technologies, publicly available software and data,
and the Internet. Together with these advances, complex, multidisciplinary
questions and urgent environmental and public health problems have led to
changes in scientific culture and practice, with shifts toward greater
collaboration, accountability, and transparency. These technological advances
and cultural changes represent an educational challenge: already-full courses
and curricula do not prepare students to address data-intensive problems. To
assess the main opportunities and obstacles for integrating data science into
biology and environmental science curricula, BEDE investigators will use a
survey to gather data on faculty attitudes and expertise about it. Data from the
survey will be examined at a BEDE workshop, where participants will: 1) develop
Train-the-Teachers workshops based on curricular needs of survey respondents, 2)
prepare a position/review paper describing barriers and opportunities to
incorporating data science in biology and environmental science education; and
3) develop plans for further expansion of the Network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.