* 1827130
* RCN-UBE: Establishing a Genomics Education Alliance: Steps toward Sustainability
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Rochelle Tractenberg, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 494,749.00

The genomics revolution, the wide-spread use of DNA sequence data to enhance
biological understanding, brings unique challenges for biology educators. Skills
from computer and data sciences have become core competencies for students even
though many life science faculty completed formal training without the
computational expertise needed to effectively engage in this field. The Genomics
Education Alliance (GEA) will bring together members of existing genomics
education networks, leveraging their combined expertise to identify and curate
common genome analysis tools, associated curricular and assessment materials,
and faculty training strategies to facilitate the adoption of genomics
instruction at any college or university. By making existing resources
accessible, the GEA will enable current faculty to guide undergraduate life
science students participating in authentic genomic research projects. Such work
will enhance the ability of students -- whether at 2- or 4-year institutions --
to become productive members of the technological work-force, to succeed in
post-graduation studies in biology and related disciplines, and to be better
informed citizens and decision makers. The GEA will develop a consensus set of
vetted resources and training materials to be disseminated to the education
community through a single web portal for use of these materials in
undergraduate classrooms. Curation efforts will emphasize faculty training and
student learning resources, in particular the development of strategies to
effectively lead genomics Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
(CUREs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEA will form an extended network, recruiting
members from existing undergraduate genomics education communities, and exploit
their combined experience to create a unified and sustainable platform,
available through a web portal, that faculty can use to engage diverse students
in inquiry-based curricula and CUREs. Our efforts will focus around three major
aims: 1) curation and maintenance of computational resources for genomics
instruction; 2) development of faculty training and student learning materials;
and 3) evaluation of teaching and learning assessments in genomics education,
aligning assessments with faculty training and student learning resources. The
GEA network will be organized into four committees -- Bioinformatics
Infrastructure, Student Learning, Faculty Training, and Evaluation/Assessment --
who will meet regularly to assemble and select materials to be further refined
at the three face-to-face workshops. The specific tasks of each committee will
be set at the kickoff workshop, and their initial work will be reported at a
second progress workshop. At the final synthesis workshop, participants will
evaluate the products and recommend any continued development needed for broad
implementation. Curated materials will be maintained on established
infrastructure to ensure the long-term accessibility of these
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.