* 1827214
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Chemical Doping and Halogen Bonding Studies of Conjugated Polymers for Renewable Energies
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Harold LEE, LEE                     Harold         O
* Fellowship Award
* Emanuel WAddell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Renewable Energy and Advanced
Materials (CREST-CREAM) at Norfolk State University (NSU). Compared to
traditional inorganic semi-conducting materials, soft organic and polymeric
semiconducting materials exhibit inherent advantages such as lower cost and less
energy consumption on large scale manufacturing. However, the charge generation
and transport mechanisms of soft materials are not quite clear and the
conversion efficiencies of soft materials are still relatively low on average
compared to typical inorganic semiconductors. The major goal of the proposed
research is to enable a greater understanding of the fundamental scientific
mechanisms and principles behind charge generations, charge transports, and
morphological effects of soft organic and polymeric materials. Such research
could lead to less expensive, lightweight, flexible, biocompatible,
environmentally friendly, and higher performance alternatives to traditional
inorganic semi-conducting materials and devices. These future materials/devices
can contribute positively and critically to renewable and clean energy
technologies, bio-technologies, health care, and therefore can contribute to a
more sustainable human population growth.

The specific research objective of this project is to systematically investigate
the effects of charge doping on the electronic, optoelectronic, thermoelectric,
and morphological properties of conjugated or semiconducting polymers. In
addition to traditional chemical/photo/electrode doping, a relatively novel
concept of "halogen-bonding" doping will also be systematically investigated and
evaluated as an alternative low-cost and convenient method of engineering charge
generation, transport and morphological changes in soft organic/polymeric
materials. Halogen bonding is a relatively weak bonding mode similar to hydrogen
bonding and may be used to facilitate polymer self-assembly for increased solar
cell and device performance. State-of-the-art techniques will be used to
characterize potential changes in morphology and to test the final devices
constructed from these engineered materials. This research is expected to
generate new knowledge that will be widely disseminated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.