* 1827346
* Functional DNA Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 355,265.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on exploiting DNA self-assembly to develop a new class of
functional materials that outperform their analogs in biological systems.
Development of man-made systems that reproduce the functionality and outperform
biological systems is one of the most challenging and intriguing aims of science
and engineering. Miniature systems that perform practical tasks are in demand in
all areas of modern technology, from protective clothing, filtration, and
electronics to synthetic enzymes and artificial tissues. Self-assembly of DNA
molecules programmed by the letters of the genetic alphabet has emerged as a
practical method for building complex miniature objects. Driven by the
complementary pairing of A and T and C and G DNA bases, such molecular self-
assembly is robust and occurs in a massively parallel fashion. Using an arsenal
of computational approaches, this project will develop man-made DNA systems
capable of performing the functions of naturally occurring biological machines,
including ones that alter the composition of biological membranes, use
electricity to power rotary motors, harness the energy of light to generate
thrust, and remain functional in the cellular environment. Products of the
research will be used to educate the next generation of scientists and engineers
through new graduate and undergraduate courses, annual hands-on workshops,
interactive demonstrations of scientific concepts and lessons for middle school
and high school students. Ultimately, this project will contribute to the
development of synthetic systems capable of performing diverse functions of
biological systems without the complexities required to sustain biological
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to investigate
self-assembly of DNA as a way to develop a new class of functional
nanostructures that reproduce and exceed the functionality of biological
systems. All-atom, coarse-grained and continuum models of nanoscale interactions
will be combined to obtain an accurate description of the electrostatic,
optical, hydrodynamic and thermodynamic forces that give rise to the
nanostructures with desired functionalities. The PI will focus on DNA
nanostructures that can be inserted into lipid membranes in response to external
stimuli to regulate the passage of nutrients and signals across cellular
boundaries and to alter the composition of the biological membranes. DNA systems
will be designed to convert light or an electric field into forces and torques
to power nanoscale rotary motors and artificial muscles. The PI aims to
elucidate the properties of self-assembled DNA systems in the crowded
environment of a biological cell and to devise new methods to keep the DNA
nanostructures functional in such an environment. New computational approaches
for engineering matter at the nanoscale, enabling theoretical studies of systems
that combine unfamiliar combinations of materials and physical interactions,
will be developed in the course of the research. The research will advance
understanding of the physics of assemblies that combine highly charged and
hydrophobic objects, liquid flow in complex nanoscale structures, the effects of
highly focused light on self-assembled DNA structures and the behavior of man-
made systems inside biological cells. The methodological advances enabled
through this project will be disseminated to the research community in the form
of modules for well-used community software packages, including VMD, NAMD and
ARBD; through self-study materials; and an annual hands-on workshop focused on
modeling self-assembled nanostructures. The project outcomes will be integrated
into graduate and undergraduate curricula in the form of topical modules that
introduce microscopic simulations as a design and discovery tool and self-
assembly as a new engineering paradigm. The project will engage K-12 students
and their families through interactive demonstrations of scientific concepts and
integration of research products into middle and high-school
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.