* 1827277
* Investigating the Lithosphere-Asthenosphere System by Integrating New Constraints on Seismic Attenuation with Existing Geophysical Observations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Maximiliano Bezada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2021
* USD 249,999.00

Seismic waves propagating though a truly elastic material would, in principle,
keep on propagating forever. In the Earth, various mechanisms make the seismic
energy "leak" out of the waves, such that it is not available for further
propagation; leading eventually to the dissipation of the energy. This is what
is known as seismic attenuation. Although seismic attenuation occurs in a matter
of seconds, some of the same mechanisms that control this phenomenon have
profound effects on the way the plates respond to tectonic stresses over
millions-of-years timescales. For this reason, understanding where seismic
attenuation is strong and weak can help address questions such as: How do failed
rifts (scars left on the plates by episodes of extension) affect the strength of
the plates? And, what controls the location of mountain ranges and earthquakes
that occur away from the plate boundaries? Additionally, the effect of small
amounts of melt in mantle rocks may or may not significantly affect attenuation
depending on how that melt is distributed within the rock matrix. Therefore,
understanding attenuation in what are likely melt-bearing regions can help us
understand where and how melt is retained in the upper
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic attenuation is relatively difficult to
study both in the field and in the lab, and thus constraints on attenuation
structure are much scarcer than those available for other properties of the deep
subsurface, primarily seismic propagation velocity. This project will apply a
recently developed robust methodology for imaging the attenuation structure
beneath the continents to the high-quality seismic data sets that have resulted
from the EarthScope initiative. Several focus sites were selected that have been
covered by FlexArray seismic deployments and that represent prime examples of
the features that this project is aiming to investigate. Furthermore, combining
the new results that will be generated with other geophysical information will
provide stronger answers to the questions the project poses than would have been
possible with any one technique alone. The attenuation measurements will be
combined with previous constraints on seismic velocity and conductivity (where
available) jointly analyzed using software tools developed by another
EarthScope-funded project to discern whether the observed anomalies are best
explained by factors such as enhanced temperature, presence of small amounts of
melt, enhanced water content, or others. Finally, the data analysis software
developed as part of this project will be enhanced by building intuitive user
interfaces and self-contained software packages that will be made available to
the scientific community. Facilitating the dissemination and use of these tools
will lower the barriers to making this kind of measurement and doing this kind
of research. Broader Impacts of the work are many. The MATLAB code used to
process attenuation as part of this proposal will be publicly released to the
community. By pairing the code with an intuitive GUI, scientists new to the
field will more easily be able to measure the attenuation of teleseismic body
waves. This proposal will fund one postdoctoral researcher and a Hispanic early
career PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.