* 1827450
* Measurements of Hydrogen Oxide (HOx) Radical Chemistry Above and Below the Forest Canopy
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Philip Stevens, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 766,198.00

This project will improve understanding of the influence of forest emissions on
the production of ozone in the atmosphere. Currently, atmospheric chemistry
models tend to overpredict the concentration of ozone in forested environments.
Atmospheric radicals, such as the hydroxyl radical (OH), play an important role
in the chemistry of the atmosphere and in the production of ozone. This project
includes additional measurements and modeling of atmospheric radicals to improve
the understanding of atmospheric chemistry and for improving models that predict
the production of ozone and fine particulates in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following questions regarding the
measurement and modeling of HOx radicals in forested environments will be
addressed: (1) What is the source of the interference associated with
measurements of OH radical concentrations in forest environments and can it be
minimized? (2) How well do we understand the sources, sinks, and recycling of
HOx radicals in forest environments? and (3) How does below canopy radical
chemistry and transport impact the above canopy
environment?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.