* 1827264
* Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) in Support of National Science Foundation (NSF)'s Missions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Amanda Staudt, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) provides a locus for
National Research Council (NRC) activities on major atmosphere, weather, and
climate-related science, engineering, and policy issues. BASC provides guidance
to many federal agencies, offers a venue for advancing science and policy
related to these topics, oversees development and oversight of ad hoc NRC
studies on relevant subjects, and conducts outreach, education, and
international engagement activities. The Board provides oversight to the NRC
Committee to Advise the US Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) and serves as
the US National Committee to the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP). It
strives overall to help atmospheric science remain vibrant and have a broader
impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides support for the core
functions of the Board for a three-year period. The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) provide additional funds toward BASC's core operations and
activities. This base level support is essential for enabling BASC to quickly
respond to emerging needs from the sponsor community, draw attention to new
issues identified by the scientific community, and engage broadly in the
national and international discourse related to atmospheric and climate science.
In addition it will enable the Board to hold two "summer study" workshops on
topics of emerging interest. The award also supports the Christine Mirzayan
Science and Technology Policy Graduate Fellowship, a 10-12 week educational and
training opportunity for early career scientists. Mirzayan fellows support a
range of Board activities, including background research for BASC studies and
helping to organize the board meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.