* 1827509
* EDGE:   Creation of a Genetically Tractable Cephalopod Model using the Hawaiian Bobtail Squid
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Joshua Rosenthal, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Cephalopods are the most behaviorally complex invertebrates, exhibiting
sophistication on par with higher vertebrates. They have a highly complex system
for camouflage, enabling them to blend in with their environment
instantaneously. They have an advanced ability for learning and memory. They
have large brains (the common octopus has 6 times as many nerve cells as a rat).
These and other innovations have evolved along an independent trajectory from
the vertebrates, the only other similarly advanced group. By studying
cephalopods, much can be learned regarding biological complexity; however, these
studies have lagged due to the lack of a suitable cephalopod model system. Over
the past 30 years, genetically tractable model organisms like the fruit fly and
lab mouse have driven biological discovery. This project aims to develop the
Hawaiian Bobtail Squid into the first genetically tractable cephalopod model.
This species is ideal because it is small, it can be cultured through its entire
lifecycle, and it reaches sexual maturity in as little as two and a half months.
The project involves the establishment of a large-scale culture facility at the
Marine Biological Laboratory to provide specimens for genetic manipulation.
Husbandry methods are perfected to culture these organisms through multiple
generations. Finally, techniques for genome editing are developed. All resources
developed under this project, including animals and methods for gene knockouts,
are shared with the scientific community of cephalopod enthusiasts through
workshops. Additional efforts include assistance with the incorporation of
cephalopod biology into educational curricula for undergraduate students, and
into public outreach activities, such as exhibits at science museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a group, the coleoid cephalopods exhibit extraordinary
novelties, many that are poised to promote biological discovery across
disciplines. For example, they have by far the largest brains of any
invertebrate, and show behavioral sophistication comparable to advanced
vertebrates. Through convergence, they have evolved camera-type eyes and the
biomechanical capabilities of their appendages inspire robotic design.
Conspicuous symbioses with marine microbes make some species ideal models for
studying symbioses. Recently sequenced genomes and transcriptomes have uncovered
molecular novelties. In octopus, for example, large-scale expansions of cell
adhesion molecules may help explain how complex nervous systems are assembled.
Other studies indicate that cephalopods use RNA editing at unprecedented levels
to diversify genetic information. Taken together, these phenomena underscore the
vast potential of cephalopods to broaden our understanding of fundamental and
unexplored area in biology; however, the field has struggled to advance without
a genetically tractable model. The cephalopod community has lacked a model
because the husbandry of these organisms is difficult. This work overcomes a key
bottleneck in cephalopod research by developing Euprymna scolopes, the Hawaiian
Bobtail Squid, into a genetically tractable model. This species is ideal because
it is small, it can be cultured through its lifecycle, and it reaches sexual
maturity rapidly. To accomplish the project goals, a lifecycle culture facility
is established and protocols for genome editing using CRISPR-Cas9 are developed.
Animals produced by this facility are offered to the scientific community.
Protocols for husbandry and genome editing are disseminated through
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.