* 1827847
* PREM for functional nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Doyle Temple, Fort Lewis College
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,690,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnership in Research and
Education for Materials (PREM) project for Functional Nanomaterials is creating
a new partnership between Fort Lewis College (FLC; a non-tribal Native American
Serving Institution), Norfolk State University (NSU; a member of the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities), and the STROBE NSF Science and
Technology Center for Real-Time Functional Imaging. The partnership
strategically leverages (1) advanced microscopy for imaging functional
nanosystems being developed at STROBE, (2) extensive world-class fabrication
capabilities for advanced materials at NSU, and (3) expertise and infrastructure
for material characterization and nanofabrication at FLC. The collaboration
enables advances in cutting edge materials science, exposes and attracts
students from diverse groups to exciting applications in STEM, utilizes novel
and effective curricula, networks, and pathways that recruit and retain the best
in STEM. This PREM project directly funds approximately 50 undergraduate
researchers and 24 high school researchers at FLC and NSU. It also reaches out
to diverse populations of high school students with expanded STEM recruiting
efforts and provides pathways for students to careers in science and
engineering. PREM leverages existing infrastructures within STROBE, providing
student access to world-class research mentors, facilities and projects at the
cutting edge of material science and functional imaging. The student experience
in this PREM is immersive through not only year-long, hands on research but also
mentoring, professional development, leadership opportunities, and network
building; all with the goal of improving recruitment, retention, and graduation
of underrepresented minority students in STEM. This PREM develops the next
generation of scientists and engineers with emphasis and experience in materials
and imaging science and related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectrics, nanotherapeutics, and
nanoelectronics are pushing ever deeper into the nanoscale regime, with
characteristic dimensions already at 10nm. However, a fundamental understanding
of the role of defects and interfaces, deviations from bulk behavior, or the
relationship between multi-scale structure and nanostructured material
properties is still elusive. The PREM for functional nanomaterials leverages
advanced fabrication techniques and capabilities at NSU with advanced
characterization capabilities at FLC to better understand materials at the nano-
scale. The partnership with STROBE will enable PREM students to access world-
class imaging facilities, transdisciplinary research, and industry and
government collaborators, connecting them to a broad set of student and faculty
mentors. The PREM for functional nanomaterials research focuses on understanding
and utilizing the interplay of atomic- and nanoscale structure with
functionality in three different research thrust areas, providing a diverse set
of opportunities for student involvement in different stages and facets of
material science research. The three thrust areas are: 1) understanding the role
of crystal structure and defects on the thermoelectric and topological insulator
properties of chalcogenide bulk materials; 2) understanding and utilizing the
role of nanoscale geometry on the thermoelectric efficiency of a simple device;
and 3) understanding and controlling nanoscale structuring and interface quality
in materials that are a key component for applications in brain imaging and
living cell imaging. The results of this research will ultimately change the way
materials for energy, electronics, and medicine applications are
utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.