* 1827668
* PFI-TT: Creation of an augmented-reality platform for treatment of phobias/anxiety in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Zhandong Liu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 199,791.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will be in enabling
future technology-based therapies for Specific Phobia (SP) in both the general
population and individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Nearly 9% of US
population meets criteria for SP and very few seek treatment. Use of augmented
reality (AR) could, in the future, reduce barriers to seeking treatment and also
improve the health provider's ability to effectively and efficiently deliver
evidence-based therapy. Costs of delivering 'minimally adequate treatment' for
SP can range from $600-$900 per patient and can be much higher for payers,
patients, and health providers. Fortunately, augmented reality would allow the
advantages of providing therapy in a virtual environment with lower costs and
greater flexibility of options for the healthcare provider.

The proposed project is an AR platform that allows individuals with ASD as well
as those within the general population to overcome debilitating fears
characteristic of SP. Despite the availability of highly-effective treatments,
the majority of individuals experiencing debilitating fears characterizing SP
will never receive treatment, particularly those with ASD. The AR platform
created through this grant will, in the future, reduce the high rejection rate
of traditional exposure therapy as well as encourage individuals to seek
treatment who would not have done so before. Adaptive learning and computer
vision technologies will be used to enhance the efficacy and usability of the AR
platform. The project will involve development of a prototype platform allowing
individuals to observe a computer generated phobic stimuli through an AR device.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.