* 1827034
* IRES: Cooperative for Advanced Materials in Energy-Related Applications (CAMERA)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Dorothy Pak, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

IRES: Cooperative for Advanced Materials in Energy-Related Applications
(CAMERA)&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to involve and train
undergraduate and graduate student researchers from UCSB and other institutions
in different scientific, academic, and international venues to develop a highly
skilled, diverse and globally engaged workforce who can address energy
challenges of today and the future. Three undergraduate students and four
graduate students will travel to Chalmers University of Technology (Gothenburg,
Sweden) each year for 8-10 week long research experiences. UCSB graduate
students taking part in the research experiences at Chalmers will be recruited
based on collaborative research topics, working broadly in the area of materials
chemistry for energy conversion and storage. Undergraduate students will be
recruited from US colleges and universities to participate in the summer
undergraduate IRES program, with particular focus on recruiting participation by
women and underrepresented minorities. The international component of the
research and program will provide students with cultural perspectives and the
opportunity to develop a global network in science.&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
challenge of this IRES project is to design, create, and understand novel
materials and materials systems that can capture, convert, and store energy.
This will be accomplished through synergistic and complementary coupling of
resources and expertise in state-of-the-art synthesis, simulation,
characterization, and testing at UCSB, Chalmers University of Technology, and
multi-user x-ray and neutron facilities in Sweden. IRES students will
participate in collaborative research between UCSB and Chalmers University
through international research visits focused on battery materials;
magnetocalorics, thermoelectrics, and dynamic polymers for energy capture; and
carbon and oxide-based materials for electrocatalysis and electrochemical energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.