* 1827093
* IRES Track I: Algorithms and Software for SUpercomputers with emerging aRchitEctures (ASSURE)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Kenneth Merz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 269,547.00

Supercomputers enable researchers to push the boundaries of science and find
innovative approaches to complex problems. From improving advanced manufacturing
with modeling and simulation to understanding earth systems and weather with
greater precision, harnessing the data revolution and applying data to
understand life processes, supercomputers are essential to human advancement.
HPC (High Performing Computer) systems of the future will likely be very
different from those of today. Emerging architectures can have a tremendous
impact on the development of software, methods and models that can take
advantage of these new features resulting in speed up and improvement in the
accuracy of calculations. Early adoption of these emerging technologies to take
advantage of special features is key to remaining competitive in the global
economy. The goal of this IRES site is to engage PhD. students in research
learning experiences that increase their capacity to conduct research on
supercomputing systems, (including those with classical and emerging
architectures), and their exposure to international collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES, called ASSURE, aims to enhance the
capabilities of US graduate students to develop Algorithms and Software in key
scientific disciplines that benefit from Supercomputers and emerging
aRchitEctures (ASSURE). The program focuses on equipping students to conduct
research on one of the fastest supercomputers in the world, Sunway Taihulight,
housed in Wuxi China, which has a unique architecture. ASSURE achieves this goal
by: (i) training students to utilize unique international large-scale systems;
(ii) engaging students in high quality collaborative research in four key areas
of computational and data science utilizing these systems; and (iii) exposing
students to international large-scale research environments that prepare them
with cultural and professional skills required to occupy international
leadership roles. Specifically, IRES students at this site will conduct research
at two locations in China: The National Supercomputing Center (NSCC) in Wuxi
China and the University of Tsinghua and the East China Normal
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSURE site is open to US Ph.D. students
with an interest in computational and data science in the areas of earth
systems, drug design, advanced manufacturing, big data and machine learning.
Specifically, US citizens or permanent residents, including women and students
from underrepresented populations in international STEM research, are invited to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.