* 1827608
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nanofabrication and Electron Microscopy System for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2019
* USD 699,998.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The acquired nanofabrication and electron
microscopy system enhances the research and education capabilities at the
University of Texas at Austin in nanometer-scale science and engineering,
including the development of new low-cost, efficient materials for solar cells,
fuel cells, batteries, nano-electronics, microfluidics, drug delivery,
catalysis, health, etc. It also serves as a regional research tool for
universities and industries for the study of advanced materials and devices. The
fundamental understanding gained on the chemical/physical phenomena seeds
transformational breakthroughs in the design of advanced materials and spurs the
creation of new technologies. Moreover, the facility where the instrument is
located has a profound impact on education and training of students on the
campus and beyond, and serves as a focal point for outreach activities for
underrepresented student populations through workshops and hands-on training
sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
acquired through a Major Research Instrumentation grant comprises a high-
resolution dual focused ion beam (FIB)/scanning electron microscope (SEM) system
equipped with an electron-beam lithography (EBL) package for the fabrication and
characterization of 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) materials. The
system offers innovative electron and ion optics with state-of-the-art
patterning control. Specifically, the instrument combines several key features
onto a single platform: (i) device fabrication and testing with both ion-beam (3
nm resolution) and electron-beam (20 nm resolution) patterning, (ii) high
throughput traditional (cross-sectional) and plan-view (lamella parallel to the
surface) site-specific, thin transmission electron microscopy (TEM) sample
preparation with minimal sample damage, (iii) nano-device fabrication and
testing, (iv) gas-chemistry technology for materials deposition, and (v) 3D
imaging of complex structures with parallel detection of various signals. The
ability to prepare site-specific, TEM samples with limited damage enables key
research in multiple areas, e.g., preparation of thin solid-state battery
samples and monitoring their atomic structure/composition during the charge-
discharge process with in-situ TEM. In the realm of microelectronics, the FIB
enables preparation of samples for investigating how different growth processes
affect boundary structures and compositions in materials, such as oxide
heterostructures, essential for memory/communication devices or sensors. The EBL
capability enables fabrication of complex electronic devices based on 2D
materials, devices for understanding thermoelectric properties of materials at
nanoscale, metasurfaces for molecular detection, and biological
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.