* 1827406
* Collaborative Research: Researching How You Teach Holistic Modeling (RHYTHM)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Farshid Marbouti, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2022
* USD 78,045.00

Models are a critical part of the analysis and design of engineered systems. The
purpose of multiple types of models (physical, mathematical, computational, and
financial) is to provide a simplified representation of reality that mimics the
features of the engineered system, and that predicts the behavior of the system.
This project, a collaboration between Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, San
Jose State University, and the University of Louisville, aims to improve
engineering students' modeling competence. The project aims to achieve this goal
by transforming first-year engineering courses to teach modeling as an
engineering tool. The project will change existing course materials, pedagogy,
and assessment methods across the three institutions. Each institution will
implement its own specific strategy to teach mathematical, physical,
computational, and financial modeling, thus providing three different
approaches. By comparing student's modeling abilities across the institutions
and approaches, the project aims to identify the most impactful approaches for
teaching multiple modeling in introductory undergraduate engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is guided by a "holistic modeling
perspective" theoretical framework, that builds on the successful "Models and
Modeling Perspective" and "Computational Adaptive Expertise" frameworks. The
objectives of the project are to: (1) implement, test, and refine holistic
modeling environments for institutions that have flexibility in changing
curriculum and for instructors that have different degrees of interest in
changing their course(s); (2) implement, test, and refine methods to assess
students' modeling abilities; and (3) evaluate and present the results of
modeling abilities attained by students at three different universities. A
unified language and discussion around modeling will be adopted in all revised
courses. An assessment tool to measure students' modeling competence will be
developed and implemented at each university. This work builds upon existing
research in the development of more easily adaptable and adoptable modeling
pedagogies and modeling languages. The following broad research question guides
the research: How do students' definitional knowledge, ability to apply, and
ability to create models change based on different degrees of modeling
integration in the classroom?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.