* 1827257
* EDGE: Genetic transformation of chytrid fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Lillian Fritz-Laylin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 778,390.00

Chytrids are a diverse group of over 1000 species of fungi, including organisms
that play key roles in the biology of freshwater, marine, and soil ecosystems.
While some chytrid species occupy key positions in aquatic and soil food webs,
other chytrids infect and kill insects, protists, invertebrates, amphibians,
plants, and other fungi. Currently, multiple chytrid species are causing global
declines in amphibian population, including Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd)
that is devastating frog populations, and Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans
(Bsal) that is thought to be poised to do the same to North American
salamanders. Despite the importance of chytrid fungi in global ecosystems, basic
modern biological tools have not yet been developed for any species of chytrid
fungus. This lack of molecular genetic methods makes it impossible to directly
test hypotheses about how and why chytrids cause disease. This project will
develop and test the first molecular genetic tools for chytrids and will foster
the use of these tools by different scientific communities. The project will
broadly impact many scientific communities, via wide dissemination of the tools
using rapid and open data and protocol sharing, as well as direct training of
scientists from diverse laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to overcome the main bottleneck to modern genetics in the zoosporic chytrid
fungi: molecular transformation. Although chytrids occupy key ecological,
evolutionary, and pathogenic niches, the current lack of basic molecular tools
is a major impediment to hypothesis-driven research. The project will overcome
this deficiency by developing methods for genetic transformation for one species
from each of the two main lineages of chytrid fungi, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis (Bd), an important pathogen belonging to the Chytridiomycota, and
Allomyces macrogynus (Am), a system used to study alternation of generations and
a member of the Blastocladiomycota. Objective 1 develops a panel of
transformation vectors for episomal replication and chromosomal integration as
well as drug resistance and fluorescent protein markers to facilitate screening
for successful transformation. Objective 2 will enable molecular transformation
in chytrids, building on our preliminary success in intracellular delivery of
fluorescent compounds by electroporation, and the vectors developed in Objective
1. Objective 3 uses the tools developed in Objectives 1 and 2 to build
capability for testing gene function and more broadly relating genotype to
phenotype. As a proof of principle, specific components of flagellar motility, a
key feature of chytrid biology, will be targeted for knock-down and functional
interference and resulting phenotypes assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was co-funded by funds from Enabling Discovery through GEnomic Tools (EDGE),
Integrative Ecological Physiology, and Symbiosis, Defense and Self-recognition
programs in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the Evolutionary
Process Program within the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.