* 1827209
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education in the Rural Western Illinois Region
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jenq-Kuen Huang, Western Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,742.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Liguo Song from Western Illinois
University (WIU) and colleagues Jenq-Kuen Huang (WIU), Meshack Afitlhile (WIU),
Audra Sostarecz from Monmouth College, and Caitlin Deskins from Quincy
University have acquired a high-resolution quadrupole, time-of-flight, liquid
chromatograph mass spectrometer (Q-TOF-LCMS). In general, mass spectrometry (MS)
is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small
quantities of chemical species embedded in complex samples. In a typical
experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized
into ions and then the masses of the ions are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the structure of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied.
An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds
before they reach the mass spectrometer. In the time-of-flight method, the mass-
to-charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way of a time measurement in
which ions are accelerated by an electric field of known strength. This
acceleration results in an ion having the same kinetic energy as any other ion
that has the same charge. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse groups of students in research and research
training using this modern analytical technique. It also provides training
opportunities to many undergraduate students including those from
underrepresented groups and will serve as a regional resource serving
neighboring universities, agricultural associations and in institutions that
need forensics analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially impacts trace level analysis
of drugs of abuse in hair, investigation of the self-heating and spontaneous
ignition process of vegetable oils, and investigations of the structure-function
of antibacterial molecules with Langmuir monolayer films. The mass spectrometer
aids researchers studying metabolic engineering of secondary alcohol
dehydrogenase from the bacterium nocardia cholesterolicum NRRL 5767 via
CRISP/Cas9 genome editing and those investigating the slow pH-dependent
equilibrium of protease inhibitor leupeptin. The instrument is also essential
for the analyses of volatile compounds such as those in
breads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.