* 1827243
* CC* Network Design: Improve Network on Campus for Research and Education in Agriculture, Science, and Engineering at Prairie View A&amp;M University
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yoonsung Jung, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 531,964.00

Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU), a Historically Black College and
University, is implementing a Science DMZ to Improve Network on Campus for
Research and Education in Agriculture, Science, and Engineering (INCREASE),
which is an upgrade to current cyberinfrastructure that allows researchers to
effectively work in the fields of Big Data and Data Intensive science. This
INCREASE project enables data driven research in the areas of cyber security,
high performance computing, computational chemistry, brain imaging, genomics,
and bioinformatics. It provides better visualization and collaboration
mechanisms for PVAMU researchers from seven departments in three colleges. It
leads to better educational resources to train students at a minority serving
institution. The INCREASE project specifically ties researchers from four
research centers closely together to form a new foundation of campus
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INCREASE network, bypassing PVAMU-
IT's firewall, integrates with existing infrastructure and provides improved
connectivity between PVAMU and Internet2 via Lonestar Education and Research
Network (LEARN). It also provides high bandwidth interconnectivity to other
research universities and High Performance Computing resources nationwide. As
part of the network design, the need for Software Defined Networking solutions
that can selectively steer Science DMZ traffic around the campus firewall
solution as well as look into implementing a deep-packet inspection and
Intrusion Prevention Service to route unregistered connections in and out of the
Science DMZ is considered. The study and exploration of the INCREASE network can
provide guidance for universities of similar scale to pursue and utilize
research resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.