* 1827801
* PFI-TT: Redefining Electromechanical Energy Conversion Through the use of Magnetic Gearboxes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Jonathan Bird, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is related to the
development of a highly reliable, low maintenance, low noise magnetic gearbox
(MG) for electromechanical energy conversion applications. A MG can create speed
change without any physical contact and therefore no gear lubrication is
required. A MG has inherent overload protection capabilities as well as no
backlash. By eliminating most mechanical losses MGs offer the potential for
increased efficiency whilst providing a longer service life than its mechanical
counterpart. This PFI will focus on translating the MG technology towards
commercial application in the areas of renewable energy generation and robotic
actuation. There is a growing need for a new power conversion approach that are
more efficient and more reliable than existing mechanical gearboxes and direct-
drive generators. For instance, one barrier to increasing the use of wind power
generation is the reliability of the drivetrain. By developing a new type of MG,
the reliability and efficiency of the drivetrain could be greatly improved,
whilst still being compact in size. This would thereby reduce the levelized cost
of power generation. In addition, robotic actuators are increasingly being sort
that are more reliable and have compliant capabilities, a MG offers such
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
demonstrate that a multistage MG has the potential to attain a competitive
torque-to-mass ratio and torque-to-volume ratio with traditional gearboxes
whilst also being more reliable, efficient and quieter than existing mechanical
gearboxes. The proposed project will utilize 3-D printing to increase the rate
at which design improvements can be made to a unique Halbach rotor MG typology.
A series of MGs will be tested in order to refine and develop a greater
understanding of the MG capabilities relative to their mechanical counterparts.
Using prototype devices, a direct cost-performance analysis of the MG technology
relative to equivalent mechanical gearbox counterparts will be completed for the
first time. The demonstration that a MG can be performance competitive with a
mechanical gearbox, whilst also have a significantly longer design life, could
transform the way in which power conversion is accomplished. A MG could
therefore find uses in a myriad of applications throughout society. The graduate
and undergraduate student involved with this project will receive technology
translation and entrepreneurship experiences through the prototype development
and commercialization activities associated with this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.