* 1827971
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Elizabeth Atkinson, Linfield College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 180,677.00

This Major Research Instrumentation grant funds the acquisition of an atomic
force microscope, which supports multidisciplinary research and undergraduate
education at Linfield College as well as at nearby colleges/universities. This
microscope provides detailed images of sample surfaces at nanometer scale as
well as specialized capabilities that can map electrical, magnetic, and elastic
properties of the surfaces. As such, this instrument enables new research on
topics of high societal impact, including novel electronic materials,
biosensors, energy conversion, drug delivery, and health of the marine
environment. Since the institutions using the microscope are primarily
undergraduate serving, the projects undertaken have been carefully chosen to
engage this population in meaningful research that can realistically deliver
results. This microscope is also central to the undergraduate experience at
Linfield by allowing high quality training, ranging from course laboratories to
summer research to senior capstone projects, for a large number of undergraduate
students. In addition, because the microscope delivers compelling images that
engage students in the excitement of scientific research, the instrument is also
used to broaden participation of underrepresented students in the sciences. It
is integrated in Linfield's pre-orientation science camp for entering first-year
and transfer students, a scholarship program for undergraduates with high
financial need, and outreach efforts that seek to build excitement about the
sciences among high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This atomic force
microscope greatly expands experimental capabilities at Linfield College and in
the region, enabling a wide range of research projects including: investigating
electronic properties of two-dimensional materials and devices; developing
graphene-based biosensors; creating electronically active silica xerogel and
aerogel materials for use in sensors; synthesizing functional thermo-responsive
polymeric micelles for drug delivery applications; probing the roles of
cytoskeletal motors in phagocytosis in retinal pigment epithelium cells; imaging
interactions between microbes and their host sponges; and understanding surface
passivation effects on optical emission from quantum dots. The microscope is
essential to these projects, yielding high resolution spatial characterization
of the topographic and electronic properties of materials and devices,
identification and study of biological structures, and force spectroscopy of
cellular features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.