* 1827182
* Forming Collective Memories:  From local influences to global mnemonic convergence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Hirst, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,272.00

The present research explores how collective memories are formed, maintained,
changed, and forgotten. How do collective memories form? To a large extent, the
formation of collective memories occurs through acts of communication. One
person might talk to another person about a past event, or one person might
watch a video about an event on the Internet. Eventually, some of these memories
are propagated throughout the group. The present research examines how acts of
person-to-person communication can establish, strengthen, change and weaken what
people remember of their own and others' collective past. It tests the
mechanisms by which this interpersonal influence can spread across a network,
affect the memories of those with whom there is no direct connection, and in so
doing, have a marked effect on the collective memory formed across the network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three sets of experiments are proposed. Using a modified
version of the serial reproduction task, the first set examines the extent to
which the three conversational influences of interest - reinforcement, induced
forgetting, and the implantation of memories - spread across transmission chains
of various sizes. It tests whether the extent of this propagation is a function
of the strength of these conversational influences and whether these strengths,
in turn, are a function of social relationships and the medium of communication.
The second phase explores mnemonic convergence, that is, the extent to which a
chain of individuals converges onto the same shared memories. Specifically, it
investigates whether the extent of propagation can not exceed the length of the
transmission chain if convergence is to occur. The third phase moves beyond
transmission chains to complex social networks. It now probes for the degree to
which mnemonic convergence is a function of both the extent of propagation, or
in turn, the strength of conversational influences, and the average length
between all pairings of individuals in the network. It also introduces cluster
coefficients as an additional variable of interest. The proposed research brings
together for the first time two strands of relevant research: the burgeoning
experimentally-based psychological literature on the effect of communication on
memory in dyads and the widely discussed work on the propagation of influence
through social networks. This synergistic approach produces a model with great
general applicability, particularly in the domain of national security. Its
interdisciplinarity will link psychological research on individual memory with
work on networks and social connectedness. As a result, graduate students
working on the proposed research will receive a unique training. Overall, the
proposed research provides an empirical foundation for a model of collective
memory formation that will impact on societally important
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.