* 1827968
* MRI: Acquisition of an EPR Spectrometer for Research and Training at the University of Georgia
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Michael Johnson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 343,686.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Todd Harrop from University of
Georgia and colleague Michael Johnson are acquiring a continuous-wave electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. This instrument allows research in a
variety of fields such as those that provide insight on how biologically
relevant species with unpaired electrons behave. In general, an EPR spectrometer
yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic structure of
molecular and solid-state materials. It is also used to obtain information about
the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive species involved in
valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation of possible
pathological growth. These studies impact many areas, from the synthesis of
inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid-state materials
to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing examples inspired
from ongoing research, this instrument is an integral part of research and
teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at the University of Georgia.
Additionally, the investigators are sharing the spectrometer with a significant
number of interested users from the area outside of this institution. The
spectrometer is utilized by students from primarily undergraduate institutions
in the North Georgia area (University of North Georgia, Dahlonega exemplifies
one example of regional impact) free of charge with online access to the
spectrometer and its programs to extend the research experience beyond
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the EPR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies
characterizing important metal-containing biomolecules such as those having Fe-S
clusters, cobalamin, heme. The instrumentation is also used for investigating
and developing metal-based catalytic systems such as nitrite reduction and
cycloadditions. In addition, it benefits environmental studies of speciation of
metal complexes (iron-natural organic matter in soils and sediments). The
spectrometer benefits characterization of nanomaterials during the study of
charge-transfer in organic semiconductors, organic spin valves, and spin-
labeling in nanostructured soft materials. Finally, the spectrometer aids in
understanding the electronic characteristics of inorganic compounds while
studying metal-NO bond activation, dithiolene radicals and metal-metal
bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.