* 1827755
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 TPRC46
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The 2018 TPRC46 Research Conference on Communications, Information and Internet
Policy will take place Friday and Saturday, September 21-22 2018, at the
American University Washington College of Law in Washington D.C. TPRC promotes
interdisciplinary thinking on current and emerging issues in communications and
the Internet by disseminating and discussing new research relevant to policy
questions in the U.S. and around the world. It serves researchers, policymakers,
and members of the private sector and civil society, from students to well-
established practitioners. This award assists approximately 15 U.S.-based
graduate students to attend this conference. Participation in conferences such
as TPRC forms a central part of the graduate school experience, providing
students with an opportunity to interact with senior researchers from academia
and industry, and exposing them to leading-edge research and thinking in the
various fields of expertise. TPRC brings together computer scientists, network
researchers, policymakers, and members of the private sector and civil society.
Attending TPRC presents an excellent opportunity for U.S. graduate students to
connect with a thriving international research community. The support requested
in this proposal will enable students to attend the main conference, panels and
paper presentations as well as the Graduate Student Consortium (GSC) at TPRC46
2018. This program will expose students to new ideas in these emerging areas,
and allow them to interact with researchers outside their disciplines, including
legal, economic, social science and technology scholars, thereby broadening
their intellectual horizons. A special day of the conference dedicated to the
GSC helps to ensure students are engaged and maximize the benefit from attending
the conference. The GSC provides graduate students with opportunities for
mentoring by academics, industry, and government leaders, as well as the
opportunity to network with other graduate students. GSC participants will gain
insights on research strategies and topics of interest from members of the TPRC
community representing various industries and sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and education with a
target of computer science students and exposure to a premier interdisciplinary
conference covering challenges in national and international policy on
communications, information, and the Internet. The TPRC conference has developed
into a top-tier international conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to
students to expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical
perspective. The travel grant co-chairs are committed to encouraging the
participation of women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.