* 1827730
* PFI-TT: A Parallel Computing Engine for Simulation of Complex Multi-Scale Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Hector Gutierrez, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2022
* USD 302,105.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project stems from the
development of an inexpensive, highly parallel computing platform to solve
scientific and engineering simulations while taking advantage of the front end
and post-processing tools of commercially available finite-element software. The
breakthrough scientific and commercial opportunity stems from the use of
parallel computing hardware developed in recent years in support of the computer
gaming industry, that has not been leveraged yet for solution of simulation
problems currently addressed using finite element methods. This can lead to a
breakthrough in the simulation industry by embracing an approach to the solution
of boundary value problems that does not require inversion of large matrices.
The proposed approach will benefit several scientific and engineering
applications where large dimensions or multi-scale geometries makes meshing
computationally prohibitive, and addresses critical bottlenecks in engineering
design and simulation, in particular in transient analysis and design
optimization. The potential business opportunity is significant: the successful
adoption of the proposed approach would lead to a major breakthrough in the
performance of software for engineering and scientific simulation, while
exploiting newly available parallel computing resources (gaming graphics
engines).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project supports the
development of an inexpensive, highly parallel simulation platform that can be
integrated with pre and post processing tools of existing finite-element
software. The proposed module will be implemented using gaming graphics
processors, enabling a breakthrough speed-up in simulation time compared to
conventional finite element software. The final deliverables will be presented
to potential partners or investors for commercialization and future development.
Interviews with engineers and scientists under an NSF I-Corps study revealed a
significant need and interest for simulation tools that address the bottlenecks
of existing finite-element tools, in particular in terms of prohibitively long
simulation times. The proposed project is transformative for the following
reasons: (i) A novel approach for the simulation of complex systems using
highly-parallel computing is proposed, (ii) the proposed approach can lead to a
breakthrough reduction in simulation time compared to available software in
large scale problems and transient analyses, and (iii) the proposed approach
will lead to a simulation engine that can be integrated with pre and post
processing tools from existing finite element method (FEM) software, enabling
its use within well developed products that already have a solid customer
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.