* 1827883
* MRI: Acquisition of a Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence (TIRF)  Microscope for Research and Education at Marquette University and the Greater Milwaukee Region
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Pinfen Yang, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 251,424.00

An award is made to support the acquisition of an automated Total Internal
Reflection Fluorescence (TIRF) Microscope system to support the research,
educational and outreach efforts at Marquette University (MU), Medical College
of Wisconsin (MCW) and other research groups in the greater Milwaukee region.
TIRF microscopy is an essential tool used to study, with high resolution, the
mechanism and dynamics of macromolecular protein complex assembly and movement
at cellular surfaces. TIRF has also been extensively adapted to study enzymes at
single molecule resolution using various fluorescence-based approaches. The
availability of a TIRF microscope at MU and neighboring institutions in the
greater Milwaukee areas is required to provide hands-on training to
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers. The PI and co-PIs will
provide training to all interested researchers, including students ranging in
expertise from graduate to young undergraduate students. The PI and co-PIs have
a strong record of training undergraduate and graduate students and the TIRF
microscope will become a key part of the educational efforts at Marquette
University and surrounding institutions in the greater Milwaukee
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects underway in the laboratories of the
PI, Co-PIs and other users fall under two broad categories of TIRF microscopy
applications. The first group will use single molecule FRET to visualize the
motions of fluorescently labelled enzymes and this information will be
deconvoluted to understand their mechanism of action. The second group will
utilize the TIRF microscope to study in vivo cellular processes, where the
dynamics of fluorescently labeled proteins are followed within the cell. The
TIRF microscope will be invaluable to: (1) performing mechanistic studies of
ATP-dependent motor proteins; (2) clarifying the role of carrier domain
movements in biotin-dependent metabolic enzymes; (3) identifying the assembly
mechanism of prion formation on actin networks; (4) exploring the role of
temperature in gamete development; (5) understand the molecular and cellular
mechanisms of eukaryotic flagella; (6) studying Ras GTPase interactions on
cellular membranes (7) describing the mechanism of G protein and
&amp;#946-arrestin chemokine receptor signaling; and (8) investigating the role
of phosphorylation in &amp;#946-arrestin and E3 ubiquitin ligase recruitment.
Results from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed scientific
journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in both training and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.