* 1827415
* Ship Operations - R/V SALLY RIDE
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 14,836,293.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) proposes to continue operating the
research vessel Sally Ride to support NSF-funded scientific research for the
five-year period 2018 -2022. Sally Ride is a capable, well-equipped general-
purpose Ocean Class research vessel that is owned by the US Navy and has been
operated by SIO since the ship's introduction into the US Academic Research
Fleet in 2016. As a large shared-use facility scheduled within the collaborative
framework of the University-National-Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS),
Sally Ride will host scientists from across the United States to undertake
research in a variety of disciplines. The ship will be operated in a manner that
promotes safety, capability and efficiency in order to maximize NSF's investment
in the ship and in the programs that are conducted on board. SIO employs a
disciplined approach to vessel maintenance, regulatory compliance, foreign
clearance, crewing and logistics so that scientific missions can becompleted
successfully and on schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation, measurement,
and collection of samples and data are accomplished on an ocean-basin scale by
scientific missions aboard Sally Ride. SIO-operated ships have played a critical
role in the exploration of our planet since 1907, and continue to contribute
significantly to the U.S. ocean research effort. SIO's ship operations
department supports NSF core values of scientific excellence, organizational
excellence, learning, inclusiveness and accountability. The vessel management
and operations proposed here enable transformative scientific research in
physical and biological processes in the natural environment upon which human
well-being depends. The intellectual merit of this proposal is amplified by the
combined merit of research projects undertaken by scientists on board. During
2018, Sally Ride will support seven different NSF-sponsored programs in the
Pacific Ocean in marine chemistry, seafloor mapping, geophysics, crustal
geochemistry, paleooceanography, marine ecology, mesozooplankton food webs, and
long-term acquisition of ocean environmental data. NSF-sponsored research
(including Ocean Observing Initiative) will account for 60% (145 days) of Sally
Ride's work this year. The remainder of the work will be supported by NASA (44
days, 18%), the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (32 days, 13%), NOAA (20
days, 8%) and BOEM (2 days, 1 %). Each scientific program contributes its own
distinctive intellectual merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIO's management of Sally
Ride enables research, education and training that advance discovery and
understanding while achieving far-reaching broader impacts. The proposed
management supports strongly collaborative, multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional use of the vessel. Through UNOLS, SIO coordinates the shared use
of Sally Ride with scientists and funding agencies so shipboard capabilities
meet the current and anticipated needs of the community. SIO is committed to
promoting a climate of fairness, cooperation, and professionalism on board that
embraces diversity, equity, and inclusion as essential ingredients of scientific
discovery, technical development, and learning. SIO's operation of Sally Ride
leverages institutional programs that complement NSF's mission to promote
achievement and progress in science, engineering and education for the benefit
of the nation. For example, SIO's UC Ship Funds Program enables graduate and
undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers and early career faculty to
pursue independent research and instruction aboard Sally Ride via an internal
peer-reviewed competitive process for ship time. The vessel is integral to SIO's
K-12 education program In the Footsteps of Sally Ride, which uses oceanography
to teach physical science to economically disadvantaged seventh- and eighth-
grade students. As a broadly-subscribed shared-use facility, Sally Ride
similarly contributes to the education, training and outreach missions of
scientists from institutions across America who conduct their research and
educational programs on board. As proposed here, Sally Ride will continue to
serve NSF by safely, capably and efficiently facilitating multi-disciplinary
scientific research to advance our understanding of our oceans and
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.