* 1827557
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,616.00

This project is upgrading the ability of researchers at the Stevens Institute of
Technology to study the structure of advanced materials by replacing a 25-year
old transmission electron microscope with a new and modern microscope. The new
microscope is able to take advantage of computer control and digital image
acquisition that has transformed such instruments over the past decade. The new
microscope is used by a broad and interdisciplinary group of professors and
their students to study advanced materials being developed for applications in
healthcare and in energy, including materials used in biomedical implants such
as hip and knee replacements as well as materials used to make flexible solar
cells. The new microscope is also used in lecture and laboratory courses as well
as in one-on-one mentoring to train students about the microscopic structure of
advanced materials and how this structure can be quantitatively studied with
modern transmission electron microscopes. The microscope is essential to a broad
array of graduate students pursuing their doctoral dissertation
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project
provides funds to purchase a JEOL 1400 transmission electron microscope. This
instrument is a 120 keV thermionic (LaB6) microscope, and it is optimized for
cryo-electron microscopy, tomography, and diffraction-contrast and mass-
thickness-contrast imaging. It replaces a 25 year-old microscope purchased in
1992 partly with NSF funding. Six specific projects are being substantially
advanced with this new microscope, including two projects led by women Faculty
members. One research project is developing infection-resisting biomaterials.
Another is developing advanced scaffolds for tissue engineering. A third is
developing gold nanostructures for monitoring focal-adhesion formation. The
other three projects fall within the energy space. One is developing a new
materials platform for high-temperature label-free sensing. Another pursues
novel cryo-microscopy experiments involving organic solvents in order to
understand solvent-induced gel formation and create organic solar cells using
scalable processing methods. The third uses tomography to characterize network
formation involving magnetic nanoparticles. These core projects, as well as
other research projects, all require the spatial and image resolution afforded
by transmission electron microscopy in order for them to
advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.