* 1827474
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Mode X-Ray Scattering System for Soft Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Dayakar Penumadu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 525,736.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will fund the acquisition of a modern
X-ray scattering instrument to support soft materials research in the Tennessee
Valley and surrounding region. The instrument will be installed at the
University of Tennessee in the Polymers Characterization Lab, an established
user facility for academic and industrial researchers. This acquisition will
enable measurements of hierarchical structure in soft materials under controlled
environmental conditions, thereby informing the design of new materials for
strong and lightweight composites, safe batteries, gas and water purification,
oil spill remediation, drug delivery, and 3D printing. The proposed instrument
is extremely flexible, easy to use, and well-suited to a large user base with a
diverse and continuously evolving research portfolio. The team is highly
experienced with the design, implementation, and analysis of X-ray scattering
measurements, so students will receive training in advanced materials
characterization, which is critical to maintaining US technological
competitiveness in the global market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund
the acquisition of a multimode X-ray scattering system to support soft materials
characterization in targeted or extreme environments. The system will be
installed at the University of Tennessee in the Polymers Characterization Lab,
an established, sustainable, and centrally-supported user facility. The proposed
acquisition will enable four workhorse techniques for characterization of
hierarchical structure in soft and hybrid materials: transmission small angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS), transmission wide angle X-ray scattering (WAXS),
grazing-incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), and grazing-incidence
wide angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). The instrument can accommodate samples in
a variety of states, including bulk powders, liquids, and films, and is equipped
with integrated environmental controls to examine material responses to
temperature, humidity, gases, applied tension, and applied shear. X-ray
scattering measurements will inform fundamental studies of structure-property-
processing relations in soft and hybrid materials, providing immediate support
to a variety of federally funded research programs in nanocomposites, energy
storage, separations, renewable materials, and biomaterials. The team will
leverage the acquisition of the X-ray scattering instrument for the design of
new course modules and a regional immersion workshop, thereby elevating the
educational experience of undergraduate and graduate students through training
in advanced materials characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.