* 1827125
* 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Catalysis: Accelerating Catalytic Solutions to Global Grand Challenges
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Fabio Ribeiro, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

The proposal requests funds to partially support registration fees for U.S.
student participation in the 2018 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Catalysis,
which will be held on June 24-29, 2018 at Colby-Sawyer College in New London,
NH, along with the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Catalysis, a new forum that
is held two days prior to the main conference (June 23-24, 2018) and is designed
specifically to engage and support new entrants to the field of catalysis and to
give them the opportunity to build their professional network.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 GRC in Catalysis titled, "Accelerating Catalytic Solutions
to Global Grand Challenges," reflects the research background of the Chair,
Fabio H. Ribeiro (Chemical Engineering, Purdue University) in the application of
catalyst synthesis, reaction kinetics, in situ and operando spectroscopic
characterization and theory to understand catalysis. The 2018 GRC in Catalysis,
along with the associated GRS in Catalysis, will fully engage chemists, chemical
engineers, and materials scientists in a meeting that focuses on applying ground
breaking, fundamental advances in catalytic chemistry to address global grand
challenges. The Catalysis GRC plays an important role in enhancing the
development of researchers in early stages of their careers. The GRC format is
designed to foster an environment of in-depth scientific discussion and
relationship building among participants. Sufficient time has been set aside
both in the seminar room and during breaks and poster sessions for the younger
members of the community to discuss new ideas and concepts with recognized
research leaders that may lead to a lifetime of collaboration and scientific
achievement. Also, this year we will start a new tradition with the addition of
the Catalysis GRS that will bring together graduate students, postdocs, and
early-career professionals to discuss their cutting-edge research among peers
and mentors in a highly-stimulating and non-intimidating environment over two
days prior to the main conference, to which they will be invited. The program
will incorporate a mixture of academic and industrial perspectives as well as
encourage participation from underrepresented groups. The GRC will have a strong
positive diversity impact with women accounting for 45% of the invited speakers,
which is a significantly higher percentage than the historical average. To aid
to this diversity goal, there will be a Monday afternoon session titled "Power
Hour: Committed to Inclusion and the Professional Development of Women in
Science," which is an informal gathering open to all meeting participants. This
session is designed to help address the challenges women face in science and to
support the professional growth of women in our communities by providing an open
forum for discussion and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.