* 1827186
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Building a high-performance, flexible DMZ backbone at the University of Nevada, Reno
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Graham Kent, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 495,255.00

Advances in science and engineering and the use of science-driven technology are
transforming the scale and complexity of research at the University of Nevada,
Reno (UNR). Fundamental to supporting these shifts in data volume and research
workflows are core networking and computing infrastructures maintained by the
central campus Office of Information Technology. As part of a strategic plan to
increase technology support of research activity at the university, a
collaboration of faculty and IT professionals are building a dedicated, high-
speed research network backbone across campus with connections to off-campus
high-performance-compute facilities, remote sensor networks, and national
peering points. The primary tasks of this project are to: 1) increase external
connectivity to Internet2 and Pacific Wave from 10G to 100G; 2) extend a set of
40G dedicated research network paths with data transfer management and
monitoring to geographically distributed locations on campus to serve critical
research efforts; 3) implement a "scienceDMZ" network architecture for
scientific and research workflows across the UNR network and as a model for
Nevada's higher education community; and 4) augment key wide-area network end-
to-end research workflows impacting rural areas all the way to UNR's high-
performance research computing colocation partner Switch, a new state-of-the-art
world-class datacenter.

This project solves current and near-future connectivity problems for science-
focused researchers at UNR by enabling larger-scale science, saving time, and
increasing the rate of discovery, and creating the capability for the
institution to participate in the emerging Pacific Wave and National Research
Platforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.