* 1827308
* PFI-TT: Initial proof of concept of a novel minimally invasive tool to address urethral narrowing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Edward Wright, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2021
* USD 215,938.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to dramatically
improve the quality of life for men with urethral stricture disease (USD), by
enabling them to undergo a curative minimally invasive treatment. USD is a
narrowing of the urinary tract (urethra), similar to a band of scar tissue,
causing painful and frequent urination. Nearly 1% of men on Medicare seek
treatment for USD, and over $300 million is spent annually on treatment in the
United States alone. Current options for these patients are either minimally
invasive procedures with high rates of recurrence, or complex open
reconstructive surgery of the urethra - only performed by small number of
experts. Many patients diagnosed with USD undergo repeat minimally invasive
treatments - worsening their condition; their lives revolve around the next
painful trip to the restroom. Our innovation will bridge the gap between these
approaches, allowing general urologists to provide effective treatment by
performing graft reconstruction of the urethra minimally invasively. This will
make treatment accessible to patients who don?t have access to an expert
surgeon, and to those who are ineligible for a long complex
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a prototype for
the minimally invasive surgical tool which will be fully integrated. Research
objectives include: the development of an anatomically correct urethral model,
iterative manufacture and testing of device sub-components, and integration of
sub-components into the complete device for functional testing in the urethral
model. &lt;br/&gt;Sub-component testing will include measuring the forces
exerted upon the graft used for reconstruction during various steps of the
procedure, to ensure that the final integrated device design can successfully
deliver a graft, and not cause damage to the graft upon device removal. Once
sub-components have been tested and modified as needed, they will be integrated
into the complete device for testing functionality in the urethral model. The
resulting integrated prototype will be fully functional, and be ready for use in
a future pilot study in an animal model (beyond PFI-
TT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.