* 1827506
* PFI-TT: Production and Formulation of Janus Colloids for Personal and Healthcare Applications.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Rodney Priestley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 02/28/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project focuses on the
production and formulation of biocompatible asymmetric colloids, termed Janus
colloids, to create personal- and health-care consumer products with improved
self-life and stability as well as performance including delivery of active
ingredients, oil uptake and reduced skin irritation. Janus colloids for consumer
products are not commercially available, in part, due to the lack of a scale
technology that can i) drive the required translational research needed for
fundamental insight and development and ii) be scaled to meet potential industry
demand. The technology presented in this proposal overcomes these major
bottlenecks towards the commercialization of Janus colloids that could lead to
job growth, as the patents developed from this proposal will be licensed to a
newly developed enterprise. Furthermore, fundamental insights into polymer-
polymer phase behavior at the nanoscale and structure-property relationships of
Janus colloids will be a natural outcome of addressing the bottlenecks towards
commercialization. The proposal will facilitate an extensive education and
outreach program with one aim of expanding access to science and technology and
encouraging entrepreneurship as a career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses fundamental knowledge gaps which require understanding prior
to the scale up of Flash NanoPrecipitation for the production and first-to-
market commercialization of Janus colloids in consumer products. The study
provides fundamental insights into how combining colloid formation using rapid
micro-mixing and kinetically arrested precipitation with polymer phase
separation at the nanoscale can lead to the production of Janus colloids.
Commercialization requires connecting processing parameters of Flash
NanoPrecipitation with the molecular parameters of the polymers from which the
Janus colloids are assembled: process-structure relationship studies. The
second-level of structure and property relationship is the connection between
the geometry and properties of Janus colloids, as amphiphiles to the desired
properties for formulations in personal- and health-care products. In
particular, this proposal aims to develop the rules of biocompatible Janus
colloid production by understanding how polymer-polymer interactions,
interfacial properties, and molecular characteristics, e.g., molecular weight
and glass transition, influence the structure of Janus colloids. Structure will
be evaluated using state-of-the art three-dimensional microscopy tools.
Furthermore, the work aims to reveal how Janus colloids stabilize emulsions and
foams with respect to different formulations and process parameters including
stability against centrifugal fields, temperature and polarity which will lead
to enhanced formulation properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.