* 1827923
* PAWR Platform COSMOS: Cloud Enhanced Open Software Defined Mobile Wireless Testbed for City-Scale Deployment
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 6,500,000.00

This project creates a city-scale platform for advanced wireless research that
will be deployed over the period 2018 - 2023 in New York City, NY. This Cloud
Enhanced Open Software Defined Mobile Wireless Testbed for City-Scale Deployment
(COSMOS) supports at-scale experimentation of novel advanced wireless broadband
and communication technologies in the sub-6 GHz bands and in the millimeter wave
frequency bands in a densely populated, urban setting. The project features
interactions with regional networks and smart community initiatives including
municipalities, non-profits, and various tech communities with interest in
contributing to and/or using the testbed for application development. The
ability to use this platform by early adopter companies/startups, global telecom
industry and application developers to evaluate technologies in their pre-
commercial phase will have a significant positive impact on the speed of
innovation in the data networking and application domains. This effort will also
benefit educators and students at all levels of study in communications-related
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radio nodes in COSMOS provide a mix of fully
programmable software defined radios (SDRs) for flexible wireless
experimentation as well as commercial hardware capable of supporting networking
and applications research with currently available end-user devices. COSMOS is
built in a bottom-up manner with commodity components and customized open-source
hardware and software modules. The developed wireless platforms cover the full
range of spectrum including the sub 6 GHz bands used for today's services as
well as emerging 28 GHz and 60 GHz millimeter-wave (mmWave) bands. SDRs utilize
a new design that achieves an order-of-magnitude performance headroom over
current technology, achieving real-time processing of wide bandwidths (~500 MHz)
via novel acceleration techniques. The COSMOS platform incorporates fast
programmable core network technology to keep pace with significant increases in
wireless link bandwidth and to effectively integrate emerging radio access
networks with edge cloud computing. The design includes novel 100 Gbps+ fiber,
free space optical, and microwave backhaul technologies interconnected with a
software-defined network (SDN) switching fabric for minimum latency and
flexibility in setting up experimental network topologies. Sub-microsecond
optical switching technology offers the option of passive Wavelength-Division
Multiplexing (WDM) switch fabrics and radio over fiber interfaces for the
purpose of achieving ultra-low latency connections to edge computing services,
which will be built in as an integral part of the system. Together, this will
enable comprehensive end-to-end experimentation across diverse applications and
users with tools for scientific workflow management, collaboration, and artifact
sharing, all with a goal towards promoting rigorous standards for
reproducibility in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.