* 1827674
* PFI-RP: A Smart Building for Enhancing Human Performance, Comfort and Health
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 440,432.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project includes enhancing
the workers' performance, comfort, health and well-being and saves billions of
dollars for healthcare. This project will produce a new approach to integrating
physical and human behavioral factors within a smart building system that has a
high potential for commercialization. It will involve K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students, and also will be used for new curriculum development. Female
and under-represented students will be encouraged to participate in this
project. The project will provide critical insight into creating human-centered
smart buildings. Research results will be disseminated through publication,
software and data release and technology transfer to industrial partners. The
partnership with industrial partners will make the research deliverables have
potential for commercialization. This project will create the foundation to
launch a new inter-disciplinary research initiative in cyber-physical systems
with potential for high impact on the nation's
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to build a human-
centered context-aware responsive smart building that can provide personalized
services to enhance the performance, comfort and health of occupants. The
novelty of this project lies in its leveraging human behaviors in addition to
the data from the physical world to provide context-aware automatic and
personalized services that can better meet human needs. This smart building is
unique by two features: 1) it provides personalized service rather than a
universal service for all users; and 2) the building can automatically make
context-aware adjustments to proactively meet user needs. This project consists
of two innovations: 1) Social-based Context-aware Prediction/Response, and 2)
Environmental Control for Human Health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.