* 1827246
* RCN-UBE:  Data-to-Design Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience ? protein modeling and characterization to enhance student learning and improve computational protein design
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Justin Siegel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2021
* USD 293,790.00

Incorporating undergraduate research experiences into laboratory courses vastly
increases the reach and accessibility of these opportunities. The Data-to-Design
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (D2D-CURE) network will train and
support faculty to broaden research participation and expand high-impact
educational practices. The network is designed to make this workflow accessible
to a wide array of higher education institutions (community colleges, state
schools, liberal arts schools, as well as research universities), as a high-
impact module for existing and new biochemistry and bioengineering courses.
Collectively and over time students who engage in this project will be
generating datasets large enough to begin utilizing machine learning tools to
improve protein design algorithms, while learning translatable skills, the
process of science, and developing confidence in doing research. This network
serves to both train future scientist and to advance the progress of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data-to-Design Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experience (D2D-CURE) network's primary goal is to make a well-
developed and tested molecular modeling and enzyme characterization workflow
accessible to institutions nation-wide as an integratable curricular element for
existing and new biology courses. The project has three major activities: The
first is the coordination of workshops that will enable instructors from across
the country to employ the D2D-CURE workshop at their home institutions. The
second is the expansion of an annual conference, currently focused on protein
modeling and design, to include a student development and engagement track.
Third is the development of an online presence allowing the D2D-CURE
participants to work in concert on cutting-edge scientific problems as a
community as opposed to isolated institutions and programs. Despite widespread
adoption of computational protein design, significant improvements are still
needed to move efforts from being a tool used to enrich proteins with the
desired function into a more accurate and predictive computer-aided design tool
with a quantitative relationship between design and desired function. We plan to
focus on enzymes since the only large data sets that currently exist are not
quantitative, have a low dynamic range, and often convolve several independent
physical measurements into a single value. To generate the data sets needed to
develop a new generation of computational protein design software for enzymes,
we are proposing a Research Coordination Network to engage students and their
instructors in using industrially relevant techniques while generating acutely
needed protein structure-function datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.