* 1827288
* PFI-TT: Total Intervertebral Disc Replacement Device using Novel Energy Absorbing Materials.
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Carl Frick, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 247,200.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to develop a
prototype device aimed at improving the current standard of care for total disc
replacement (TDR) procedures. Each year approximately $500,000 Americans will
undergo surgery involving intervertebral disc replacement, resulting in a device
market well over $1 billion. These procedures, which are most often interbody
fusions or TDRs, are associated with a high rate of complications. Approximately
one-third of patients will ultimately require a follow-up procedure. Although
the underlying causes are unclear, the biomedical devices most often used are
significantly stiffer than the original intervertebral disc, and no cushioning
or force dissipation occurs across the disc space; this is likely a significant
factor for complications such as subsidence and adjacent level disease. This
study will be the first cyclic loading investigation into the use of novel
liquid crystalline elastomers (LCEs) for potential use in spinal devices. If
successful, the proposed research will develop LCEs for stable long-term
mechanical dissipative properties with a hierarchical structure to mimic the
natural organization of the intervertebral disc. Other potential applications
involving the use this ultra-dissipative material are for protective equipment
used in sports or military, such as helmets to better prevent concussions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate main-
chain LCEs, which have vastly superior energy dissipation properties relative to
traditional rubber-like materials such as silicone or hydrogels. Liquid crystal
mesogen reorientation under mechanical stress provides a temperature and
frequency insensitive mechanism for dissipating energy, more robust than typical
viscoelasticity. This proposed research will be the first to investigate cyclic
mechanical properties of main-chain LCEs. The proposed research will result in
an LCE proof-of-concept device that exhibits mechanical properties seen in
biological soft tissues (i.e., anisotropy, dampening, and low modulus). The LCE
will be synthesized a spatially tailored device to match the mechanical
properties and structure of a natural disc. The unique liquid-crystal structure
within these materials makes cyclic behavior difficult to estimate a priori, and
therefore direct characterization as a function of material structure, strain
rate, and displacement magnitude must be investigated. High-cycle loading of
LCEs will be investigated. Fundamental knowledge gained through this analysis
will show the feasibility of LCEs for TDR and demonstrate broad applicability of
LCEs for dampening applications. This project builds directly from fundamental
research discovery supported by the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.