* 1827404
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Resolution in context: Identity and nonidentity in anaphora resolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 11,767.00

The goal of this dissertation research is to enhance the scientific
understanding of sentence production and comprehension by examining the
relationship between two types of linguistic construction and the surrounding
linguistic and nonlinguistic context. Linguists have long been aware that
speakers' awareness of what information is available in the broad context of
utterance affects how they use and interpret language, but the exact effects of
this knowledge on certain parts of the linguistic system have not been fully
identified. The constructions under investigation in this dissertation are verb
phrase ellipsis, in which a silent "gap" after an auxiliary verb is interpreted
as containing full verbal content, and deaccenting, in which the pronunciation
of a sentential constituent is de-emphasized to indicate that it is redundant.
Previous analyses have suggested that both phenomena are licit only when they
can be construed as identical to an overt antecedent that appears earlier in the
linguistic discourse. This dissertation investigates evidence that previous
formulations of identity for these phenomena have been too strict, and that they
can be licensed and interpreted with respect to a broader range of linguistic
antecedents, as well as with respect to information available in the
nonlinguistic context. In addition to advancing the scientific understanding of
these phenomena, this research may have technological and clinical applications.
A more complete understanding of how listeners integrate linguistic and
nonlinguistic information to interpret these constructions may lead to the
development of artificial language systems that produce and interpret language
more similarly to human speakers, as well as diagnosis and treatment strategies
for speakers whose use of these constructions is impaired.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The dissertation project focuses on three main research questions:
(1) Is salient information from the nonlinguistic context considered during the
interpretation of verb phrase ellipsis when there is a linguistic antecedent
that could provide a reasonable interpretation? (2) Can deaccenting of a
particular constituent be licensed by linguistic relations other than
repetition, i.e., entailment, bridging, or world knowledge inferences? (3) Can
deaccenting be licensed, in whole or in part, by information made salient in the
nonlinguistic context? The two phenomena will be investigated using production,
perception, and eye-tracking methodologies that examine the use and
interpretation of verb phrase ellipsis and deaccenting both offline and in real
time. The results will enhance models of how these constructions are licensed
and interpreted in a more comprehensive discourse context than has previously
been considered, by taking into account linguistically evoked information,
inferrable information, and salient nonlinguistic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.