* 1827633
* PFI-TT: Scalable Silicon Photonic Switches for Data Centers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Ming Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to introduce
scalable silicon photonic switches with fast response time and low power
consumption to enhance the capacity and efficiency of the interconnect networks
in data centers. The global internet traffic has continued to grow
exponentially, fueled by the increase of mobile devices and cloud-based
applications for artificial intelligence, video streaming, social networking as
well as enterprise compute/collaborate needs. A majority of the data traffic
remains within the datacenter. The number of hyperscale datacenters will double
in five years. Each of these hyperscale datacenters houses hundreds of thousands
of servers and consumes 100 MW of power. Such growth is not sustainable without
fundamental changes in how datacenter is designed. Scalable photonic switches
with fast response time and low power consumption can improve the efficiency and
performance of datacenters. Optical switching is agnostic to data rate, unlike
the electrical packet switches in current networks. It enables programmable
datacenter networks, allowing the network to adjust its topology to match the
traffic patterns of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
accelerate the development and commercialization of scalable silicon photonic
switches and make them widely available to datacenters and telecommunication
industry. Current optical switches in the market are bulky, slow, and expensive.
In this PFI-TT, we propose to replace the bulk optical switches with fully
integrated (single chip) silicon photonic switches. Silicon photonics use
complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) foundries to mass produce
photonic integrated circuits at low cost, leveraging economies of scale of the
multi-trillion-dollar microelectronics industry. We use micro-electro-
mechanical-system (MEMS) actuation to dramatically reduce the optical insertion
loss and power consumption. Silicon photonic switches with microsecond response
time and low optical loss will revolutionize datacenter networks. The
anticipated outputs of this program include a prototype switch with proven
reliability and a strategy to scale up production. The ultimate goal is to spin
out a new company building switching subsystems supplying to both datacenter and
the telecommunications industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.