* 1827138
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: CyberInfrastructure Technology Advancement for Delaware (CITADel) - 100 Gb/s Connection Upgrade to Internet2
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jason Cash, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 447,089.00

The CC* Networking Infrastructure project at the University of Delaware (UD) is
constructing a high-bandwidth, low-latency Internet2 connection to support the
university's research and education initiatives by fulfilling the need for
efficient and timely data transfer to collaborating institutions, national high-
performance computing resources, and service for the global research community.
This project enables the sharing of large and time-sensitive data sets without
impediment. It provides the necessary infrastructure to support major
initiatives for the Delaware Biotechnology Institute, department of Chemistry
&amp; Biochemistry, department of Mechanical Engineering, Center for
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Bartol Research Institute, department
of Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Entomology and Wildlife Ecology, and
many more data intensive programs across the university. This is a
transformational grant which enables DNA sequence, energy flux, molecule
property, molecular dynamics trajectory, protein, solid particle, visualization,
weather, and other data to be transferred between HPC clusters and scientists
for immediate use with shorter delays between successive simulations and
resulting in faster overall research schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides two enhancements to the University of Delaware network infrastructure:
(1) creation of a 100Gbps capable network for connectivity to the Internet2
network community, and (2) creation of a ScienceDMZ to enable researchers to
take full advantage of the new high-bandwidth
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.