* 1827333
* EDGE:  Developing techniques for linking genotype to phenotype in amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Lauren O'Connell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,599,999.00

Amphibians have been an important model system in scientific research for
centuries. Frogs and salamanders have easily accessible physiology, life cycles,
and behavior that can be used to study general questions in biology. There are
over 5,000 species of frogs that show a great deal of natural diversity, where
each species has adapted in unique ways to its environment. Many of these
species are at risk of extinction, mainly due to habitat degradation and spread
of a lethal fungus throughout the world that can kill entire frog populations.
The investigators of this project, together with a network of amphibian
researchers, develop gene-editing tools for frogs and salamanders. The purpose
of this genetic toolkit is to enable researchers to test predictions of how
genes or proteins influence behavior and development, both in the pristine
laboratory as well as the muddy rainforest. This project also involves training
of undergraduate and graduate students, and researchers from around the world
through hands-on training courses and the development of online community
resources. One training course is held at Stanford University to support the
training of researchers in the United States. Another, international workshop is
held in South America, which holds much of the world's amphibian biodiversity.
In addition, the project expands a successful regional program called the
Frogger School Program to a nationwide resource with education materials for
K-12 classrooms in rural and inner-city public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amphibians are a diverse group of vertebrates with
unique evolutionary innovations in morphology, behavior, and physiology. Most of
these striking phenotypes are not represented in the few amphibian species with
functional genomics tools, severely hindering progress on understanding how
genetic variation influences the incredible phenotypic variation observed within
this speciose group. South American poison frogs have evolved warning
coloration, chemical defenses, and complex parental behaviors, where each of
these traits varies both within and between species. Moreover, this suite of
traits has evolved independently in some African frog species, allowing built-in
replication for addressing links between genotype and phenotype. This research
proposal focuses on the development of functional genomics tools in poison
frogs, with plans to expand and disseminate these technologies to the broader
amphibian community. Specifically, the goals of the project are to develop a
general amphibian genetic toolkit to (1) enable gene disruption using
CRISPR/Cas9 and morpholino technologies, (2) express transgenic materials using
expression vector insertions, and (3) develop electroporation techniques to
manipulate genes in specific cell types or tissues. Another goal is rapid
dissemination of this toolkit through the online distribution of protocols and
hands-on workshops to train the next generation of amphibian biologists to
integrate newly developed, cutting-edge technologies into their research
programs. Finally, an existing regional K-12 outreach program is expanded into a
nationwide resource for educators and local amphibian researchers to connect
with one another and bring amphibian biology, conservation, and evolution into
public school classrooms. This project is co-funded by the Behavioral Systems
Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems of the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.