* 1827854
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer at Fairfield University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Matthew Kubasik, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 306,950.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor John Miecznikowski from Fairfield
University and colleagues Matthew Kubasik, Aaron Van Dyke and Jillian Smith-
Carpenter have acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with an automatic
sampler. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those
that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well
as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The instrument
positively impacts students at this institution and at nearby Iona College. The
research team is partnering with the Upward Bound Program at Fairfield
University by hosting a series of one-day scientific instrumentation workshops
for 9-12th graders from the Bridgeport, CT school system and most of the
students. Many of these students identify themselves as minority and low-income.
They also partner with the annual Broadening Access to Science Education (BASE)
Camp at Fairfield University directed to local high school students from
Bridgeport schools who participate in hands-on research experiences with faculty
mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It especially aids the development of water-soluble
carbonyl reduction precatalysts based on zinc(II) pincer complexes and studies
of helical peptide conformational dynamics. The spectrometer is essential in
characterizing synthetic products of capture-tag-release probes to label
endogenous enzymes, such as histone deacetylases, and those prepared thorough
synthesis of 1,2-dithiolane functionalized self-assembling
peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.