* 1827173
* IRES Track I: Collaborative Research: Interdisciplinary Research in Korea on Applied Smart Systems (IRiKA) for Undergraduate Students
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Gloria Kim, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 213,000.00

Interdisciplinary Research in Korea on Applied smart systems (IRiKA) for
Undergraduate Students will provide a cohort of five US undergraduate students
per year with the opportunity to conduct research for 8 weeks at Korea's top-
ranked universities with state-of-the-art research facilities: Seoul National
University, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology and Ewha Womans
University. Over the lifetime of this 3-year project, 15 students will
participate. Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited. The
unifying research theme of IRiKA is smart systems with the subtopics of sensors,
emerging electronics, and materials and process development. In addition to lab
work and weekly cohort research meetings, IRiKA students will visit Korea's
government research institutions and global leaders in the tech industry such as
Samsung, LG, and Hyundai. The distinctive features of IRiKA are: 1) A cohort
experience bringing the US participants together; 2) Vetted and structured
professional development program tailored for both US students and Korean
mentors; and 3) Availability of follow-on collaborative projects in US and Korea
to facilitate a sustained global network of mentorship. Students will gain
formative research skills and learn how smart systems brings together
interdisciplinary technological solutions for manufacturing, healthcare, energy,
safety and security, transportation, and logistics. The international aspect of
the IRiKA will help students recognize their place in the global scientific
community. The participants will present their work at their home institutions
upon their return and will be incentivized to publish in a peer-reviewed journal
or present at a conference for broader dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary Research in Korea on Applied smart
systems (IRiKA) for Undergraduate Students will engage students in
interdisciplinary research, help them develop a global perspective on
collaboration, and motivate them to pursue a career in STEM research. Efforts
will be made to attract students underrepresented in STEM and/or with limited
STEM research opportunities. IRiKA takes a scaffolded mentorship approach that
fosters students' growth from a relatively dependent status to as independent a
status as their competence warrants. Smart systems incorporate sensing,
actuation, wireless connectivity, and machine learning. Examples of research
projects that individual students will conduct during 8 weeks in Korea include:
Development of an air-borne particle sensing system for health monitoring and
air quality monitoring; Development of miniature and micro power generation
systems to enable autonomous sensor systems; and Development of a light-weight,
flexible point-of-care device consisting of microfluidic channels and reduced
graphene oxide-based biosensors. Upon return to the US, students will be able to
engage in follow-on projects in areas such as convergent IoT systems at
University of Florida's NSF I/UCRC Multi-functional Integrated Systems
Technology (MIST) center and wearable sensor systems at Louisiana State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.