* 1827921
* Acquisition of a Zeta Potential and Particle Size Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Education at the Inter American University of Puerto Rico, Ponce Campus
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Edmy Ferrer-Torres, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 90,502.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Merlis Alvarez-
Berrios from the Inter American University Puerto Rico, Ponce Campus and
colleague Edmy Ferrer-Torres have acquired a zeta potential and particle size
analyzer. The zeta potential is a term used in the electrokinetic studies of
colloidal dispersions. This instrument is also used in the investigation of very
small aggregates called nanoparticles. It is used to determine particle size and
zeta potential critical for understanding of various materials. The size of
nanoparticles plays a key role in their unique properties. The zeta potential
value is related to the stability of nanoparticles and hence their product
performance. Moreover, the analyzer provides multiple accessories and therefore
is suitable for a wide spectrum of user applications. These characterization
studies are crucial for evaluating the potential application of novel materials
in areas such as medicine, technology and the petroleum field. One application
is the study of microparticle-protein interactions which may be of potential
interest in medicine. The instrument also contributes to training students in
modern instrumentation. It is supporting interdisciplinary undergraduate
research and education at the Inter American University of Puerto Rico, at both
the Ponce Campus and San German campuses, as well as high schools and colleges
from the south region of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is
employed in supporting research in a number of projects to accurately predict
and quantify the stability of nanoparticles. Metallic nanoparticles are of
special interest in these studies. The instrument is being used to elucidate
protein-protein and microparticle-protein interactions governing the inhibition
of fibrillation processes. Modification of solid surfaces is being studied.
Confirmation of the functional groups present on the surface of the
nanomaterials suspended in liquids after chemical modification is under
investigation. The instrument is also being used to determine the electrostatic
interactions between particles and flat surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.