* 1827876
* A History of Data Practices in the Water Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Etienne Benson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,194.00

This project is a historical study of data practices in hydrology, the science
dealing with the properties, distribution, and circulation of water on and below
the earth's surface. Many of these practices continue to be used by scientists
today to study and manage erosion, flooding, water scarcity, and a wide range of
other water-related problems. This project will shed light on the historical
origins of practices of data collection, management, analysis, and sharing that
continue to be used by earth and environmental scientists. The requested funds
will support travel for archival research, and for undergraduate and graduate
student research assistants. It will result in a scholarly book and journal
articles, a new undergraduate course on environmental data, research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and insights into the
history of data practices that may help to improve scientific pedagogy, data-
sharing initiatives, and the use of scientific data in policy
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrology and fluvial geomorphology became
increasingly quantitative, mathematical, experimental, and data-intensive from
the 1940s to the 1970s, a critical period in the history of the water sciences
in the United States. To develop mathematical models of interactions between
water and land, hydrologists and fluvial geomorphologists found it necessary to
gather new kinds of data and to develop new ways of organizing, analyzing, and
sharing them. In some cases, they re-purposed existing sources of data, while in
other cases they launched entirely new data-gathering enterprises including
novel kinds of field surveys and laboratory experiments. They also established
new agreements and institutions to standardize data and encourage data sharing.
These data practices proved critical to the management of water resources in the
rapidly developing U.S. West as well as in other arid regions around the world.
They also proved controversial; various stakeholders fought to determine which
data were relevant, whether they could be trusted, and how they should be
interpreted. This project will show how the sciences of water informed responses
to emerging water problems and were in turn shaped by them. It will contribute
to our understanding of the rise of quantitative, mathematical, and data-
intensive techniques for understanding the Earth and managing the human
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.