* 1827796
* Workshop on Variation in the Mechanisms of Human Language Processing; March 29-31, 2019, Boulder, CO
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Laura Michaelis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 46,585.00

The ability to comprehend and produce language is crucial to the success of
human beings across history and is crucial to success in modern life. The
question of how this ability is enabled by the human brain is one of the central
challenges of cognitive science. The most common approach to answering this
question has concentrated on documenting the language processing abilities of
typically developing young adults, generating accounts of language processing
abilities that are shared by all human beings. Although this standard approach
has produced many crucial insights into human language, it fails to explain a
number of ways in which language processing ability is not the same in all
people but rather varies substantially across different individuals or groups of
people. Among typically developing young adults, there are well-documented
individual differences in cognitive abilities--for instance, people vary in
their ability to hold information in mind and manipulate that information--which
can shape language processing ability. Moreover, language processing ability
changes across the lifespan, as people develop from childhood to old age, and
thus the story of human language processing is about more than just young
adults. Finally, some groups of people are congenitally atypical in terms of
cognitive or perceptual abilities, as in the case of blindness or deafness, and
this has important implications for language and language processing. Progress
in understanding the variability of language processing ability is of pressing
importance, because language is the primary means of communication in nearly all
facets of modern human life, including school, work, and media environments.
Understanding the nature of variations in language processing ability will aid
in identifying individuals who need help and in developing methods for helping
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop on Variation in the Mechanisms of Human
Language Processing will be held in conjunction with the 2019 Annual CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing (March 29-31, at the University of
Colorado, Boulder). The Conference on Human Sentence Processing is the premier
event in North America for research on how humans comprehend and produce
language. The workshop will convene researchers working on different aspects of
variation in the mechanisms of language processing, including a group of experts
in the area. The workshop will enable scientific discussion amongst researchers
focused on variation in language processing and mainstream psycholinguistic
researchers which will enhance our understanding of variation in language
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.