* 1827910
* A Social-Network Study of a Conflict over Pesticide Use
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Scott Frickel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 151,150.00

This award supports a post-doctoral research project that studies the structure
and dynamics of expert networks as they interact with social movements and shape
the development of new fields of environmental health. It will identify and map
the networks that linked experts to social movement organizations in the
conflict over pesticide use in Argentina triggered by the adoption of
genetically modified soy, and assess how these networks shaped political
mobilization as well as new knowledge on the health effects of pesticides. It
will also trace the contribution of non-experts to the development of new
knowledge to outline the network that connect all the contributors to the
production of different types of knowledge. The study employs in-depth
interviews with mobilized experts and activists, archival research, and network
analysis; it includes eighteen months of field work in six GM soy producing
provinces of Argentina. The results will be broadly disseminated in academic
multidisciplinary STS, environmental studies journals and sociology journals; as
well as to activists through a summary report that will be sent to media outlets
and will be generally available on the project website. An oral presentation of
the main findings and conclusions will be delivered in a final workshop with
interviewees and other stakeholders in Argentina.

This study will test, refine, and synthesize existing theories of the co-
production of activism and expertise within different types of conflicts and
settings. Given the potential importance and complexity of the cooperation of
environmental movements and environmental sciences, there is a need for research
that explores this interaction within a broader scope than most case- study-
based research. The study will bring together two theories about expert activism
and expertise that have never been brought into conversation, and in doing so it
will develop a symmetrical-network theory of expert activism. It will also
implement a new symmetrical network-organizational approach to data collection
and analysis, and it will test theoretical ideas developed in the US in a
fundamentally different national setting in the global South. These innovations
will deepen understanding of expert-movement interpenetration and the broader
dynamics of knowledge production within environmental conflicts. The results
will help environmental health experts and environmental movements to better
coordinate their efforts to produce and mobilize different types of knowledge
towards solving pressing environmental health problems unrecognized or silenced
by the governments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.