* 1827693
* PFI-TT: Bioresorbable multi-functional optical sensor for brain implant
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2020
* John Rogers, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 252,131.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project: During clinical,
surgical and rehabilitation steps, various sensor/monitor techniques are used to
monitor brain function and other physiological parameters. However, current
sensors are hard, rigid, bulky and dependent on fragile cables that can act as a
nidus for infection in contaminated traumatic wounds. The associated surgical
retrieval procedures, meanwhile, are costly and they subject patients to
distress associated with re-operation and expose them to additional
complications. On the other hand, bioresorbable electronics can be used for
post-surgical monitoring of organ, tissue, implant, and wound health without the
need for surgical extraction, thus reducing the risk of infection and
complications during and after the surgical processes. The proposed innovation
will open up numerous and diverse applications in medical, security, and
consumer markets. Bioresorbable electronics can potentially move much closer to
commercial reality in the next few years, with the promise of revolutionary
advances in health care and environmental protection, resulting in broad social
and economic impacts. Technology leadership in these areas will increase the
economic competitiveness of the United States, advancing the health and welfare
of the American public, enhancing partnerships between academia and industry,
and developing an American STEM workforce that is globally
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to develop a
bioresorbable bio-implantable multi-functional optical probe for simultaneous
monitoring of brain intracranial pressure (ICP), temperature, and oxygenation.
The initial target market of the technology is brain monitors for the efficient
treatment of patients during recovery following a severe Traumatic brain injury
(TBI). With this NSF PFI-PR project, various technical challenges at the
interface between optics, electronic/optical materials, processes of bio-
resorption, brain interfaces, advanced manufacturing, and commercial scaling
will be addressed. The modular design approach proposed here involves an
implantable bioresorbable probe head coupled to a pluggable/flexible external
optical head, to shorten the product design cycle and reduce the cost. The self-
compensating design for the fully bioresorbable optical/temperature sensor
system will ensure accurate readings of physiological parameters, which are
typically sensitive to environmental variations. A built-in self-calibration
evanescent waveguide sensor pair enables autonomous long-term sensor accuracy.
This bioresorbable systems can be designed to have the specific functional
lifetimes, after which all of the constituent materials under complete bio-
absorption, thereby eliminating the need for surgery, and associated risks to
the patient, to remove the devices. Additionally, electrically passive operation
and complete immunity to electromagnetic interference represent two important
advantages of the proposed optical pressure sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.