* 1827978
* MRI:  Acquisition of ICP-OES Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Stephanie Fretham, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 85,914.00

An award is made to Luther College to acquire an inductively coupled plasma-
optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES). ICP-OES is a powerful instrument able
to sensitively measure small amounts of elements such as calcium, iron, zinc,
copper, and other metals in various types of complex samples. This instrument
will be a valuable resource for enhancing research and education at Luther
College where faculty extensively engage undergraduate students in their
research activities. The ICP-OES will be a central component of several research
programs as well as Chemistry and Environmental Studies courses at Luther
College. Access to this technology will enable Luther College faculty to more
effectively train the next generation of scientists and provide opportunities
for students that are not available in a formal class setting. Additionally, the
instrument will allow expansion of ongoing water quality research to complement
and strengthen community outreach efforts centered around water, which is vital
to our local community and state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-OES will expand
research directions for both new and ongoing projects at Luther College. One
application will investigate how organisms, such as the small nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans, regulate metal concentrations. This work will increase
our understanding of the role of metals in growth, reproduction, and survival of
cells and organisms support. Another project will use the ICP-OES to examine
connections between trace metals, antibiotic resistant bacteria, and animal
waste in aquatic environments, including surface and ground water. Further, the
ICP-OES will enhance an ongoing project focused on how bacteria sense and
respond to metals and expand the knowledge of how metals impact bacteria in
ecosystems and natural environments. Finally, an innovative project focused on
developing novel nanocrystals has the potential for a better understanding of
the conversion of light to electrical energy for solar technology
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.