* 1827846
* MRI: Acquisition of an ultrafast amplified laser system for nonlinear optics and time-resolved spectroscopic studies of condensed matter systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Rainer Glaser, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 352,346.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an
ultrafast amplified laser system enabling studies at the intersections of
condensed matter systems in physics, materials science and engineering,
chemistry, chemical engineering, biology, and bioengineering. Probing materials
with ultrafast short laser pulses captures some of the most fundamental physical
processes that occur at extremely short timescales. These processes, which the
project addresses, provide insights into charge transfer and evolution of
optical excitations in solar cells, nonlinear optical phenomena in organic
electronics, quantum materials, and (bio)organic materials, and transient
optical processes in mesoporous materials. The ultrafast laser facility, while
enhancing areas of nonlinear optics and time-resolved spectroscopic studies of
condensed matter systems, complements existing research centers involved with
nanomedicine, nanotechnology, and nanoscience at the University of Missouri
(MU). The project seeks to make ultrafast laser technology available to a large
user base at MU and in the state of Missouri. The versatility of the instrument
and the transdisciplinary breadth of available expertise are unmatched in the
region, empowering STEM students to obtain a competitive edge by hands-on
experiences, and preparing them for employment in nanotechnology, biotechnology,
materials science and engineering, and semiconductor-based academic research or
industry. The research and educational activities are strengthened by the
participation of students and researchers from Lincoln University, a
Historically Black College &amp; University in Missouri, and other institutions
in the state along with advancing ongoing efforts in high school mentorship and
middle school outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrashort light pulses
open up new realms for probing nonlinear optical processes in materials and
electronic devices. The proposed system is a versatile femtosecond laser system
with broadband wavelength tunability and capabilities for multi-dimensional
spectroscopy. It consists of three parts: (a) a femtosecond oscillator (mode-
locked Ti-Sapphire laser); (b) a femtosecond amplifier; (c) a non-collinear
optical parametric amplifier. The project focuses on investigating carrier
dynamics and optical nonlinearities in electronic materials and organic
semiconductor transistors to improve technology based on organic electronics.
The research of two-dimensional (2D) materials, in particular the monolayer
transition metal dichalcogenides, will benefit by obtaining in-depth
understanding of the excitonic processes in these materials. In the area of
molecular organic crystals, combined efforts in the second harmonic generation
measurements, synthesis, and computational simulations will establish large
scale polar order by rational design. The ultrafast laser system will be used to
exploit the nonlinear optical properties of biological nanostructures in order
to obtain multi-wavelength coherent sources with potential applications in
nanophotonics. The project will further enable the development of silica-based
materials by probing transient optical processes and fabricating micro- and
nano-structures on the order necessary for their integration into optoelectronic
devices. The proposed experimental laser facility will be bolstered by
establishing a center for nonlinear optics, comprising both experimentalists and
theorists, to promote research and educational activities in emerging ultrafast
and nonlinear optical phenomena in condensed matter
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.