* 1827952
* Emergence of Organizational Forms of Data Governance in the Big Data Era
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Davidson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 08/31/2021
* USD 214,998.00

Today, previously unimaginable varieties and volume of "big data" are collected
and aggregated through information and communication technologies. This project
addresses one of the grand challenges of this big data era - how can we harness
these resources for societal good amidst many competing claims on the value to
be derived from these data and the substantial risks for individual privacy and
security? In the health care sector, yielding the greatest value possible from
rapidly expanding digitalized health data resources is essential to address
pressing societal issues related to cost, quality, safety and access. Health
data governance remains challenged by technical, institutional and competitive
factors. How health data are governed - by whom, for what purposes, on whose
behalf and through what organizational forms and structures - are vital
questions. This project examines how organizational forms develop around health
data resources. Viewing health data as shared societal resources rather than
merely as organizational assets calls into question whether new governance forms
can develop, what influences their emergence, and what factors enable or limit
effective governance of these resources. The findings from this study will
develop new knowledge with application for policy settings as well for health
system leaders and technology innovators on how to alter organizational forms to
produce more value from health data and thereby improve the health care system
and benefit public welfare. Findings will be disseminated to relevant health
data organizations and associations such as the National Association of Health
Data Organizations. This interdisciplinary project spanning communications,
public health and information technology management contributes to research
capabilities and educational curricula for health data management, data science,
and information policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates three
research questions: (1) What organizational forms emerge to address challenges
and opportunities of big data governance? (2) What institutional and
sociotechnical factors enable or inhibit the establishment of new organizational
forms of data governance? (3) How do varied organizational forms address the
multiple, possibly conflicting, interests and values of societal and
organizational stakeholders to enhance value realized from data resources? These
questions are addressed through a series of embedded case studies of an emerging
organization form of health data governance, the All-Payer Claims Databases
(APCD) in the U.S. health care sector. The three phases include a historical
analysis of the APCD movement at the national level including the All-Payer
Claims Database Council, in-depth case studies of four states' APCDs, and field-
level analysis of the State of Hawai'i APCD project. Through comparative case
analysis, the research examines how and why there is significant variation in
organizational forms among 30 state projects and what are the implications for
the societal, organizational, and individual value realized through these
resources. The project supports theorizing the process and outcomes of
governance form emergence, develops a series of embedded case study reports of
APCDs, and creates an analytical codebook and structure useful for analyzing
governance of other health data domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.