* 1827123
* PFI-TT: Research and Development of a Novel Printer for Small Molecular-Based Medicines That Enhances Their Dissolution Properties and Cost-Effectiveness.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Max Shtein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,947.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will be to enhance
the rate and cost-effectiveness of pharmaceutical research, development and
manufacturing, ultimately lowering the cost of new, sophisticated medicines, as
well as making it easier for people to take combinations of medicines required
to combat some diseases. Many current practices in drug discovery and
manufacturing are century-old, resulting in poor quality, poor patient
compliance, poor scalability, and scarcity of many medicines. The proposed
approach differs radically from existing practices in the pharmaceutical sector,
enhances the properties of active ingre-dients in medicines, drives down the
amount of solvents required for pre-clinical testing and thus reducing toxic
chemical waste, yet is compatible with many existing drugs and dosage forms
(e.g. pills, gel caps, patches, injections, etc.). If successful, the proposed
technology could short-en by several years the drug development timeline, make
it easier to combine multiple med-icines into a single pill or patch tailored to
each patient, and reduce the amount of precious active ingredient being wasted
due to body elimination or unused prescription medicines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has significant intellectual merit,
in that it leverages techniques from the semiconductor industry and
nanotechnology to address long-standing problems in pharmaceutical science,
development, and manufacturing. The process at the core of this project can
print active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) with precision and accuracy,
while also enhancing their dissolution without resorting to strong or toxic
solvents. It will advance understanding of thermal properties of pharmaceutical
compounds, the link between molecular structure and crystal structure, and its
influence on dissolution properties and bioa-vailability, which it enhances.
While these capabilities have been shown for some compounds, they remain
unavailable to the broader pharma research community. This multi-disciplinary
project will make the capability widely available to molecular chemists,
biologists, and pharmacologists, allowing them to devote more of their time to
optimizing small molecular therapeutics for potency and site-specific binding,
without facing solubility bottlenecks. The proposed work promises to unlock the
therapeutic potential of millions of al-ready synthesized compounds that are
languishing in material libraries due to their poor solubility, and to create
combination therapies of unprecedented sophistication that will leverage deep
learning- and data-driven medical science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.