* 1827945
* MRI:  Acquisition of integrated laser scanning/spinning disk confocal microscopy system to advance multidisciplinary research and training at Mount Holyoke College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kyle Broaders, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 516,249.00

An award is made to Mount Holyoke College to acquire an integrated laser
scanning/spinning disk confocal microscopy system that will enhance the diverse
research and teaching needs of its faculty. This equipment will considerably
strengthen STEM education at the oldest women's college in the country by
promoting new and innovative microscopy-associated course offerings across the
Life and Physical Science curriculum. Students will be afforded hands-on
training with the most current and powerful instrumentation to both prepare them
for the job market and enhance their candidacy for graduate-level education. The
microscope will also be used as the focus of campus wide events specifically
geared towards increasing representation of students of color in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will transform scientific
inquiry of Mount Holyoke faculty spanning a variety of disciplines, organisms,
model systems and preparations. The number of undergraduate-driven research
activities in biology, neuroscience, chemistry, psychology, and physics will be
increased by expanding opportunities for senior thesis research and summer
internship projects ranging from fine-scale interrogations of cellular
interactions to particle fluid dynamics and intracellular signaling pathways.
The versatility of this microscopy system will transform the research and
teaching platforms across STEM disciplines at Mount Holyoke College and provide
new opportunities that prepare a diverse student body to work in cutting-edge
research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.