* 1827364
* PFI-RP: Conversion of Organic Wastes Streams by Torrefaction for Bio-Power Application
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Armando McDonald, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,020,895.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is the production of
clean, renewable, and affordable solid fuel pellets produced from torrefied
waste-plastic blend as a drop-in fuel for use in coal power plants. The use of
waste as a feedstock for a clean fuel (void of chlorine, sulfur, and nitrogen)
will prevent ecological damage, due to landfilling, and will advance the health
and welfare of the American public by reduced air emissions. The pellets are of
high calorific value and at low cost that will compete with fossil coal,
increasing the economic competitiveness of the U.S. This effort is enhancing
partnerships between academia and industry (two partners from the academia and
one from the industry) in the U.S. The program has significant educational
contributions, both at Michigan Technological University and the University of
Idaho, and will prepare Ph.D. students for this emerging field in the workplace.
Finally, this work will improve public scientific literacy and engagement with
science and technology in the U.S., by advancing this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project deals with torrefaction of solid
waste that comprises mostly fiber and plastic to convert them into clean, high-
calorific-value solid fuels. The main challenges in using solid wastes for
energy applications are: (1) inhomogeneity within the waste streams; (2)
materials in the waste that are hazardous to the environment and equipment, such
as chlorine and potassium; and (3) the converted fuel should be grindable to
enable its applications in coal-fired boilers. The team, comprising two academic
institutions and a commercial entity, is developing new approaches to solve
these hurdles. Inhomogeneity is being resolved by sorting metals and glass and
blending the sorted waste with fiber or plastic waste to obtain a consistent
blend. Torrefaction is helping to solve the two latter hurdles. During
torrefaction, the material becomes brittle and hence can be pulverized to the
required size. The hazardous materials are removed after torrefaction, by
dissolving the brittle material in aqueous solution that dissolved the hazardous
material, specifically chlorine and potassium. Plastic has been found to play a
major role in the quality of final pellets, as it increases the calorific value
and enables producing high density pellets that are safe, durable, and water
resistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.