* 1827397
* Collaborative Research: An Ethnographic Study of Local-level Policy Implementation Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Whitney Duncan, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 98,564.00

The research supported by this award looks at how national, state, and local
policies, discourses, and people interact to produce a local service choice
environment. Policy development may assume a direct translation from the
objectives developed at federal and state levels to implementation and response
at the community level. But the United States comprises a great diversity of
local contexts. This research addresses the important question of how that
diversity affects policy implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be conducted by anthropologists Sarah B. Horton (University of Colorado at
Denver) and Whitney L. Duncan (University of Northern Colorado). The researchers
have chosen to focus on local perceptions of health care service availability as
a case study of policy devolution. They will undertake a comparative,
longitudinal investigation of how specific residents in two different sites in
Colorado, one urban and one rural, connect with and understand the availability
of health care services for chronic diseases. Policies are standard across the
state but are mediated by different local institutional, historical, and
sociocultural contexts. The goal is to see what difference those contexts make.
Working cooperatively with local clinics, they will collect data through
interviews and participant observation with local stakeholders, patients, and
health care staff. They will also analyze local media accounts and relevant
documents. Findings from this research will be valuable for policy makers,
service providers, and service users. The research will also enrich social
scientific understanding of the complex functioning of the contemporary state
and the different ways in which citizenship is made concrete at the local
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.