* 1827211
* CC* Integration: End-to-End Software-Defined Cyberinfrastruture for Smart Agriculture and Transportation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Patrick Schnable, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,919.00

Imaging and other sensor-based understanding of plant behavior is becoming
key&lt;br/&gt;to new discoveries in plant genotypes leading to more productive
and environment-friendly farming.&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, distributed sensing is
seen as a key component of a safe, efficient, and sustainable autonomous
transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt;Existing research and education in agriculture
and transportation systems are constrained by the lack of connectivity between
field-deployed testbed equipment and computing infrastructure. To realize that
connectivity, this project proposes to deploy CyNet wireless networks
to&lt;br/&gt;connect experimental science testbeds to high-performance cloud
computing infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CyNet project
will:&lt;br/&gt;1) deploy Predictable, Reliable, Real-time, and high-Throughput
(PRRT) wireless networking solutions using the standards-compliant, open-source
Open Air Interface software framework and commodity Universal Software Radio
Peripheral (USRP) hardware;&lt;br/&gt;2) integrate these wireless networks with
software defined networks to seamlessly integrate outdoor cameras, sensors, and
autonomous vehicles, and connect these components to high performance cloud
computing systems;&lt;br/&gt;3) implement an infrastructure virtualization
system that partitions CyNet into programmable, isolated experiments;
and&lt;br/&gt;4) create an infrastructure management system that performs
admission and access control and establishes specified resource allocation
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.