* 1827948
* A power law model of dynamic marine phytoplankton stoichiometry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Katsumi Matsumoto, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 348,041.00

Almost a century ago, Alfred Redfield observed that the ratios of the elements
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus in ocean phytoplankton were nearly the same
throughout the oceans. This observation came to be called the "Redfield ratio"
and is a central idea in biological and chemical oceanography. The Redfield
ratio provides a convenient and useful way of relating the uptake of nutrients
(nitrogen and phosphorus) and carbon, and of exploring aspects of ocean carbon
cycling. Recent work, however, has highlighted the many ways in which the carbon
to nitrogen to phosphorus (C:N:P) ratios can vary, suggesting that the simple
assumption that they are unchanging should be revisited. The overall goal of
this project is to develop a way of incorporating varying C:N:P ratios into
ocean models that will allow researchers to explore the impacts of these
variations on carbon cycling. The proposed work will directly support graduate
student researchers and include STEM outreach to local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a power law model of flexible
phytoplankton stoichiometry, an approach that is able to capture the nonlinear
behavior of the elemental ratios as a function of multiple environmental
drivers. The central feature of the power law model is a coefficient that yields
useful insights about phytoplankton biochemistry (i.e., phytoplankton
homeostasis) and ocean biogeochemistry (i.e., the buffer capacity of the global
carbon export production to environmental changes). Furthermore, the power law
model is mathematically robust and thus easily ported to global ocean models.
These attributes of the power law model are expected to facilitate widespread
studies of dynamic stoichiometry with global ocean models. The investigators
will also enable two global ocean models with their new stoichiometry model and
quantify the stoichiometry-biogeochemical cycles-climate feedbacks under ongoing
global warming and late Pleistocene ice age conditions. This study will thus
make a significant contribution to chemical oceanography by developing a new
approach to representing stoichiometric diversity in ocean models and by
quantifying the global impacts of that diversity under different climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.