* 1827204
* RCN-UBE: The Build-a-Genome Network
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Lisa Scheifele, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 511,184.00

This RCN-UBE network project seeks to foster a community dedicated to
incorporating synthetic biology research into undergraduate curricula. Synthetic
biology, the design and creation of biological systems not found in nature, is a
powerful and increasingly common research approach, thereby demanding its
inclusion in scientific training programs. The Build-a-Genome network will host
annual workshops for educators from diverse undergraduate institutions, develop
teaching materials and software that allow students to engage in design and
synthesis of genes and genomes, coordinate the exchange of ideas, expertise, and
pedagogical results, and increase understanding of synthetic biology among the
broader community. The Build-a-Genome network's approach accomplishes many of
the goals of Vision and Change, including integration of research into the
curriculum, exposure of students to the interdisciplinary and collaborative
nature of the scientific process, and enhancing students' abilities to model and
create new genomes and systems and to apply the process of science. Because it
exemplifies biology's shift towards interdisciplinary study by integrating
biology, mathematics, chemistry, and computer science, Build-a-Genome will
effectively train and position students for the science jobs of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Build-a-Genome Network will develop and support
diverse synthetic biology workflows that can be implemented at the undergraduate
level including the following: synthesis of bacteriophage genomes, synthesis of
yeast neochromosomes, and induced rearrangement of synthetic yeast chromosomes.
Annual workshops will introduce network participants to the Build-a-Genome
course workflows and the broader synthetic biology field, facilitate the
collective creation of teaching modules on synthetic biology ethics, and
encourage discussions about course implementation. The Build-a-Genome network
will have a robust online working site where protocols will be iteratively
refined, common software tools will be disseminated, assessment mechanisms and
scientific expertise will be shared, and collaborations among students and
institutions engaging in genome synthesis will be coordinated. Network
activities will impact institutional curricula, produce lab manuals and teaching
modules, broaden knowledge about synthetic biology among non-research-intensive
schools, and result in presentation of research and pedagogical results at
meetings and in publications. The network will include faculty from varied
fields and institutional settings, including 2- and 4-year colleges, minority-
serving institutions, a community lab, and a postdoctoral training program. As a
result, diverse undergraduate students will gain valuable course-based research
experience at the interface of genomics, bioengineering, and synthetic biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/). Funding is also provided from the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.