* 1827731
* IMREL-CHRNS Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (IC-PREM) using a National Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Dan Neumann, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 718,294.00

Fayetteville State University (FSU) is a minority-serving institution with over
70% of students classified as minorities, primarily African Americans, and with
high female, military or military-affiliated student populations. This award to
FSU supports research on neutron scattering of nanomaterials through the NSF
Partnerships for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) program. The
established partnership is defined between the Interdisciplinary Materials
Research and Education Laboratory (IMREL) at FSU funded by NSF, and the Center
for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS), a national user facility co-
funded by NSF and by the NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology)
Center for Neutron Research (NCNR). The IMREL houses equipment and
instrumentation for materials synthesis, fabrication, processing,
characterization and property measurements for nanomaterials research, and CHRNS
provides state-of-the-art neutron scattering instrumentation to the general
scientific community with broad applications in materials research, such as
polymers, metals, ceramics, magnetic materials, porous media, fluids and gels,
and biological molecules. The FSU investigators and undergraduate students are
supported to visit and conduct onsite collaborative research annually with CHRNS
scientists on various synthesized nanomaterials using neutron scattering at
CHRNS. FSU's facilities will also be made available to CHRNS-affiliated
scientists and to the CHRNS user community for complementary research at FSU as
needed. This IMREL-CHRNS PREM (IC-PREM) project will enhance the materials
research capacities and promote the education in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) at FSU. The national user facility CHRNS is
utilized to enhance the minority education in this PREM
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focus in this project is to use the
neutron scattering at CHRNS to understand the structure-processing-property
relationship of nanomaterials. The IMREL and CHRNS investigators have identified
research directions with mutual interests for synergistic collaborations in
these three thrust areas: (1) tailoring one-dimensional inorganic perovskite
nanofibers for enhanced physical and chemical properties; (2) optoelectronic
properties of two-dimensional hybrid perovskites; and (3) synthesis,
manipulation, and characterization of nanomaterial pseudocrystals. These
fundamental research projects will explore new enhanced physical and chemical
properties by delicately tailored inorganic nanoscale perovskite nanofiber
architectures through changing the shape, dimensionality, size, processing and
chemical doping; potentially find new optoelectronic properties of two-
dimensional hybrid perovskites through the study of isotope effects, cation
substitution, structural defects and structural dimensionality; and achieve
enhanced electrical, optical and thermal properties through surface
modifications with nanocrystals. Neutron scattering by the partner, CHRNS, is a
centerpiece method to characterize these crystalline and magnetic nanostructures
that cannot be done by other means to guide the investigations in each of the
research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.