* 1827940
* PAWR Platform POWDER-RENEW: A Platform for Open Wireless Data-driven Experimental Research with Massive MIMO Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 24,427,346.00

This project creates a city-scale platform for advanced wireless research that
will be deployed over the period 2018 - 2023 in Salt Lake City, Utah. This
Platform for Open Wireless Data-driven Experimental Research (POWDER) supports
at-scale experimentation of novel advanced wireless broadband and communication
technologies in the sub-6 GHz band. The project features interactions with
regional networks encompassing initiatives on public transportation, broadband
delivery, education and health service delivery as well as advancement of
science, technology and research by creating an ecosystem of a hundred small
companies in allied technical domains. The ability to use this platform by early
adopter companies/startups and application developers to evaluate technologies
in their pre-commercial phase will have a significant positive impact on the
speed of innovation in the data networking and application domains. This effort
will also benefit educators and students at all levels of study in
communications-related disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key feature of the
platform is the partnership with the Reconfigurable Eco-system for Next-
generation End-to-end Wireless (RENEW) project at Rice University to develop a
highly programmable and flexible massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO)
platform that is an essential feature of both 5G and beyond-5G wireless
networks. The platform will feature (i) heterogeneous systems composed of
programmable base stations, mobile devices and static sensors; (ii) state of the
art massive MIMO base-stations; (iii) ability to conduct research over a diverse
spectrum range (from 50 MHz to 3.8 GHz), and (iv) a large-scale software defined
wireless networking testbed integrated with an existing NSF-funded cloud
testbed, thereby enabling end-to-end experimentation. Another unique aspect of
the platform is support for wireless mobility-based studies, provided by using
couriers with predictable movement patterns (e.g., buses), less predictable but
bounded mobility (e.g., maintenance vehicles), and controllable couriers (e.g.,
on-site volunteers). Each of these deployed units will consist of "base"
functionality that includes user-programmable software defined radios, "bring
your own device" (BYOD) experiments, and will be connected via a sophisticated
platform control framework. Existing fiber links will connect the wireless base
stations to about half a dozen edge compute platforms. This will enable complex
device provisioning and a set of tools for scientific workflow management,
collaboration, and artifact sharing, with a goal towards promoting rigorous
standards for reproducibility in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.