* 1827154
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Urban agriculture supports accessible and impactful biology education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Adam Kay, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 04/30/2021
* USD 73,904.00

Too many students, especially those from underrepresented groups, abandon their
pursuit of STEM degrees in college. This attrition is a significant problem
because there are not enough science, health professionals, and teachers in the
U.S., and more diverse perspectives are needed to help solve the world's complex
scientific challenges. Part of the reason for this attrition is because science
education can seem abstract and not relevant to the problems that students are
aware of in their own communities. This project addresses this attrition by
creating a network focused on urban agriculture. Urban agriculture engages
undergraduate students, in part, because it connects two of the world's most
pressing problems, how to make agriculture more sustainable, and how to make
cities healthier. Urban agriculture sites such as campus gardens and community
farms, filled with crop plants, flowers, and insects, can captivate the
imagination and connect them to nature. Although underappreciated, urban
agriculture is also an ideal setting for helping students learn about science
because plots of crop plants can easily organized as experiments. This project
will build on this feature to develop labs that help undergraduate students
learn every aspect of the scientific process, coming up with questions,
developing a project design, collecting data, analyzing results, and presenting
findings. This project will also make important contributions to communities by
helping students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, stay
interested in biology, and by connecting science education to community service
projects such as produce donation programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
attrition from science fields is a significant problem in the United States.
Attrition from science fields contributes to a shortage of available science and
health professionals and teachers, and represents lost investments for students.
Science attrition is particularly pronounced in underrepresented groups, which
are needed to diversify perspectives. Reducing this attrition requires the
development of rigorous yet engaging programs accessible to a large number of
students from all backgrounds. This project will create a research coordination
network that enhances undergraduate biology education by capitalizing on the
advantages of urban agriculture as a model system. The network will be guided by
two core goals: 1) to develop and implement biology curricula using the Core
Concepts and Competencies outlined by the AAAS in their 2011 report, Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education; and 2) to create quantitative
assessments that measure progress toward our curricular and network goals. Urban
agriculture provides an ideal setting for this program because the topic is
relevant to students and the venue provides opportunities for hands-on training
around core concepts in biology. The project will also help students connect
their science training to community service through produce distributions,
educational programming, and other types of outreach activities with community
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.