* 1827830
* 2018 Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) Student Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2018
* USD 18,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. It
also is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning
and artificial intelligence. The proceedings of its annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Thus, it is also the most important gathering of
researchers in computational linguistics and natural language processing. This
project is to subsidize travel, conference and housing expenses of students
selected to participate in the ACL Student Research Workshop, which will take
place during the main ACL conference from July 15-25, 2018 in Melbourne,
Australia. The Student Research Workshop helps create a new generation of
researchers with a more thorough understanding of their field, with connections
and collaborations across institutions, and with innovative and exciting
research programs. This contributes to America's pool of researchers with the
needed scientific and engineering knowledge and skills. The workshop encourages
a spirit of collaborative research and builds a supportive environment for a new
generation of computational linguists.

The Student Research Workshop solicits two categories of submissions: research
papers and research proposals. The research proposal can have only one author
who must be a student. The research papers can have multiple authors, with the
first author being a student (at either the graduate or undergraduate level).
The workshop is a venue for students to receive constructive critical feedback
on their work from experts outside of their institution, and to connect with
other students and senior researchers in their field. The students gain exposure
by presenting their work earlier than they would otherwise (i.e., in a form not
yet ready for the main conference). This is particularly valuable for students
from smaller institutions and undergraduate students. In addition, the workshop
is organized and run by students. The student organizers gain valuable
opportunities for professional growth and interaction with the researchers on
the organizing committee of the main conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.