* 1827326
* Human Occupation Of Persistent Coastal Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Irene Esteban, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,890.00

Dr. Erich Fisher, of Arizona State University, and colleagues from South Africa
and many other nations will study how hunter-gatherers lived in persistent
coastal contexts during glacial and interglacial phases. For many years,
scholars have studied how people interact with their environment when faced with
ecological pressures. Like modern people, prehistoric hunter-gatherers are known
to have adapted their subsistence, technological, and social behaviors in
response to changes in their local environments. These adaptations influenced,
among other things, what they ate, where they lived, what kinds of tools they
made, and also how they interacted with each other. The archaeological sciences
are ideally suited to studying the relationship between people and their
environment over long timespans - spanning centuries to tens of thousands of
years - because these kinds of behavioral changes can be detected in the
multivariate archaeological record. Coastal zones are dynamic and rich
environments with abundant, diverse, and predictable foods and other resources.
Scholars have been intrigued by the way coastal environments may have supported
and even protected humans living in these places from larger ecological changes
that detrimentally affected human groups living in inland locations. Yet
considerable gaps remain in these records due to changes in sea levels during
glacial phases that shifted the locations of many coastlines by tens to hundreds
of kilometers. Understanding how hunter-gatherers adapted to coastal zones over
long timeframes, and how these groups compared to populations living inland,
therefore, provides new insights into the ways that humans used subsistence,
social and technological strategies to mediate ecological pressures in dynamic
environments. It also gives the scientific community a broader point of
reference for understanding human impacts on coastal environments, which can
inform 21st century marine and coastal conservation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;South Africa has one of the oldest and richest records of human
coastal occupation. This research project focuses on South Africa's East Coast
where very narrow continental shelf has limited coastline movements during
glacial periods. This prevented large coastline movements and created stable
coastal ecosystems. In one these places, known as Pondoland, rare records of
coastal occupation and resource use during the Last Glacial Maximum (ca.
26,000-19,000 years ago) have already been recovered by the P5 Project. These
records provide a unique opportunity to study hunter-gatherers living in stable
coastal contexts over long time periods and compare evidence of their behaviors
to hunter-gatherer groups living inland. The project synergizes researchers from
numerous international universities and disciplines to answer complex questions
about the evolution of human behavior in a unique and persistent environment
along Pondoland's coastline. Detailed archaeological, zooarchaeological, and
paleoenvironmental information from excavations at two coastal archaeological
sites will be collected as well as datasets from systematic landscape studies
and ethnographic observations of modern plant foods and coastal foraging. The
research will generate new evidence to test questions about coastal ecological
variability across glacial and interglacial periods and how these changes
impacted hunter-gatherer food-choice patterns, social networks, settlement
patterns, and technology. Situating these data within the broader southern
African paleolandscape will bring renewed focus on hunter-gatherer's use of
coastal and inland resources across glacial and interglacial cycles and it will
provide a more nuanced understanding of human evolution and social complexity
across broad bio-geographical contexts. The project's interdisciplinary
datasets, therefore, will provide detailed insights into past human behavior,
humans' long-term impacts on coastal ecology, local environmental changes that
influenced various biotic communities, and new methods to conserve these
resources for future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.