* 1827293
* Developing the Next Generation of Problem Solvers: Investigating the Integration of Computational Thinking into Preschool Mathematics and Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Shuchi Grover, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,096,700.00

The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains. Not too long ago,
the goal of teaching computational thinking (CT) in preschool would have seemed
unachievable, but recent advances in our understanding of the building blocks of
CT and of the capabilities of young learners makes this an area ripe for further
exploration. This project will investigate the integration of CT with
mathematics and science with the goal of informing the development of new
resources that provide preschool children with rich learning experiences that
promote critical thinking and problem solving skills crucial for later school
success. Project activities will include: 1) the development of research-based
learning blueprints that delineate learning goals that integrate CT with
mathematics and science; 2) the design and iterative testing of complementary
hands-on and digital activities that address these learning goals, capture young
children's interest, and also yield learning; and 3) the identification of
design principles that guide the design of activity formats that can be used by
educators and caregivers at school and at home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary project team will develop learning blueprints to serve as
anchor documents, guiding the design of activities and research instrumentation.
Furthermore, the team will engage in Design-Based Research and use a co-design
approach in which multiple stakeholder, including preschool teachers, parents,
children, and advisors, are directly and actively involved in the development
and iterative pilot testing of digital and hands-on activities. This will ensure
that design decisions link home and school learning, take into account the
interests of young children, and address the needs and strengths of preschool
programs and culturally diverse families. Researchers will conduct observations
and interviews and make assessments of children's learning using evidence
centered design learning tasks developed as part of this study and conduct mixed
method analyses. The results of this investigation could inform future research
and practice seeking to integrate CT with early childhood science and
mathematics. Likewise, the co-design process used here could inform other
efforts that seek to include diverse stakeholders in design based research.