* 1827592
* EAGER: Hybrid Precoding for Massive MIMO Communication Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Chengshan Xiao, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

EAGER: Hybrid Precoding for Massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Millimeter
Wave Wireless Communication Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future
smart and connected communities will place tremendous demand on wireless
communications due to the ever-growing popularity of smartphones, autonomous
vehicles, and mobile devices. The massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO)
technology, in combination with millimeter wave (mmWave) spectrum utilization,
is considered as a key breakthrough for enabling enormous data-rate increase for
next generation wireless networks. In massive MIMO systems, a very large number
of antennas is employed at the base station to communicate many mobile users
simultaneously. However, this large number of antennas can lead to prohibitive
cost and power consumption if conventional approach which requires one radio
frequency (RF) chain per antenna is adopted. This project focuses on novel
hybrid precoding designs which will not only reduce the number of RF chains but
also maximize the data rate. The hybrid precoding consists of analog and digital
precoders, where the digital precoder is realized by a small amount of RF
chains, and the analog precoder is realized by phase shifters. Therefore, the
cost, complexity and power consumption of massive MIMO systems can be reduced
dramatically. The proposed research can have a large impact on the design and
development of future generation of wireless networks, for which massive MIMO
and mmWave are key enabling technologies. The research results will be
integrated into the classes for electrical engineering and computer engineering
majors through designing new course projects. Research findings will be broadly
disseminated through conference presentations and journal publications.
Moreover, the project will help increase participation of under-represented
minorities and enhance outreach activities to attract female students to careers
in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate hybrid
precoding design methods that can drastically reduce the cost, complexity and
power consumption while approaching the optimal performance of fully-connected,
unconstrained massive MIMO systems. The project formulates the hybrid precoding
design of multi-user massive MIMO systems into a joint optimization of analog
and digital precoders with dynamic resource allocation which includes subarray
selection, power allocation, and modulation-coding-rate selection. The joint
optimization will enable the hybrid system with a significantly reduced number
of RF chains to achieve similar performance of fully-connected massive MIMO
systems at a fractional cost. The dynamic resource allocation will help to
achieve best throughput for given channel conditions. Furthermore, the proposed
approach utilizes finite-alphabet inputs and statistical channel state
information (CSI) instead of the idealistic Gaussian inputs and instantaneous
CSI, thus improving the robustness of the optimized precoders for practical
systems. The objective of this project is expected to be accomplished by three
specific tasks. First, theoretical studies of the achievable data rates will
address the fundamental tradeoff between performance and cost of hybrid
precoding. Second, algorithm research will derive low-complexity solutions to
solve the NP-hard optimization problems. Third, machine learning techniques will
be applied to learn the features and transition probabilities of the Markov
decision processes governing the online resource allocation and hybrid
precoding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.