* 1827374
* Collaborative Research: CompCog: Achieving Analogical Reasoning via Human and Machine Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Hongjing Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 477,000.00

Despite recent advances in artificial intelligence, humans remain unmatched in
their ability to think creatively. Intelligent machines can use massive data to
learn to identify patterns that are similar to learned examples, but people can
use very small amounts of data to discover deep similarities between situations
that are superficially very different (e.g., engineers have devised a cooling
system for buildings using principles adapted from termite mounds). This type of
creative thinking depends on analogy: the ability to find and exploit
resemblances based on relations among entities, rather than solely on
superficial appearances. The present investigation aims to show how relations
can be learned from examples (in the form of either texts or pictures) and then
used to reason by analogy. The work integrates recent advances in machine
learning with more human-like learning mechanisms. Improved analogy models will
increase the power of computer-based information retrieval, allowing both text
and pictures to serve as retrieval cues to search large databases for items that
are analogous in relational structure. The large analogy datasets generated for
the project will be made publically available. More flexible search engines will
help to automate creative tasks such as engineering design. Identifying the
computational basis for relation learning and analogical reasoning will guide
development of artificial intelligence systems by providing more efficient
learning mechanisms. The research team is integrating research and education
activities by using this project as a training opportunity in interdisciplinary
research, encompassing psychology, statistics, computer science and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will integrate advanced computational
approaches with behavioral experiments on human relation learning and analogical
reasoning, using both texts and pictures as inputs. The work is guided by
cognitive theory on learning and reasoning, and exploits recent advances in the
field of machine vision. The project includes the creation and validation of
multiple databases of analogy problems. Experiments will be performed to
establish human performance levels in a variety of tasks. Computational models
will be developed by synergizing big-data learning through deep networks with
small-data learning through Bayesian modeling. Models will be evaluated by
comparison with human benchmarks. By addressing issues that arise in reasoning
from natural inputs such as texts and pictures, the models to be developed will
generalize to situations that people encounter in their daily
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.