* 1827066
* RCN-UBE: Cell Biology Education Consortium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Nathan Reyna, Ouachita Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The need for changing how the natural sciences are taught and the expansion of
undergraduate research experiences has been well-documented in the literature.
One mechanism to accomplish these changes is the incorporation of course-based
undergraduate research experiences. While isolated groups are introducing cell
culture techniques into such experiences, there has been no coordinated effort
to compile resources and provide training that makes creating customizable cell-
culture-based research projects easier to implement at smaller, primarily
undergraduate institutions and community colleges where faculty time and
resources are limited. The Cell Biology Education Coalition (CBEC) will address
these major shortfalls through the creation of a network of faculty, students,
and resources that will provide an infrastructure to facilitate the development
and implementation of unique student-driven research experiences. By creating
projects that align with a curriculum's learning goals and desired student
outcomes, these activities will help strengthen critical thinking skills in and
beyond the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary activity of CBEC will be
the development of "Cell Blocks," modules consisting of written and video
protocols and classroom implementation strategies and assessments. Cell Blocks
will be developed by faculty and their students at small institutions making it
likely that they will be adaptable at similar schools. Because the Cell Blocks
will have similar basic components, they will be able to be mixed and matched to
answer novel questions. The implementation of multiple Cell Blocks will serve as
the basis for semester-long research projects that provide the foundation for
independent student research projects. Network faculty will have opportunities
for professional development through the creation of new Cell Blocks, access to
all Cell Block modules and associated supplies, and networking opportunities.
Students will be able to interact within a community of scientists to expand on
their experiences and create their own independent research projects, establish
a funding record through a voucher system, and participate in professional
development experiences. Such activities have the potential to increase the
number of students entering STEM research fields at the graduate level and in
the workforce. Additionally, because efforts will be made to recruit faculty
from minority-serving institutions, the proposed network will have a pronounced
effect on undergraduates underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/). Co-funding
was provided by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.