* 1827517
* PFI-TT: Demonstration of a Liquid Piston Gas Compressor/Expander for Compressed Air Energy Storage and CO2 Sequestration
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Kevin Nickels, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is in advancing the
development of a high efficiency, high power, high pressure gas
compressor/expander. Such a device is key to enabling Compressed Air Energy
Storage (CAES) to be used as a viable, economical electricity storage approach
that can be deployed anywhere. Such an energy storage system can be used to save
surplus electricity that would otherwise be waster to be used when demand is
high. Also, as intermittent renewable energy resources such as wind and solar
supply a larger portion of the electricity supply, energy storage is needed to
supplement these resources when they are not available. The gas compressor can
also be used for compressing other gases, such as carbon dioxide and gases used
in many industries, with less energy consumption. The reduction in energy
consumption and greenhouse gases will consequently increase the energy security
of the U.S. and help combat climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop and validate the performance of a prototype device for
compressing and expanding gas to and from a high pressure. High efficiency will
be achieved if the compression and expansion processes occur at constant
temperature. To attain both high efficiency and high power, the
compressor/expander will incorporate design that augments heat transfer. The
prototype design will be based upon prior fundamental research that has led to
two orders of magnitude increase in power density without sacrificing
efficiency. This project advances the technological know-how of compressing and
expanding gases more efficiently. In particular, it makes advances on the
technique of achieving isothermal compression/ expansion using a liquid piston
augmented with porous media heat transfer. Although the fundamental benefits of
this approach have been established in prior research, these benefits have not
been realized in a device. This project fills the knowledge gaps that exist to
create such a devices by providing insight and understanding on optimal system
design, valving, sensing and control, and the management of liquid-gas
interface, which are necessary to achieve continuous reciprocating
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.