* 1827339
* Collaborative Research: An Ethnographic Study of Local-level Policy Implementation Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sarah Horton, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 131,800.00

The research supported by this award investigates the outcomes of cross-scale
interactions in contemporary state societies. This is an important scientific
question because when policy is developed at national and state levels it may be
assumed that it will be translated and implemented locally as intended. However,
given the known diversity of the United States, it is likely that this is not
always the case. Therefore, it is important to identify the pathways by which
policies devolve and how they interact with variability both within and between
communities. Findings from this research will be of value not only to social
scientists who study the changing nature of complex societies but also to policy
makers who must take this complexity into account for their policies and
programs to achieve their goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted by anthropologists Sarah B. Horton (University of Colorado at Denver)
and Whitney L. Duncan (University of Northern Colorado). The researchers have
chosen to focus on local perceptions of health care service availability as a
case study of policy devolution. They will undertake a comparative, longitudinal
investigation of how specific residents in two different sites in Colorado, one
urban and one rural, connect with and understand the availability of health care
services for chronic diseases. Policies are standard across the state but are
mediated by different local institutional, historical, and sociocultural
contexts. The goal is to see what difference those contexts make. Working
cooperatively with local clinics, they will collect data through interviews and
participant observation with local stakeholders, patients, and health care
staff. They will also analyze local media accounts and relevant documents.
Findings from this research will be valuable for policy makers, service
providers, and service users. The research will also enrich social scientific
understanding of the complex functioning of the contemporary state and the
different ways in which citizenship is made concrete at the local
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.