* 1827037
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Confined Fluids Using Nitrogen Vacancy Centers
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Jacob Henshaw, Henshaw                 Jacob          D
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 10/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the NSF-CREST program affords
support to beginning CREST Center post-doctoral investigators with significant
potential, funding opportunities for training and research experiences to
broaden their perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and
assist them in establishing positions of leadership within the scientific
community. The CREST-PRF research project titled "Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy of Confined Fluids Using Nitrogen Vacancy Centers" aligns with the
goals of the PRF program and the CREST Center for Interface Design and
Engineered Assembly of Low-Dimensional Systems (IDEALS) at CUNY City College of
New York, where it is housed. The project's work focuses on the study of fluid
dynamics at nanoscale volumes, an area of research of broad interest across
scientific disciplines and with a high potential to generate benefits to
society. Collaborations with other researchers, in both international and
domestic laboratories, will enhance the progress of the work. Outreach to area
schools will provide opportunities for high school students to be exposed to
cutting edge STEM research.

The project's main goal is the empirical characterization of confined fluids as
the dynamic transitions from bulk-dominated to interface-dominated. The work
employs a novel technique, utilizing Nitrogen Vacancy Centers (NVCs) in diamonds
to confine nanoscale volumes of fluids, to enable their study using magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. Extending previous work, the superb spin properties and
unmatched spatial resolution of NVCs can be used to perform magnetic resonance
spectroscopy on fluid volumes orders of magnitude smaller than what is feasible
with standard means. With established techniques of dynamic decoupling and
correlation spectroscopy, the diffusion dynamics of the fluid of interest can be
probed, providing great insight into this poorly understood regime. Experiments
with NVCs bring together specialized fields including semiconductor physics,
atomic physics, magnetic resonance, quantum optics, and quantum information
processing. Knowledge generated and processes developed through the project's
work will be broadly applicable to innovations beneficial to society, ranging
from energy storage to biomedical technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.