* 1827201
* IRES TRACK I: THE GLOBAL INSTITUTE FOR CARBON-HYDROGEN FUNCTIONALIZATION (GICHF)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Huw Davies, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,001.00

Center for Selective Carbon - Hydrogen (C-H) Functionalization (CCHF) will
coordinate and support a highly collaborative international exchange program
with sites in Japan, South Korea and Germany. During the exchanges, students
will participate in collaborative projects directed towards developing new
approaches to making molecules in a streamlined and sustainable way. These new
approaches will have impact on modern medicine and manufacturing, including drug
discovery and materials science. This proposal builds upon a previous NSF
Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) program and provides the exciting
opportunity to capitalize on the collaborative bonds already established to grow
a truly diverse and globally prepared next generation of scientists that benefit
from an integrated and successful global research collective. The overarching
scientific theme that brings these international teams together is C-H
functionalization, a science that is at the leading edge of academic chemical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this International Research
Experiences for Students (IRES) proposal is to establish a vibrant training
environment for collaborative global research in the general field of C?H
functionalization. This will be achieved by means of a productive international
research collaborative, the Global Institute for C-H Functionalization (GICHF).
This program will involve student exchanges and collaborations between the CCHF
and three major international centers in the general field of C-H
functionalization. These centers are the World Premier International Research
Center Initiative (WPI)-funded Institute for Transformative Bio-Molecule (WPI-
ITbM) at Nagoya University, Japan, the Institutes for Basic Sciences-funded
Center for Catalytic Hydrocarbon Functionalizations (IBS-CF) at KAIST, South
Korea, and the Photocatalysis Center based at the University of Regensburg,
Germany. Each year a cohort of CCHF students, consisting of 3 graduate and 5
undergraduate students will perform 8-12 week exchanges between May-August with
the international partners. The CCHF will also host international students,
funded by the international partners, to ensure reciprocity in the collaborative
exchanges. Programming throughout the year will be in place to prepare the
students for the research exchanges and to ensure they make the most of these
experiences. The experience will include a GICHF annual meeting, which will be
hosted, on a rotating basis, at one of our international partners. The annual
meeting will serve as an opportunity to bring together the entire student cohort
as well as faculty from the United States, for a week-long brainstorming,
community building, and educational event with our international
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.