* 1827647
* EDGE:  Establishment of genome-editing and transgenic tools in Anolis lizards
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Lauderdale, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Genetic modification technologies have been applied to investigate gene function
in a broad range of different vertebrate species. These genetic studies have
produced fundamental insights into animal development and other critical
biological processes. However, there are currently no effective approaches for
genetically modifying any of the more than 10,000 described species of reptile.
As a consequence, studies of gene function have almost completely excluded this
diverse and highly successful group of animals. This project advances the brown
anole lizard, Anolis sagrei, as a system for comparative studies of reptile
evolution, development, and gene function. Anolis lizards have served as
important models for studies of evolution, behavior, and ecology for many
decades, and the brown anole is ideal for genetic studies due its small size,
ease of husbandry, continuous egg production, and low cost. The project involves
establishment of a new lizard model system with genome-editing capabilities to
facilitate basic research studies of gene function and gene regulation in this
understudied group of vertebrates. Achievement of these goals will enable the
identification of genetic mechanisms that are deeply conserved across different
vertebrates, as well as enable genetic studies of reptile evolution that are not
currently feasible. The project also involves hosting of two Anolis workshops to
train a cadre of researchers in how to create genetically modified lizards, as
well as opportunities for hands-on research experiences for undergraduate and
high-school students, with special emphasis on the engagement of students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
enabling two technologies for use in the brown anole lizard: CRISPR/Cas9 genome-
editing and transposon-based transgenesis. The project focuses on development of
methods to surgically access maturing oocytes within adult A. sagrei females to
allow the microinjection of unfertilized oocytes with genome modification
reagents. Oocyte microinjection of Cas9 RNPs or transposon mRNA with appropriate
transgene cassettes are performed to produce genetically modified brown anole
lizards by targeted genome-editing or transgenesis, respectively. In addition,
immortalized lines of A. sagrei fibroblasts are established to create a lizard
cell culture system for detailed investigations of cellular mechanisms using
CRISPR/Cas9. Protocols developed during this project are made freely available
in the form of an Anolis Genome Manipulation Handbook. The development of
genome-editing and transgenesis tools in A. sagrei will establish the first
reptilian model system where functional genetic experimental approaches are
available. This project is co-funded by the Evolutionary Processes program in
the Division of Environmental Biology and the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems of the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.