* 1827362
* Research to Determine Brokered Boundaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Danielle Riebe, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 127,290.00

Dr. Danielle Riebe will lead an international, collaborative team of American
and Hungarian scholars and students to investigate the role that everyday
interactions play in forming, maintaining, and changing socio-cultural
boundaries. The project focuses on the Late Neolithic prehistoric period
(roughly 7,000-6,500 years ago) on the Great Hungarian Plain, but its findings
have direct relevance to contemporary issues of social interaction, boundaries,
and the definition and demarcation of borders. Previous studies on these issues
have focused on how regional cultural variation is shaped by environmental and
economic changes, but these studies underestimate the active role that people
play in the creation of their own social identities. By focusing on household-
scale interactions, the project will examine how daily interactions between
people influence larger regional socio-cultural boundaries. In this way it will
contribute to a better understanding of how connectivity impacts and structures
concepts of self and identity - issues that are especially relevant in the
extremely globalized world that exists today. From a research perspective the
project will advance the well-established consortium of collaborative Hungarian-
American archaeological research projects that has been active in the region for
the past 40 years. In addition to promoting women in the sciences, the project
also will further the STEM fields by combining diverse approaches to studying
the past, including anthropology, geology, geochemistry, botany, zoology,
osteology, and sociology, and it will offer new research and training
opportunities to students and scholars.

In the first phase (2013-2016), researchers successfully reconstructed
prehistoric regional interactions between two archaeologically defined cultures,
the Tisza and Herply, and were able to model the presence of a strictly enforced
socio-cultural boundary during the Late Neolithic. However, due to limited
research on Herply settlements, it has remained unclear how local-scale
interactions fed into these regional networks. In this next phase Hungarian and
American researchers will work together to investigate a Herply tell site,
Csokmo-Kaposztas Domb, that is located near the perceived Herpalay and Tisza
cultural boundary. Preliminary magnetometric survey at the site identified
subsurface features, including houses, fortification ditches, wells, and storage
pits. Guided by the magnetometric and surface survey data, the team will
excavate selected households and collect materials that will grant insight into
past interactive behaviors, including the ceramics that people made, the tools
that they used, and the food that they ate. From these materials, the team will
be able to reconstruct past interactions at multiple scales and determine the
degree of connectivity between households within the settlement of Caokmo-
Kaposztas Domb. Innovative techniques, including laser ablation-inductively
coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), portable X-ray fluorescence
(p-XRF) and social network analysis (SNA) will be used to model these multi-
scalar interactions. The results from the survey and excavation will be compared
with information from neighboring excavated Tisza sites that were previously
excavated in order to assess how inter-site interactions and access to exchange
networks at the household level resulted in the formation and maintenance of
regional cultural boundaries during the Late Neolithic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.