* 1827108
* RCN-UBE: Networking STEM Initiatives To Enhance (NSITE) Adoption of Evidence-Based Practices
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Debra Pires, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 472,898.00

This project will establish a network that allows national STEM education reform
initiatives to join forces to speed adoption of effective teaching practices in
post-secondary STEM education and to provide a deeper understanding of how
organizations change. At present, college STEM educators rarely have formal
training in teaching. As such, many teach the way they were taught using a
passive, lecture method that leads to low retention and success rates for
students who enter college declaring STEM majors, especially those from under-
represented groups. The resulting STEM workforce is therefore unable to meet the
current demand for those professionals and does not represent the diversity of
the society it serves. Over the past decade many initiatives have emerged to
address this issue and have made some progress in spreading awareness and some
solutions. While STEM education is changing, the pace is slower than the
shifting societal demands. This new network will allow established initiatives
to share effective strategies and to join forces testing new strategies to
increase the rate of progress in STEM education reform and increase the success
and retention of all students in STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To meet the
needs of the future workforce, we need to retain a larger and more diverse
population of STEM undergraduates. A barrier to increasing retention,
specifically increasing participation by under-represented groups, is the
continued predominance of a transmission model of post-secondary STEM education
which has become a marked issue of social justice. To speed adoption of
evidence-based practices in post-secondary life sciences education, the goal of
this proposal is to build connections between prominent education transformation
efforts, starting in the life sciences, to foster interactions that increase the
efficacy of each initiative. Using a three-phased Networked Improvement
Communities format, a combination of four in-person and multiple virtual
meetings will be used to improve knowledge and awareness, foster communication
and facilitate coordinated action to identify and implement common solutions to
move the needle on common challenges. Ten prominent life sciences initiatives
serving thousands of educators and impacting hundreds of thousands of students
will build relationships, analyze common challenges, identify steps for change,
and subsequently test changes to collect and share data. The last phase will
focus on building capacity to scale efforts based upon a deeper understanding of
organizational change strategies. This project will contribute to increasing and
diversifying the STEM workforce by growing a network to enhance the impact of
the initiatives involved whose common mission is to increase adoption of
evidence-based teaching in post-secondary STEM education, and improving the
impact of a broader community of reform efforts by increasing our knowledge of
effective organizational change strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.