* 1827645
* EDGE: Enabling functional genomics in monkeyflowers (Mimulus)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Wayne Parrott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

A fundamental goal in biology is to understand the genes and developmental
processes that affect ecological success and adaptation of organisms in natural
environments. Historically, a mechanistic understanding of ecologically
important phenotypes has been limited to a small number of genes in very few
model organisms. The research will improve genetic tools in the wildflower genus
Mimulus (monkeyflowers), a system that exhibits rich diversity in form,
physiology, and life history. By connecting this diversity with functional
genetic analysis and field experiments, the research will enable molecular
genetic investigations of previously unexplored of phenotypic variation. With
the tools proposed here, the growing Mimulus scientific community will be in an
excellent position to identify the causal genetic mechanisms underlying
ecologically important traits. The research will provide hands-on learning
opportunities for two different undergraduate laboratory courses taught at
University of Georgia and University of California, Riverside. In addition, the
research will offer training experiences for local high school teachers in
Georgia to develop and refine lab activities for dissemination in the high
school classroom. Furthermore, the plant materials generated in this research
will be incorporated into live plant outreach activities at the University of
Connecticut for student and public education. Finally, the actives will be
broadly disseminated via the Plant Biology section on the "Learn.Genetics"
website as online educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the
genetic and developmental determinants of natural phenotypic variation is
fundamentally important for understanding organismal biology and the processes
that generate biodiversity. The genus Mimulus is an exceptionally diverse group
of approximately 200 wildflower species with abundant natural populations that
is ideally suited for linking naturally occurring genotypes to their
ecologically important phenotypes. The research will enable Mimulus as a
powerful new model for ecological functional genomics and plant developmental
genetics. The specific scientific objectives are as follows: 1) Optimize genetic
transformation protocols in seven Mimulus species that are actively studied by
many researchers and represent a wide range of phylogenetic diversity. 2)
Generate large-scale chemical and transposon insertion mutant libraries for
three of the most actively studied species. Additionally, a major goal of the
research is to enable Mimulus researchers to take full advantage of the newly
developed functional genomics protocols and resources in their own labs. This
project includes an annual, weeklong summer lab short course that will rotate
between the University of Connecticut and the University of Georgia. The project
will also include a website to disseminate detailed instructions and video
tutorials of protocols, as well as a searchable database with information on
plant lines, seed stocks, and other important tools generated from this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by funds from Enabling
Discovery through GEnomic Tools (EDGE) Program and the Evolutionary Process
Program within the Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.