* 1827434
* PFI-RP: Manufacture of Durable and Stable Cross-Laminated Strand-Veneer Lumber for Mass Timber Construction
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Vikram Yadama, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 764,345.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is in development of
a commercially-viable process for manufacturing high-performing, durable mass
strand timber panels for building construction from low-value and underutilized
small-diameter softwood trees, such as from hazardous fuel thinning operations
for improved forest health. The broader impacts are: (1) advancement of
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning by
including students and faculty in the research; (2) enhancement of
infrastructure for research and education by establishing collaborations between
interdisciplinary, yet complementary academic and industry stakeholders; (3)
broadening of research dissemination to enhance understanding by involving
industry and academia in the research, publishing project results in diverse
media sources, and presenting research results in several formats that will
benefit a wide range of forest products industry stakeholders; and (4) improved
economic competitiveness of the U.S. forest products industry. In addition, if
this proof-of-concept research leads to commercial applications, the benefits to
society are: (1) new products with reduced environmental impacts, improved
durability, and longer service-life; (2) technology that increases the U.S.
forest products industry's competitiveness through creation of new jobs and
increased opportunities for potential exports; and (3) increased use of wood, an
environmentally-friendly, renewable, sustainable, and carbon-sequestering
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses challenges facing
cross-laminated timber (CLT) panels in mass timber construction. Construction
currently requires extreme care to protect CLT panels from moisture while
ensuring long-term durability. Although builders take measures to reduce
moisture exposure, it is inevitable that the CLT panels will take on water
during their service-life. This project addresses these problems by utilizing
thermal modification to produce chemical-free, mass timber panels with increased
resistance to moisture and decay and improved dimensional stability. The goals
are to: (1) evaluate process-performance relationships for thermal modification
of small-diameter wood strands, and (2) demonstrate the feasibility of
manufacturing high-performance cross-laminated strand-veneer lumber (CLSVL) mass
timber panels. The objectives are to: (1) demonstrate the feasibility of
utilizing thermally modified laminated strand veneer lumber for production of
high-performance CLSVL panels, and (2) determine the potential environmental
impacts of the new CLSVL panels. The technical results include validation of a
repeatable process for thermally modifying small-diameter pine strands,
validation of a method for manufacturing CLSVL panels, verification of physical
and mechanical performance of the CLSVL panels, and establishment of
commercially-viable process-performance relationships to enable commercial
production of the CLSVL mass timber panels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.