* 1827523
* PFI-TT: Acoustic Continuous Condition Monitoring of Manufacturing Machinery
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Juan Bello, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 02/28/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is in providing the
manufacturing sector with advanced solutions for the early detection of machine
malfunctions via continuous acoustic monitoring. Machinery malfunctions have
significant negative effects on the manufacturing industry, including:
unscheduled downtime leading to the under-utilization of equipment and staff;
the production of off-spec products leading to waste of finished product and raw
materials; as well as costly-repairs and inefficient maintenance schedules. All
these effects increase the cost of manufacturing and can result in loss of
revenue, directly affecting the margin of profitability, and thus the
competitiveness, for these companies. By improving machine condition monitoring
and enabling the widespread adoption of predictive maintenance, we believe our
solutions can contribute to the growth of the US manufacturing sector, with all
the significant ancillary benefits that entails. Better prediction of machine
failures could also potentially affect energy efficiency, environmental impact
and workplace safety in manufacturing operations.

The proposed project will develop an integrated, Industrial Internet-of-Things
(IIoT) solution to continuous condition monitoring of manufacturing machinery.
Our solution is centered around a network of low-cost, high quality, remote
acoustic sensing devices with embedded artificial intelligence (AI) for sound
recognition, that can automatically detect and diagnose the early signs of
machine failure. Our novel focus on acoustic emissions, both in the audible and
ultrasonic range, means that our sensors are non-contact and thus easy to
install, capable of monitoring multiple parts per sensor, and able to produce
earlier warnings than those possible with existing solutions. Furthermore, our
use of AI for sound recognition results in fast and scalable analytics in real-
time with minimal expertise required. We provide a unified cyber-infrastructure
integrating edge computing, cloud data storage and an easy-to-use dashboard to
facilitate navigation, retrieval and operation. This combination has the
potential to result in a disruptive and transformative product that improves
machine condition monitoring while significantly lowering the cost of deployment
and operation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.