* 1827894
* Wisconsin - Puerto Rico Partnership for Research and Education in Materials [Wi(PR)2EM]
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Nelson Cardona-Martinez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,906,727.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Wisconsin -
Puerto Rico Partnership for Research and Education in Materials [Wi(PR)2EM] is
to make transformative advances on a range of materials-enabled technologies,
and to do so while broadening participation of Hispanic Americans in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. Wi(PR)2EM will achieve
these goals by developing synergies between research and educational outreach at
University of Wisconsin - Madison (UW) and three campuses of University of
Puerto Rico (UPR) (Mayaguez (M), Medical Sciences Campus (MSC) and Rio Piedras
(RP)), with a particular focus on leveraging resources of UW's Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) to achieve sustainable
collaborations. Wi(PR)2EM will also leverage its multidisciplinary and
multicultural research teams to develop a series of research-inspired programs
that collectively define a pathway that recruits, retains and advances people
from all stages of the pipeline (K-12 through faculty) into STEM fields
throughout Puerto Rico and Wisconsin, with a focus on Hispanic Americans and
women. This pathway emphasizes mentoring across the entire scope of the
partnership at UPR and UW, which will be promoted through a carefully
coordinated series of trainings and experiences. The proposed education and
outreach activities leverage and build upon STEM outreach programs developed by
the UW MRSEC Interdisciplinary Education Group and the internationally acclaimed
UPRM Science on Wheels Educational Center. The PREM will expand the breadth of
opportunities for K-12, undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, and faculty
at both institutions, as well as the public in surrounding communities, with the
long-term goal of creating a diverse and creative STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wi(PR)2EM combines the shared vision and expertise
of UW and three campuses of UPR to form multidisciplinary and multicultural
teams that will make transformative advances in research involving a diverse
range of materials. The three interdisciplinary research teams (IRTs) of
Wi(PR)2EM bring together deep and complementary expertise in the synthesis,
characterization, modeling and application of multifunctional materials. The
teams will pioneer fundamental advances in atom-scale materials design and
understanding, including atomically controlled bimetallic nanostructures and
nano- or mesoporous materials for catalysis and separations (IRT1); amorphous
and crystalline pharmaceutical materials templated from designer polymers
(IRT2), and active and reconfigurable liquid crystalline soft materials (IRT3).
The teams also integrate collaborators from national laboratories and industry.
The long-term technological impact of the research to be pursued in Wi(PR)2EM is
enormous, including nanostructured materials for chemical transformation of
sustainable biological feedstock into commodity chemicals, new formulations of
small and large molecule pharmaceutically active materials, novel chemical and
biological sensors and assays, and hierarchically structured materials for
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.