* 1827132
* IRES Track I: US-Ghana Collaboration: Providing Opportunities for Global Research on Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Allan Feldman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 284,750.00

In much of the world, including sub-Saharan Africa, people lack safe drinking
water and adequate sanitation. Although there have been a number of efforts to
develop low-cost, efficient methods to treat water and wastewater, many of them
fail in practice due to the lack of understanding of social and economic
factors, and the lack of community engagement. This project will engage fifteen
(15) IRES participants and three (3) graduate assistants from STEM, STEM
education, public health and social sciences in carrying out research to
develop, test and implement the technologies, such as biosand filters and
decentralized sanitation systems, while uncovering and addressing social factors
that limit their use in the field. The project will take place in collaboration
with students and faculty at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology
(KNUST), as well as teachers and pupils in a local secondary school in Kumasi,
Ghana. US students will experience real on-the-ground water and sanitation
situations that will enhance their research skills as they develop the global
competence needed to work effectively in developing countries. Specific
objectives are to: 1) increase the number of US students engaging in global
water and sanitation research, 2) enhance student understanding of the
complexity of water and sanitation challenges and increase their global
competency, 3) engage secondary school teachers and pupils in Ghana in authentic
science and participatory action research, and 4) develop strong collaborations
between USF and KNUST for water and sanitation research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating research teams will advance
research and development of: 1) biosand filters that simultaneously address
infectious disease and dental/skeletal health risks that are prevalent in sub-
Saharan Africa, and 2) decentralized ecological sanitation technologies, such as
constructed wetlands, urine diverting dry toilets and biodigesters, which
recover valuable resources (water, nutrients, energy) from human wastes. Each
team will work on technology development, appropriate financing mechanisms and
effective behavioral and educational approaches to improve WASH practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRES participants will directly experience WASH research
in the geopolitical, socioeconomic and cultural context of Ghana. These
experiences will enhance their understanding of WASH challenges and build their
global competency. We will recruit female and underrepresented minority students
through programs and clubs that emphasize diversity, community colleges and
minority serving institutions. Extensive professional development and mentoring
programs are planned for IRES participants. Results will be integrated into
courses taught by the PIs and outreach to the Tampa Bay community, K12 science
teachers and students. The project will strengthen the partnership between USF
and KNUST and create opportunities for future collaborations, particularly in
WASH research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.