* 1827554
* PFI-TT: Development of Prototype Aqueous Energy Storage Device using Nanomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Xiaowei Teng, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 05/31/2021
* USD 191,937.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to provide an
alternative energy storage solution to current lithium-ion battery technology in
the marketplace, with a safer, more stable, and less expensive storage system
using V2O5 nanomaterials. Residential solar photovoltaic systems combined with
affordable battery storage are becoming increasingly likely to drive an
evolution of modern electricity supply systems with a low-emission of greenhouse
gases. In the past decade, development of the residential solar photovoltaic
across the nation has disrupted the way in which centralized electricity systems
operate. As solar panel system prices have fallen dramatically in the past few
years, a residential solar battery system that can operate off-grid remains
relatively expensive. The proposed technology, if successful, will provide a
cost-effective energy storage solution for residential solar systems by offering
a low-cost, environmentally benign aqueous battery system based on V2O5
nanomaterials. Thus, much less investment will be needed during installation of
solar panel system, accelerating the adoption of residential solar energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is built on the PI's previous success
on the development of disordered V2O5 nanomaterials for aqueous K-ion storage.
However, the real-size energy storage devices using such innovative materials
under practical operational conditions has not been tested, which requires the
development of prototype battery devices. The proposed project will involve the
scale-up production of the proposed materials, including the fabricating and
testing of the prototype pouch cells using industrial-level line equipment. This
project will provide a critical bridge across the performance gap to move this
innovation from the lab to commercial scale. This project will also utilize
realistic assessment metrics to support the continued development of the device
from research discovery toward commercial reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.