* 1827098
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Jackson State University (JSU)-Research Network
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Deborah Dent, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project provides Jackson State University (JSU) researchers with a campus
cyber infrastructure (CI) capability allowing expansion of big data and other
network intensive collaborative research that depend on high-speed network
access to local, regional, cloud and national compute and storage resources. The
project increases research network capacity to 100G, re-architects the campus
research network, and strategic relocation of equipment to utilize a Science DMZ
(Demilitarized zone - i.e., free from firewalls and other friction devices). The
research network includes centrally pooled High-Performance/Throughput Computing
(HPC/HTC) resources designed to meet immediate and future research needs. An
increased focus on domain scientist talent is possible due to management and
monitoring of the CI assets by a centralized, well-trained enterprise
information technology team. This project enhances the end-to-end network
services for researchers and is an important catalyst for the growing campus-
wide interdisciplinary data science program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application-
specific network and computational needs for big data analytics, visualization,
nanotoxicity, complex network analysis, science drivers and education are
addressed. Faculty, students, and the IT staff on campus and across campuses are
engaged to leverage the new environment for their research, education, and
operational needs. The project is disseminated through outreach workshop
activities with Historical Black Colleges and Universities and other
universities or the community college systems within the state of Mississippi
who may be planning similar campus network upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.