* 1827871
* Standard Grant: Studying the Transformation of Cancer Prevention Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Laura Mamo, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,591.00

This award supports a research project that studies the socio-technical
landscape of leading prevention technologies for cancers now known to be
causally related to the human papillomavirus, HPV. The study focuses on
pharmaceutical industries, the rationale embedded in markets for vaccines and
DNA-testing tools, and the resulting interventions within a political and moral
economy of health and illness. The results of this study will have the potential
to shape conceptual frameworks in interdisciplinary science and technology
studies that seek to understand the mechanisms of biomedical and public health
transformations and their impacts on human health and wellbeing; they will also
have the potential to shape how public health and clinical actors think about
and approach cancer prevention practices through action-oriented engagement with
clinical and public health audiences. By creating a feedback loop with policy-
makers, clinicians, and pharmaceutical developers, the PI seeks to work toward
ensuring that those engaging in the challenge of cancer prevention and
especially, public health cancer disparities, engage with these findings to
consider how best to reduce cancer burdens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project seeks to understand how the development of two sets of commercial
products, HPV vaccines and HPV DNA tests, is shaping the meaning and
distribution of health, risk and disease and the delivery of public health
approaches to reducing cancer. It has three core objectives. First, it will
document the socio-technical trajectories that constitute the transforming
landscape of HPV and HPV-cancer prevention, with a focus on DNA based prevention
and screening tools, HPV Vaccines and HPV Tests, and their pharmaceutical
industry materials. Second, it will analyze the kinds of biological subjects and
publics that are envisioned in the transforming public health landscape, and
what taxonomies of clinical and public health services are imagined and realized
from this vision. Finally, it will assess the opportunities and challenges to
both ensure technological adoption and to impact equitable distribution of
health and illness via the reduction of HPV and HPV-related cancers. The
overarching goal is to contribute to the growing body of interdisciplinary
research on the biomedicalization and pharmaceuticalization of health and
illness; it will provide important insights concerning the ways pharmaceuticals
participate in shaping health care either as a public good or commodity,
generating health for some while leaving others outside of potential
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.