* 1827817
* Standard Grant: Mobilized Social Group Organizations Around  Per- and Polyfluoralkyl Substances
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Phil Brown, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 547,901.00

The proposed project will examine the rapid formation of a national, networked
social movement across the United States in response to industrial and military
uses of per- and polyfluorinated compounds (PFASs), a class of over 3,000
chemical compounds with a broad range of adverse health outcomes. The project
will examine the factors facilitating the rapid development of this movement,
and the ways in which it shapes science, chemical policy, and cleanup levels.
This project will provide residents and community groups affected by PFAS
contamination with a greater awareness of how they can partake in the scientific
process, public education, and environmental policy at local, state and federal
levels. It will create greater connections among dispersed communities, and
among regulators and scientists working on these issues. The project has a water
testing component that will provide direct knowledge and interpretation of the
extent of PFAS contamination in an impacted community, and that will be used to
show how effective widely adopted remedial methods are at removing these
contaminants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will analyze the
characteristics of local organizing using its Contamination Site Database, which
has extensive data for 77 contaminated sites across the U.S.; new sites are to
be added as they are discovered. The team will quantitatively and qualitatively
assess what factors influence whether local social-movement organizations
develop at a given contamination site (such as contamination characteristics,
nature of media coverage, and demographics), as well as the outcomes that are
achieved (such as remediation, shift in regulatory or advisory standards, and
biomonitoring activities). The team will also analyze the origins, influences,
priorities, and outcomes of activism by these social movement organizations by
conducting 80-100 semi-structured interviews in 20-30 locations across the U.S.
Team members will also use network analysis techniques on interview data and
social media posts to explain and visualize how activists share information,
join and expand old networks, and create new ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.