* 1827709
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavioral and Computational Investigation of Transitivity in the Acquisition of Non-Basic Syntax
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Jeffrey Lidz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,653.00

Within the first years of life and without explicit instruction, children
acquire a linguistic system that allows them to combine sounds in order to
express meanings. Studying this process illuminates how a cognitive system as
complicated as language can develop in the human mind, and helps clarify the
nature of learning in development. Learning in general requires building on
prior knowledge: children can't learn arithmetic if they don't know how to
count. This project asks how infants build on their prior linguistic knowledge
at each stage of their development, using the limited amount of speech they are
able to understand, in order to learn more about the structure of their
language. By improving our understanding of how infants learn about their
language at each stage in development, the project provides an important step
toward understanding why and how the quantity and type of speech heard in
infancy contribute to differences in children's later vocabulary and language
performance, in school and later in life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
focuses on the acquisition of "non-basic" clauses as a window into the
incremental nature of language learning. Sentences like "What did Mary fix?" are
potentially misleading for children in the earliest stages of syntax
acquisition, who might not recognize that "what" stands for the object of "fix"
and might think that this clause is intransitive. This work pursues the
hypothesis that children may use knowledge about verb argument structure in
order to identify non-basic clause types in their language. The research
integrates approaches from different research communities, using behavioral
experiments to investigate the developmental trajectory of non-basic clause
acquisition, and computational modelling to evaluate whether the proposed
mechanisms are feasible for learning from child-directed speech. Through this
case study, this research aims to provide a fuller picture of what portion of
the input is useful to an individual child at any single point in development,
how children perceive that input given their current grammatical knowledge, and
what internal mechanisms enable them to generalize beyond that input in
inferring the grammar of their language. The project also includes outreach
about issues in language development to local families and high school students
from under-represented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.