* 1827875
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer for Research, Education, and Regional Use
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Tatiana Timofeeva, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,000.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Skye Fortier from University of Texas
El Paso (UTEP) and colleagues Tatiana Timofeeva (New Mexico Highlands
University), Luis Echegoyen (UTEP), Dino Villagran (UTEP), and Erik Yukl (New
Mexico State University) have acquired a single crystal X-ray diffractometer. An
X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule. This structure includes bond distances and
angles. This instrument provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The research may
impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry and biochemistry.
In one project, a soil bacterium which is a DNA protein repair species is under
investigation. The structure of marine viruses which contribute to the marine
ecosystem are determined. The diffractometer is a multi-user, multi-
institutional instrument that serves the needs of research institutions and
undergraduate programs throughout the region. Besides UTEP, the diffractometer
is used by New Mexico State University (NMSU), New Mexico Highlands University
(NMHU), Angelo State University, and Ft. Lewis College. The instrument provides
training opportunities to students at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this diffractometer enhances the
research and education of graduate and undergraduate students at UTEP and
surrounding institutions. Investigations to identify the locus of redox charges
in highly-reduced metal complexes are conducted. Uranium endohedral fullerenes
with extraordinary bonding motifs are characterized. Another area under
investigation is the viral assembly of an important giant marine virus. New
single crystal multiferroics and chalcogenide two-dimensional (2D) materials are
characterized using the diffractometer. The structure of bacterial proteins
involved in environmental redox sensing is being determined. Synthesis and
catalysis studies of molybdenum complexes that model molybdoenzyme active sites
are also supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.