* 1827902
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Nathaniel Traaseth, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 343,462.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Tianning Diao from New York
University and colleague Nathaniel Traaseth have acquired a continuous wave
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. This instrument allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that provide insight on how
biologically relevant species with unpaired electrons behave. In general, an EPR
spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid-state materials. It is also used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of possible pathological growth. These studies impact many areas, from the
synthesis of inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid-
state materials to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing
examples inspired from ongoing research, this instrument is an integral part of
research and teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at New York
University. In addition to gaining competency in a methodology that is central
to organic, inorganic, biophysical, and materials research, the EPR spectrometer
is used in coursework and is also used by students participating in a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program and by visiting summer research
undergraduate and high-school students. Workshops in EPR techniques are
organized in the context of the REU programs. Most of the high school and
undergraduate student participants are from minority-serving institutions and
four-year colleges. The EPR spectrometer is open to the broader user community,
including students, faculty, and industrial scientists in the tri-state area,
the nation's largest school district and one of the most ethnically and
culturally diverse. This expands the user base to students from four-year
colleges that are often unfamiliar with advanced instrumentation and graduate
school opportunities in science and engineering. These activities will
contribute to the improvement of science education in New York City and
surrounding areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially aids studies of
mechanisms of nickel-catalyzed reactions, the determination of the molecular
mechanism of membrane transport proteins, (as well as studies of electron
transfer to design molecular probes. The instrumentation is also used for
developing copper-based reconfigurable catalysts and for exploring growth
induced crystal curvature. The instrument also serves researchers preparing
polynuclear hydride-radical cations, doping impurities in semiconductor
nanocrystals, and those studying the mechanism of cobalt and manganese-catalyzed
reductive reactions at CUNY John-Jay. The spectrometer benefits the
determination of conformational changes in disordered proteins and the
determination of the effect of lactose monohydrate crystallization on the active
site of phosphotriesterase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.