* 1827782
* PFI-TT: Developing Antifreeze Polypeptide-Based Systems for Organ Preservation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Xin Wen, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2023
* USD 303,636.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project includes advancing
the knowledge of utilizing antifreeze polypeptide (AFP)-based systems (AFPs and
enhancers) in organ preservation, expediting the technology translation process
leading to the commercial application of AFP-based systems in organ
preservation, and extending the viability of postharvest tissues and organs
during organ/tissue transplantation. The broader impacts also include expanding
participation of individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM and preparing
students for entrepreneurship. Organs are scarce resources because of the gap
between the organs needed and those available. Additionally, the short time span
of the available organs in current organ preservation solutions limits the
number of organs can be transported and transplanted into patients and which
people can be considered for the organs further aggravating organ shortage and
lowering organ transplantation success rates. The composition of the
preservation solutions is crucial for the lifespan of the preserved organs. AFP-
based systems have the potential to preserve cells, tissues, organs for a longer
period outside the body and thus could provide valuable data and reduce the
costs in various areas including organ/tissue transplantation, biomedical
research and drug discovery. This project focuses on translating AFP-based
systems for organ preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses the key technology and knowledge gaps as it translates from
research discovery towards commercial application. Based on the characteristics
of AFP-based systems including highly effectiveness, compatibility to existing
solutions, and multifunction, AFP-based systems could be a potential advanced
technology for cells, tissues, and organs preservation. However, significant
technology and knowledge gaps hinder the technology translation. In this PFI
project, a multidisciplinary team will validate the proposed technology and fill
the knowledge gaps of highly active AFPs in the AFP-based systems towards the
technology translation and commercialization. In particular, the potency of AFP-
based systems in cold preservation will be systematically validated for
pancreatic cells, tissues, and organs. Moreover, toxicity profiles of the key
ingredients in AFP-based systems, that is highly active AFPs, will be
established on representative mammalian cell lines. Furthermore, a scalable
approach for preparing the potent AFPs will be developed. In addition, the
students (esp. women and individuals from underrepresented groups) will receive
training on innovation, entrepreneurship, and the process of research
translation, technology development and commercialization as well as guidance
for advancing the commercial potential of research through advising and
participating innovation and entrepreneurship
workshops/seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.