* 1827601
* Motion sickness: The role of control in prediction and prevention
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Lackner, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 616,969.00

Motion sickness has always accompanied the introduction of new transportation
and display technologies. Although the active drivers of vehicles are usually
less susceptible to motion sickness than the passive passengers, the development
of self-driving cars (autonomous vehicles) makes all of the occupants
passengers. One benefit of autonomous vehicles is that they free passengers to
perform many activities typically done at their homes or offices. Unfortunately,
when these activities require focused visual attention, such as reading,
working, or watching videos, the likelihood of experiencing motion sickness
increases. The goals of the current project are to identify the key factors that
contribute to motion sickness in autonomous vehicles, to identify factors that
characterize who will be most susceptible, and to develop ways to reduce motion
sickness and declines in performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
evaluate three aspects of individuals' responses to stimulation that might
provoke motion sickness: 1) the initial sensitivity to a stimulus, 2) the decay
of motion sickness severity following discontinuation of stimulation, and 3) the
rate of adaptation following repeated stimulation. Of key concern is whether for
a given individual, initial sensitivity, decay, and adaptation will be
consistent across different types of sickness-inducing stimulation. The approach
is based on a mechanistic model of motion sickness derived from
neurophysiological and behavioral evidence concerning the relationship between
motion sickness onset and disruptions of vestibulo-ocular and vestibulo-motor
control. The role of active control of forthcoming stimulation (the fact that
the driver rarely becomes motion sick) will be systematically evaluated to
determine the extent to which anticipation plays a role in sickness prevention.
The investigators will compare initial sensitivity, decay, and adaptability of
motion sickness across stimulation involving a) the semicircular canals of the
inner ear, which are sensitive to angular acceleration, b) the otolith organs of
the inner ear, which are sensitive to linear acceleration, c) both in
combination, and d) vision in order to assess their contributions to an
individual's overall pattern of motion sickness vulnerability under active and
passive conditions. The aim is to develop predictors of an individual's
sensitivity to the factors contributing to motion sickness in autonomous
vehicles (control vs. no-control, frequency and amplitude dependent
characteristics of vehicle motion, and focal visual attention tasks). This
capability would allow remedial steps to be taken to reduce sickness likelihood
and optimize the benefits of this new technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.