* 1827291
* The Role Of Environmental Variation In The Appearance Of Agricultural Domesticates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Robert Rosenswig, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 294,593.00

Dr. Robert Rosenswig, of the University at Albany-SUNY, along with colleagues
from Penn State, Arizona State and the University of Central Washington, will
undertake research on the origins of food production in Mesoamerica in relation
to the changing climate and evolving tropical forest ecology. Food production is
one of the most significant developments in the history of the human species. It
has long been acknowledged as setting the stage for virtually all subsequent
cultural developments by increasing the carrying capacity of land, the degree of
sedentism that is possible as well as greater population density. As a result,
the production of food was a required prerequisite for the establishment of
urban life. Food production is also necessary to underwrite the division of
labor within society that allowed farmers to support ever-increasing numbers of
non-producers such as political rulers, engineers and scientists. Changes in
climate are often posited as resulting in cultural collapse, but is evaluated in
this research for its role in the intensification of food production. This
project is significant in advancing basic understanding of interactions between
the origins of human food production and tropical forest ecology in response to
climate change in Mesoamerica, one of the small number of locations in the world
where agriculture independently developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Rosenswig
and his team will examine how drying environmental conditions impact human
subsistence practices and how intensified food production, in turn, impact local
vegetation patterns. The reconstruction of human occupation and forest floral
species diversity in the tropical lowlands of northern Belize, Central America
will be reconstructed from 4000-1000 BC to document how food production and
settlement patterns were impacted by the changing climate and, in turn, how
local vegetation was reconstituted. This will be accomplished by combining: 1.
archaeological excavation that documents human habitation; 2. lake sediment
coring to reconstruct changing patterns of plant pollen from economically useful
species and 3. charcoal that result from human burning of local vegetation to
increase soil productivity. Research will focus on the so-called "4.2k BP Event"
that caused three centuries of climate disturbance world-wide between 2200 and
1900 BC. Evidence of human settlement patterns and diet from before, during and
after this period will be used to evaluate paleoecological evidence of changing
species availability and the extent of anthropogenic disturbance through the use
of fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.