* 1827893
* MRI: Acquisition of a Helium Ion Source Upgrade for the Edwards Accelerator Laboratory at Ohio University
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Thomas Massey, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 186,965.00

Intense beams of atomic nuclei are essential for studies in fundamental and
applied research. These ion beams can be used to reproduce and study the nuclear
reactions occurring in stars and stellar explosions, characterize nuclear
reactions of interest for nuclear energy and national security, and assist in
the development of novel materials via ion beam analysis. Such experiments are
performed at the Edwards Accelerator Laboratory (EAL) at Ohio University, where
helium nuclei play a particularly important role as helium-induced nuclear
reactions are ubiquitous in nature and applications. This award provides the
funds to acquire an upgrade to the EAL's helium ion source which will
substantially increase operational reliability and will greatly expand
measurement capabilities.

The EAL is a low energy nuclear physics facility with world-unique research
capabilities. Experiments in the laboratory rely on light-ion beams accelerated
by a 4.5 MV Pelletron, where beams are used at various target stations for
charged-particle, gamma-ray, and neutron spectroscopy. This award supports the
acquisition of an RF charge-exchange ion source, known as the Alphatross, from
the National Electrostatics Corporation. The Alphatross provides a factor of
eight improvement compared to currently achievable helium beam intensities and a
factor of two reduction in gas consumption. This will enable several important
measurements to be performed that were previously out of reach due to limited
intensities or excessive helium-3 costs. The anticipated improvement in ion
source reliability would provide additional benefits, such as more efficient
operations for collaborators visiting from external institutions, a more
consistent experience for the many undergraduate and graduate students who are
trained on the accelerator, and increased throughput of experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.