* 1827671
* PFI-TT: Development of a Single-Molecule Electronic Biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Philip Collins, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2020
* USD 254,029.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to create a new
type of biosensor for biomedical research. Biosensors are key tools in the study
of how molecules bind to each other. Proteins, antibodies, peptides, DNA
strands, and medicines all bind and release each other in ways that are critical
for human health; and the study of these binding interactions is critical to
finding new medicines, detecting diseases, and understanding our own biology.
Better biosensors lead to better health outcomes, and the prototype biosensor
developed by this project aims to reveal molecular interactions that are
presently hidden to all other types of biosensors currently in
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will achieve this goal
using recent innovations in biosensing research. Specifically, electronic,
solid-state biosensors have been successfully commercialized; and compatible
single-molecule electronics have been proven to be useful for precision
measurements of biochemical activity. The technical objective of this project
will be a proof-of-concept hybrid device that combines conventional ensemble
sensing side-by-side with complementary, electronic monitoring of single-
molecule binding kinetics. This combination of simultaneous ensemble and single-
molecule monitoring does not exist in any commercial sensor, but it provides new
opportunities to break through fundamental limitations faced by all ensemble
biosensors. Specifically, the project hypothesizes that the combined data will
extend the biosensor's effective dynamic range and help eliminate false positive
and false negative results. If successful, this type of hybrid sensor could
establish a new paradigm where single-molecule data are leveraged in sensors
generally to better inform end users in biology, healthcare, and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.