* 1827035
* RCN-UBE:  A National Network for Integrating the Study of Microbiomes into Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Theodore Muth, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2024
* USD 474,610.00

Microbiomes play an important role in the health and development of their plant
or animal host, as well as contributing to the nutrient and element cycles that
are fundamental to maintaining balance in soil, water, and air. Research into
microbiomes and their impact on ecosystems and the environment represents a new
and exciting challenge for the scientific community. New technologies offer an
opportunity to bring the excitement of microbiome research to undergraduate
students through training in the scientific process and engagement in research.
Using a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) model, microbiome
projects allow students to conduct experiments that reveal the diversity and
complexity of local environmental microbiomes. The Research Experiences in
Microbiomes Network (REMNet) project will organize a national network of
microbiome experts and CURE practitioners who will create a set of resources for
college faculty to involve undergraduate students across the country in
microbiome research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REMNet will provide and distribute
tools for metagenomic analysis tools and lesson plans appropriate for
undergraduate classes and will advance our understanding of the diversity of
local environmental microbiomes. The REMNet will work closely with the American
Society of Microbiology (ASM) at national meetings such as the ASM-Conference
for Undergraduate Educators and Annual Biomedical Research Conference for
Minority Students to recruit new members. Existing microbiome CURE research
projects at the City University of New York, the lead institution of the
Authentic Research Experience in Microbiology, currently serve hundreds of
students from diverse ethnic and academic backgrounds each year; this RCN-UBE
project will expand this effort to a national scale as new schools are
recruited. The REMNet will broaden participation in microbiome research by
undergraduates and will lead to the development of new resources and a
standardization of the tools used for microbiome data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.