* 1827858
* Sounding Data in Art-Science Collaborations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Colin Milburn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 200,351.00

This Postdoctoral Fellowship supports a research project that will identify and
analyze ways of using sound to explore data and to communicate technical
knowledge. The goal of this project is to create new opportunities for
technology and knowledge transfer, and innovative conceptual development, by
facilitating sustained interactions between researchers in the arts and
sciences. It will bring to light how techniques such as sonification, field
recording, and interactive auditory displays have the power to make research
findings accessible to lay and multidisciplinary audiences, and to make science
more accessible for people with visual impairments. A better understanding of
the possibilities and limitations of sound as a medium for rigorous scientific
work, as well as the promises and pitfalls of translating experimental sound
across social groups, will serve to enhance the potential of sound technology
for science communication and outreach.

This research project will explore the emerging role of sound technology at the
interface of artistic and scientific work using three case studies. The first is
an historical study of the electropenetrograph (EPG), a now-standard piece of
entomological equipment that initially represented data as audible noise but was
eventually silenced in favor of visual techniques, such as waveforms. The second
is a study of the laser vibrometry, which makes audible the vibrational
ecologies of plants, insects, and agricultural researchers; it will explore the
ways scientists and their non-human subjects cultivate shared perceptual worlds
through the exchange of vibrations. The third is a study of the use of Max/MSP
digital signal processing language to sonically represent and interact with RNA
sequences (for example). The project will provide empirical, theoretical, and
methodological contributions to the STS literature on sound, technology, and
performativity in science. Empirically, it will provide a thick and comparative
description of three areas of scientific work, each of which employs sound in a
different moment of the knowledge production process. Theoretically, it will
place concepts and techniques from experimental music and sound art into
conversation with the literature on performativity in science. Methodologically,
it will augment written ethnography with active and collaborative sound work,
taking part in the production and experience of experimental sounds to provoke
interdisciplinary conversations and blur the studio/laboratory distinction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.