* 1827294
* Appealing to the Authority of Data: Social Complexity, Fragmented Decisionmaking, and the Politics of Smart Cities
* SBE,SES
* 09/08/2017,02/29/2020
* Susan Sterett, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 106,436.00

How do decision makers in cities use information? How can they use information
effectively? What are cross cutting definitions of problems that define the
information that is useful? How does the fragmented decision-making via multiple
policymaking paths in cities shape how information is used? This project will
study organizations within local governments to analyze variation in how cities
define problems and use data, disaggregating policy decision-making. Co-PIs will
study jurisdictions that vary in administrative capacity, using as a case a
policy issue that key informants in each city define as significant. Cities are
in an increasingly information rich environment, and increasing investments in
data analytics will press city officials to use information. &lt;br/&gt;We know
little about how the practice of data analytics works outside of large cities.
Intellectually, the project will contribute to theorizing problem formulation,
priorities in decision-making and use of information. The project's broader
impacts will include assisting cities in developing a process for formulating
questions about the information that will be most useful for them, and
disseminating findings across jurisdictions. The project will convene meetings
that help local governments to improve the flow of information and to improve
the appropriateness of measures. Finally, the project will train graduate
students in multiple methods. Many of the students in the available programs are
non-traditional students who are members of racialized minorities, contributing
to broadening participation in the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cases
have been selected for variation in administrative capacity and size. Relying on
institutional ethnography, key informant interviews, and analysis of documents,
the project will trace understandings of the usefulness of data and specifically
the translation from data to action. The framework is community-based research,
where informants also get feedback on processes and understandings from other
participants and jurisdictions. Therefore, as the project brings different
organizations together to develop and use data, it will also convene
participants to share the different understandings and to collaboratively define
problems and possible solutions, and to discuss problem definitions, data
analytics, and potential solutions with community members. That approach will
mean that city officials, and cities' citizens and denizens, as designers, users
and constituents will benefit from the process as the project progresses. The
project will surface a soft systems model of information and decision-making
flows. Finally, the co-PIs will use the information gathered in previous phases
to develop an agent-based model to assist decision
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.