* 1827656
* PFI-TT: Interactive Software for Hyperspectral Image Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mikhail Berezin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2022
* USD 239,691.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to advance,
facilitate and streamline the analysis of hyperspectral imaging data. In
contrast to two-dimensional images produced by conventional color cameras
usually with three-color channels, hyperspectral techniques generate three-
dimensional datasets known as datacubes with both spatial and spectral
dimensions with hundreds of color channels. Hyperspectral methods lead to a
vastly improved ability to classify and differentiate objects based on their
spectral features enabling small, otherwise unnoticeable, features to be
amplified. The societal impact of hyperspectral imaging is rapidly expanding and
includes the development of advanced medical diagnostic tools, systems for
precision agriculture, methods to ensure food quality, discovery of new
minerals, and the evolution of national defense projects. However, despite the
progress in analysis method development and computational speed, efficient
computational approaches suitable for rapid analysis of datacubes are still
lacking. Three-dimensionality of data and large file size presents a significant
challenge for isolation of useful data, and consequently individual
investigators developing their own tools. The development of an advanced and
commercially available software package for hyperspectral data analysis will
facilitate this work and enable users to search for new optical signatures
across multiple applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project sets a
new software architecture that is capable of analyzing complex and
computationally challenging datasets recorded by hyperspectral imaging systems.
The proposed computational platform for data analysis of hyperspectral data will
provide a unique and powerful tool to process hyperspectral data for a variety
of applications: from medicine and remote vision to forensics and plants
science. The research objective is to integrate current and new analysis methods
into an interactive, fast, and intuitive hyperspectral imaging software that
will offer an unprecedented level of flexibility in hyperspectral data
processing. The proposed software program will be designed to be operated
without any prior programming skills allowing interactive sessions of raw and
processed data to be easily shared, explored and evaluated by both peers and
newcomers. The major feature of the software is an open architecture that
provides a common framework for the implementation of the additional methods
from the user community. The commercially available platform will have
structural flexibility to allow users to integrate their novel computational
methods with relatively little effort. With this feature, the software is
expected to be a central part of hyperspectral technology and will be the
preferred software of the majority of users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.