* 1827714
* PFI-TT: Development of Single-Stage Power Modules for Modular Medium-Voltage Electric Vehicle Fast Chargers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Iqbal Husain, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2021
* USD 199,934.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to provide an
electric vehicle charger that is at least 10 times smaller than existing EV
charging systems and wastes half as much power during the charging process. This
advanced is based on the proposed solid-state transformer (SST) technology,
which makes use of a high frequency magnetics to shrink the system size and
improve efficiency. The SST connects directly to the medium voltage distribution
system, eliminating bulky step-down transformers, and eliminating power
conversion stages. A smaller, more efficient EV charger translates into cheaper
system installation, higher revenue, and better site utilization for charging
station owners, and cheaper and faster charging for the EV owners. The same
technology can serve other applications where large DC loads are present,
including the data centers, which already make up 1.8% of total US power
consumption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance
technologies developed under the FREEDM ERC, by solving a number of important
challenges in the area of medium voltage power conversion. We will prove that
our recently discovered, provisional patent protected, single stage power
converter can reduce system costs and improve system efficiency. The team will
analytically derive the conditions that allow for switching device soft-
switching transitions that result in minimal system losses. We will develop
analytical models to determine the optimal switching trajectories that consider
phase shift, switching frequency and non-linear saturable inductor elements as
independent variables. With an analytical representation of the optimal
modulation schemes for the proposed controller, the team will develop a design
space exploration tool to systematically trade off converter design parameters
against multiple performance criteria, namely cost, efficiency, power density
and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.