* 1827445
* Biological Collections: Their Past, Present, and Future Contributions and Options for Sustaining Them
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Audrey Thevenon, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 12/31/2020
* USD 665,008.00

The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine (NASEM) will
evaluate the value of biological collections - defined here as living stocks of
organisms and preserved repositories of biodiversity specimens and materials) -
to research and education. Biological collections are used for research in
evolutionary biology, biodiversity, global change, conservation, food security,
public health, the spread of invasive species, and biomedicine (among other
fields). Some specimens of plants, animals, and microbes serve as "standards" or
"type specimens" to be retained for future comparisons for formally described
species attached to particular names under the Codes of Nomenclature. They also
provide documentation that allows the comparison of past and present
biodiversity and allow researchers to reconstruct important historical changes.
Biological collections also harbor specimens of as yet undescribed species so
that researchers today find many more new animal and plant species among
preserved specimens than they do in nature. Preserved specimens also represent
invaluable resources for education and training. Because many biological
collections are in decline in the United States, the project will suggest long-
term strategies for their sustained use. This study will provide critical input
on how biological collections can be made to adapt to changing scientific
capabilities and societal needs. Information on the NASEM's Board on Life
Sciences and its products may be found at
http://dels.nas.edu/bls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological collections serve three
main functions: use in research and innovation, education, and public engagement
in science. This study will provide critical input on how biological collections
can be made to adapt to changing scientific capabilities and societal needs. The
NASEM Board on Life Sciences will convene an independent, expert committee to
review and evaluate the types of research, training, and public engagement
activities that are commonly supported by biological collections. They will
examine the logistical and financial needs to advance science, education, and
public outreach endeavors and recommend a range of long-term strategies to
enhance the effective use of these resources. The study will help build the
research, education, and public outreach infrastructure needed to advance
technologies, address national and global challenges, and prepare future
workforce to engage in the diverse areas of science supported by
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.