* 1827833
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System for Research, Education, and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Robert Onyenwoke, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 466,203.00

An award is made to North Carolina Central University (NCCU) to support the
acquisition of a confocal microscope for research and training activities. The
confocal microscope will be used extensively to support the fundamental research
activities of twenty-eight tenure-track, independently funded faculty, each
directing research programs that will significantly advance knowledge in their
chosen fields and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students from
predominantly minority communities. The new microscope will enable the training
of the next generation of scientists in modern microscopy methods for the
analysis of diverse biological samples. This system will be used to train
students in state-of-the-art imaging acquisition applications via existing
courses and during direct undergraduate and graduate research experiences. The
microscope will also be incorporated into outreach activities for middle and
high school students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new microscope will critically
enhance the scientific findings of many NCCU faculty who study a diverse range
of topics using zebrafish, mammalian cell culture, Drosophila, mice, and
transgenic plants. Projects that will use the range of capabilities of the
confocal microscope include: neuronal developing and patterning, recombinant
protein expression in transgenic plants, analyses with multiple ligand/receptor
targets, brain development and mitochondrial biogenesis, and regulation of cell
growth. Together with 3D printing technologies, this state-of-the-art confocal
microscope will serve as a key means to develop interdisciplinary collaborations
between individuals in the biomedical sciences and engineering. Data and
analyses from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed scientific
journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in both educational and
public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.