* 1827457
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Chemistry and Energy Research and Education at the University of Pennsylvania
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Gary Molander, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 347,713.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Karen Goldberg from University of
Pennsylvania and colleagues Gary Molander, Marisa Kozlowski and Daniel Mindiola
have acquired a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists
for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify
unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within
molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The instrument
positively impacts several institutions and is critical to the training of
numerous students and postdoctoral researchers across the Penn campus;
undergraduate students in chemistry laboratory courses; and undergraduate majors
in Chemistry and the Vagelos Integrated Program in Energy Research (VIPER). In
addition, existing partnerships between Penn and the School District of
Philadelphia are being leveraged to hold professional development workshops for
secondary school teachers on the topic of NMR and its use in scientific
research. Classroom materials developed in these workshops and "virtual field
trips" introduce high school students to NMR, in alignment with the Next
Generation Science Standards for Physical Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award of this spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. It especially aids researchers investigating the reactions of transition
metal complexes with oxygen and those developing synthetic routes to natural
products and organic materials containing large numbers of quaternary centers.
The spectrometer is being used in studies of complexes with metal-ligand
multiple bonds for catalytic transformations, and for the development of new
methods for asymmetric cross-coupling reactions. In addition, it benefits
studies of fluxional bioorganic and dynamic biopolymer systems and the design of
xenon-binding host molecules for use as biosensors and gas storage systems. The
instrumentation is also essential in designing nonbiological systems that
exhibit biological functions and for the development of small, fluorescent
unnatural amino acid probes and quenchers for protein labelling. The instrument
also serves researchers investigating the coordination/organometallic chemistry
and catalysis of rare earth metal and actinide complexes and those studying the
reactivity of metal clusters bound by redox-active macrocyclic ligands designed
to mimic a metallic surface,. Finally, the spectrometer is also indispensable
for the development of disulfoxide ligands for use in transition metal catalyzed
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.