* 1827453
* MRI: Acquisition of a Maskless Lithography Tool for the Brown Nanofabrication Central Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Alexander Zaslavsky, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2020
* USD 287,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Brown
University with the acquisition of a modern maskless lithography system
(Heidelberg Instruments MLA-150). Maskless lithography, where the pattern is
transferred to the substrate by rapidly scanning a laser beam over the
photoresist-covered substrate, under computer control overcomes many of the
limitations of current photolithography techniques. The instrument will be
located within the Nanofabrication Central Facility (NCF) and will support the
research by some 25 research groups at Brown University including faculty from
Engineering to Physics to Chemistry to Biomedical Engineering as well as local
research community and industry. The MLA-150 will enable high-speed and flexible
optical lithography down to micron-sized features at low cost and over large
areas, without the constraints of pre-existing mask sets. In the immediate
future, it will enable research in a range of funded or planned research
projects in electronic and microfluidic devices. The flexibility of the system
would help expand the range of laboratory courses currently supported by the NCF
(three Engineering fabrication courses, currently focused on diode, transistor
and solar cell fabrication) to encompass e.g. microfluidic devices. Postdoctoral
scholars, graduate and undergraduate students will have an opportunity to be
trained in this versatile fabrication technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of
a Heidelberg Instruments MLA-150 maskless lithography tool, with ~1 micrometer
achievable feature size over a 150 mm field of exposure, with fast computer-
controlled high-accuracy (0.5 micrometer) alignment and short (minutes-long)
exposure times. The instrument includes two laser illumination modules and
integrated cameras for high-accuracy alignment to pre-existing structures. The
system will be integrated in a new Nanofabrication Central Facility (NCF)
cleanroom at Brown University. This state-of-the-art instrument will foster
interdisciplinary research at the intersection between diverse research fields
in electronic and optoelectronic devices: fabrication of Ge quantum-dot based
photodetectors; nitride vertical current flow transistors; piezoelectric energy
harvesting devices; and magnetic tunnel junction-based memory elements and
arrays. In the advanced materials area, it will contribute to: large-area
surface patterning for THz emission spectroscopy; ultra-thin layered materials
for structural coloration; templated surfaces for self-assembled nanoparticle
arrays; 3D photocatalytic structures; and adaptive meta-surfaces based on phase-
change materials. In the rapidly expanding bio-engineering area, the MLA-150
will permit large-area microfluidic structures to study spatially confined cell
migration; DNA manipulation; and geometrically-constrained stem cell migration
and differentiation. The instrument will be made available to other local
academic institutions and local industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.