* 1827839
* MRI: Acquisition of Laser Induced Breakdown Spectrometer (LIBS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Brooke Kammrath, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 269,463.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Brooke Kammrath
from the University of New Haven and colleague Virginia Maxwell have acquired a
laser induced breakdown spectrometer (LIBS) system. This instrument is used to
identify the chemical elements in a range of samples. It employs a laser to
ablate (vaporize) material from the sample of interest. The plasma produced by
the laser contains excited atoms which emit their characteristic light. The
emitted light is then detected by a spectrometer. The acquired spectrum can
identify and quantify the elemental composition of the sample. The LIBS system
is used for elemental analysis of a variety of samples of interest to forensics,
chemistry, geology, biology and engineering. Several of the projects are
directed at forensic science. Here the goal is to evaluate whether the technique
can be established as a reliable tool. This provides a significant societal
effect. Undergraduate and master degree students receive training to use the
LIBS system in their research projects. This training in chemical analysis helps
prepare them for future careers and advanced degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels It
especially aids in the identification and characterization of microscopic
samples of forensic interest. Other projects test the reliability of the
technique in soil analysis, evaluating drug delivery vehicles in living cells,
carrying out paint analysis and in geological applications. The spectrometer is
also used for the development of new methods to analyze forensic evidence and
for the analyses of bullet metals and gunshot residue. The spectrometer also
serves researchers in the profiling of illicit drugs and their production
materials and those analyzing paints, explosives, inks and
toners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.