* 1827311
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Vacuum Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Stanley Mertzman, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 255,134.00

MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Vacuum Spectrometer at Franklin
&amp; Marshall College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the acquisition
of a new, state-of-the-art X-ray fluorescence (XRF) vacuum spectrometer at
Franklin &amp; Marshall College. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is an analytical
technique that produces a chemical analysis of solid materials. The new XRF will
be used to conduct basic geological and chemistry research and undergraduate
student training in classes and projects in these subject areas. Suitably
trained undergraduates at institutions with XRF instruments can perform accurate
and precise chemical analyses of rocks and other solid materials. Undergraduate
classes in geology, inorganic chemistry, materials science, and undergraduate
research projects, guided by a faculty member, will benefit from incorporating
the new XRF in the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the
acquisition of a new, state-of-the-art X-ray fluorescence (XRF) vacuum
spectrometer at Franklin &amp; Marshall College. XRF instruments measure the
major and trace element geochemistry of solid materials, including rocks, to
provide the basis for understanding provenance, processes of formation in
geological applications and material composition and purity in material science
and chemistry applications. The new XRF instrument contains a 4 kW rhodium x-ray
tube, which has been designed to conquer the sublimation of tungsten from the
cathode to the region around the radiation exit window, thus providing virtually
constant output over the entire tube life, coupled with a modern software
package that is interfaced with all new electrical XRF components. Continued
collaborative work with NASA, Canadian Space Agency, University of Alberta,
Kansas State University, University of Winnipeg, University of Addis Ababa and
others, will benefit from the much-improved data quality provided by this
instrument. In addition to the research applications, the new XRF will be used
as a teaching tool in undergraduate classes in geology and chemistry. Geology
Department seniors will have access to the instrument for their senior theses on
rock samples they collect during their summer field work between junior and
senior year. In addition, students from other classes in geology and chemistry
will complete independent research projects utilizing the XRF
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.