* 1827160
* RCN UBE Incubator: Failure as part of Learning, A Mindset Education Network (FLAMEnet)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jennifer Heemstra, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 07/31/2020
* USD 75,000.00

Failure as a part of Learning, A Mindset Education Network (FLAMEnet) comprises
educators and researchers, who together will address how instructors in biology
and other STEM disciplines can help students learn to cope, persevere and then
succeed when confronted with failure during their learning efforts. FLAMEnet
will create resources to encourage undergraduate students in biology and related
science fields to learn and grow from failure experiences. These resources will
be easy to implement by instructors and will be broadly distributed to the
public via networking and social media. The overarching impact of the proposed
activities is to support the preparation of a diverse workforce that is ready to
tackle the large, pressing scientific challenges of
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FLAMEnet will bring together a diverse group of
science and engineering faculty, psychology researchers, and educational
researchers to create, implement and disseminate educational interventions that
can be employed by instructors in biology and other STEM fields to help students
overcome obstacles and failures as they learn the field. These interventions
will be grounded in the psychological frameworks of mindset, goal orientation,
fear of failure, and coping, and will focus on the role of these elements in
undergraduate biology education. The specific aims of the proposal include: (1)
develop resources and instructional materials; (2) implement resources across
different disciplines and institutional types; (3) expand the network through
workshop activities. The inclusion of psychology and educational researchers
will ensure that the resources developed are solidly grounded in current
theoretical frameworks, and participation of STEM instructors will secure
acceptance from the STEM community and ensure that resources are useful and
accessible to the communities they will serve. Together, these activities will
advance our understanding of the interplay of these psychological frameworks,
and will provide instructors in the biological sciences and related STEM
disciplines with practical resources for building resilience in college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.