* 1827075
* IRES Track I: Model-Based Design, 3D-Printing, and Evaluation of Assistive Devices
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Thomas Armstrong, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this award is to establish an international research and
education partnership between the University of Michigan (U-M) and University of
Bologna (UniBo) in Italy. The proposed work is envisioned to improve the
quality-of-life of people with disabilities and their caregivers, transform the
knee-ankle-foot-orthosis care to data-based diagnosis and model-based design and
3D-printing, and provide an international research experience to students. The
goal of this collaboration is to provide a high-quality international research
experience to University of Michigan students to increase student diversity and
retention and advance students' ability in and knowledge of culture,
globalization, leadership, teamwork, and communication. The key intellectual
merit of this collaboration is in the model-based design, 3D-printing, and
evaluation of individualized assistive devices. The project will utilize
technical knowledge gained from University of Michigan and will improve
individualized assistive devices such as the knee-ankle-foot orthosis, a brace
that helps people with leg instabilities to walk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objective of this award is to establish an international research and
education partnership between the University of Michigan (U-M) and University of
Bologna (UniBo) in Italy on the model-based design, 3D-printing, and evaluation
of individualized assistive devices (IADs). The project is focused on the
advancements in 3D-printing and wearable sensors that enable the design and
fabrication of assistive devices for individual needs. Patient-specific
biomechanical models will be developed to analyze the motions and forces
associated with the daily activities of a patient. For example, from models of
patient-specific knee joint motion, compliant 3D-printed knee joints will be
analyzed and designed to improve the function of individual assistive devices.
Combined metal 3D-printing, precision machining, and mechanical testing will be
used to fabricate and test the compliant knee joint. Finally, the knee-ankle-
foot-orthosis devices fabricated by conventional and 3D-printing methods will be
evaluated on patients in clinic and during daily activities. Specifically, this
project aims to design, fabricate, and evaluate an individualized knee-ankle-
foot-orthosis (KAFO) with metal and plastic 3D-printed parts. Students will
study four research topics related to the KAFO: (1) biomechanical quantification
of activities and lifestyles of KAFO patients, (2) analysis and design of a
patient-specific compliant knee joint, (3) manufacturing of compliant knee
joint, and (4) evaluation of the patient-specific KAFO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed work in design, 3D-printing, and evaluation of
personalized assistive devices is to re-establish the quality-of-life of people
with disabilities by restoring normal joint motion and function. Personalized
assistive devices with good fit and quick delivery can greatly benefit patients
as well as their caregivers. Further, tailoring the function of these devices to
the patient improves their ability to ambulate and reduces the chances of
reinjury. The transformative aspects of this project are the mass production of
custom assistive devices and the long-term monitoring of the gait and mobility
of assistive device users for physical and psychological diagnosis and
prevention of fall and other accidents. The knowledge and biomechanical models
can improve the design practice and evaluation of the efficacy of a broad range
of assistive devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.