* 1827840
* MRI Consortium: Development of a Charged Particle Telescope by Undergraduate Research Students for Studies of Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Paul DeYoung, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 83,087.00

Determining the properties of atomic nuclides requires the measurement of
particles emitted by this nuclide. Detecting these particles in coincidence with
other emitted radiation or particles, such as gamma-rays, neutrons, and charged
particles, is difficult due to their different properties. A new charged
particle detector system will make experiments requiring detection of these
particles together more efficient for experiments performed at facilities such
as the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and soon the
Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University (MSU). Also,
the development and assembly of this device will provide invaluable training for
undergraduate students at Augustana College, Wabash College, and Hope College
(small, undergraduate-only, liberal arts institutions), which will help prepare
them for graduate school. The funds for this award will support the work of
undergraduate students and the primary investigator to purchase, test, and
install the new experimental detector system for the use at the NSCL and
FRIB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments on exotic nuclear systems are frequently
performed at or near the neutron drip-line to probe changes in nuclear
structure. The most straightforward type of experiment involves detecting a
single neutron and charged particle resulting from a nuclide decaying from a
neutron-unbound state. However, the charged fragment may be in a bound excited
state resulting in gamma-ray emission, such as for some neutron-unbound states
of F-25 and Be-13. Thus efficient coincident detection of gamma-rays, neutrons,
and charged particles is desired. This proposal supports the purchase,
development, and installation of a compact charged particle detector telescope
that will provide a balance of efficient gamma-ray, neutron, and charged
particle detection. This system will be installed at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU),
as a radioactive nuclear ion beam facility is needed to produce short-lived
nuclides for experimentation. The charged particle detector telescope will
detect the charged particle, allow the neutron to pass through with minimal
attenuation to then be detected by the MoNA-LISA (Modular Neutron Array and the
Large-area multi-Institutional Scintillator Array), and allow gamma-ray
detection using compact systems already at the NSCL. Also, this device will also
be available for use at Facility for Rare Isotope Beams
(FRIB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.