* 1827309
* PFI-TT: Development of Metabolic Imaging to Improve Treatment of Infertility
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Daniel Needleman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 285,504.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is primarily the
advancement of the commercialization of a system to improve clinical in vitro
fertilization (IVF). IVF is currently the most effective treatment for
infertility, but success rates for IVF remain low, with only ~30% of cycles
resulting in live birth which, in turn, leads to high financial and emotional
costs. Improving the success rate of IVF would help IVF patients and the
approximately 10% of couples who suffer from infertility, and would lead to
broad societal and economic benefit. The proposed work makes use of advanced
imaging and computational image analysis, and has a tight integration between
biology, physics, engineering, clinical medicine, and commercialization.
Undergraduate, graduate students, and postdocs, will benefit from this
interdisciplinary environment and training. This effort will help increase the
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities in science, innovation, and
technological commercialization.

The proposed project tests and develops the use of metabolic imaging as a means
to non-invasively measure oocyte quality. Metabolic imaging of oocytes holds
great promise for improving IVF success rates: the current inability to
determine oocyte quality is one of the major impediments to better IVF
treatment, and oocyte quality is believed to be determined by oocyte metabolism.
Previous and preliminary data demonstrated that metabolic imaging does not harm
mouse oocytes and that it can be used to measure biologically meaningful
metabolic differences between different mouse oocytes. The proposed project will
expand on that work to investigate the safety and utility of the technology on
in vitro matured human oocytes (clinically useless, otherwise discarded
material). It is necessary to perform such safety tests before attempting to use
metabolic imaging in a clinical setting. This work will also provide information
on the metabolism of human oocytes, which is of fundamental import, with broad
application for development, infertility, and birth defects. Furthermore, a
clinical instrument must be robust and integrate into the clinical workflow. A
key challenge is image and data analysis. Thus, this project also seeks to
develop and validate fully automated image and data analysis procedures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.