* 1827325
* MRI: Development of the PHAse Space MeAsurements (PHASMA) Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Amy Keesee, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 343,040.00

One of the challenges in understanding naturally occurring phenomena in outer
space is how difficult it is to perform scientific measurements throughout the
region of interest. Another challenge is that nature is rarely kind enough to
produce the exact same event over and over again so that scientists can
distinguish random fluctuations in their measurements from those that result
from the phenomena of interest. The phenomena in space of particular interest
are those that play important roles in the space environment around the Earth
and which can impact human infrastructure in space, e.g., satellites, manned
space vehicles, etc., and technological systems on Earth, e.g., power grids,
global positioning systems (GPS), and long distance radio communication. This
project involves the construction of a laboratory facility capable of producing
plasma phenomena like those that occur in space. Plasmas are gasses so hot that
the electrons are stripped away from their atoms. The resulting collection of
charged particles responds to both electric and magnetic fields, just like
plasmas in space. This particular facility will investigate how the ions and
electrons in plasmas are heated and accelerated when magnetic fields annihilate,
when the plasma is turbulent, or when the plasma moves faster than the speed of
sound. The facility will engage a consortium of plasma physics researchers
throughout West Virginia. The broader impacts of this work will also include the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a research environment that
synergistically combines experimental and theoretical plasma physics and
attracts high quality undergraduates into physics through involvement in
cutting-edge research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is a strong
synergy between laboratory experiments and other approaches to studying space
physics, there are currently no space-relevant experiments in the world making
direct measurements of three-dimensional ion and electron distribution functions
in a plasma volume. The instrument to be developed under this award, called the
PHAse Space MeAsurements (PHASMA) experiment, features laser induced
fluorescence diagnostics for ion measurements, Thomson scattering diagnostics
for electron velocity distribution function measurements, and a microwave
scattering system for turbulence measurements. Spacecraft measurements have
advanced to the point where velocity distribution function measurements are
leading to paradigm-changing insights about a broad spectrum of space plasma
phenomena. The ability to directly measure velocity distribution functions in
the lab will complement and enhance the value of the direct measurements made in
space. The PHASMA experiment will enable studies of particle acceleration and
plasma heating in magnetic reconnection, collisionless shocks, and plasma
turbulence. The experimental facility research team includes members with unique
strengths in particle diagnostic measurements and expertise in kinetic modeling
-- making the team ideally suited to investigate these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.