* 1827628
* MRI: Acquisition of X-Ray Diffraction Instrumentation for Mineralogical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Ryan Portner, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 144,158.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
table-top powder X-ray Diffractometer. This powder X-ray Diffractometer analyses
solid materials using X-rays to identify their internal composition and
crystallographic structure. Successful research conducted with this instrument
enables investigators to identify the sources of the minerals in sediments from
deep-sea cores collected in a variety of ocean basin worldwide and in regions
surrounding hydrothermal black smokers. The Diffractometer is integral part of
the undergraduate and graduate students Geology curriculum at Moss Landing
Marine Laboratories, San Jose State University and other regional campuses and
research institution in the area including the University of California Santa
Cruz, the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, and California State
University Monterey Bay. Analysis of data done in this instrument will inform
several master student dissertations at all these institutions. The instrument
is also integrated in several outreach programs with local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The X-Ray Diffractometer provides a fundamental
tool for research and education. It benefits provenance and paleoclimate studies
on deep-sea cores collected by the International Ocean Discovery Program in the
Northwest Australian, Papua New Guinea and Chilean Margins. It is a key
analytical tool for studies on silica diagenesis and associated authigenic
precipitates in the Gulf of California. The instrumentation is also used for
clay mineral analyses on cores form the Axial Seamount to determine the origin
of hydrothermal mineral/volcanic glass deposits and for bulk mineralogy analyses
of sediment surrounding a hydrothermal black smoker field on the northern East
Pacific Rise (Alarcon Rise). The instrument also supports various projects that
include the mineralogic interpretation of X-ray fluorescence data from deep-sea
cores, mineralogic analysis of cores collected by Remotely Operated Vehicles
from cold seeps, mud volcanoes and scheletal carbonates, mineralogic analyses of
fish otoliths and changes in coralline algae mineralogic characteristics in
relation to ocean acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.