* 1827930
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Teaching at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Giuliano, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 510,990.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Kevin Minbiole from Villanova
University and colleagues Robert Giuliano, Deanna Zubris, Aimee Eggler and
Thomas Umile Gwynedd from Mercy College have acquired a 500 MHz NMR
spectrometer. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as
those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as
well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts several institutions that participate in the
Southeastern Pennsylvania Consortium for Higher Education. Well-documented
utilization in classroom activities is also positive. Inclusion of a co-PI from
another institution (Mercy College) is a demonstration of the commitment to
partner with other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially aids in the identification of natural product structures and the
rapid and in-depth structural characterization of amphiphiles that lead to
improved structure-activity. The instrument is also used to fully characterize
4-amino sugars found in antibiotics and cell-surface glycans and glycosyl
cyanides found in fungal toxins as well as in the confirmation of the structure
of diplopyrone. In addition, it is essential for the characterization of
synthetic analogues of marine sponge-derived Nrf2 activators and for the
comprehensive characterization of structure changes in the oxidizable diphenols
in phosphate buffered saline. The spectrometer benefits the determination of
purity of trace amounts of purchased natural products and the characterization
of paramagnetic iron complexes (catalysts) for atom transfer radical
polymerization and mechanistic evaluation. It is also essential for the
characterization of polymers containing multi-cationic quaternary ammonium
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.