* 1827550
* The intertwined roles of vision and sensorimotor adaptation on reach-to-grasp movements
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Fulvio Domini, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 523,550.00

When we perform mundane daily actions like picking up a cup of coffee, our brain
needs to figure out the location of the cup, its shape and weight (which changes
depending on how full it is). We tend to think that our perceptual experience of
the cup is what determines our interaction with it. However, several studies
over the past two decades have repeatedly shown that a perceptual task, like
judging the size of an object or its weight, is processed by a different part of
the brain than an action task, like reaching to lift the object. This project
takes an alternate view, in which the brain processes the visual scene, but this
process may be subject to errors (like overestimating the size of a cup or its
weight). These errors are immediately detected while an action is unfolding and
the subsequent movements toward the object are quickly corrected. This research
plan will explore the nature of these complex corrections. It will also examine
certain circumstances in which our perception is faulty while our actions are
accurate. This knowledge could help people rapidly learn new visuomotor skills,
such as interacting in virtual-reality environments and teleoperation. Indeed, a
more comprehensive understanding of visually guided action could inform the
development of these emerging technologies. Finally, discoveries from this
proposal could help improve the lives of individuals with neurological
disorders, which often lead to a profound loss of motor ability that
significantly impairs activities of daily living. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project uses state-of-the-art virtual reality environments to test 1)
to what extent humans can adjust their motor actions "on the fly" to compensate
for inaccuracies in visual perception and 2) whether visual perception changes
when smooth movement coordination cannot be achieved through motor adjustments.
Three mechanistic hypotheses will be tested in which sensory-prediction errors -
signals produced when sensory feedback does not match one's expectations -
enhance the accuracy of action during repeated visuomotor interactions. At the
core of each hypothesis is the idea that when biases in perception lead to
inaccurate movements, sensory-prediction errors will drive adaptive changes
across the sensorimotor system. Three non-mutually exclusive mechanisms of
adaptive change will be tested: (1) Rapid re-alignment of the motor output with
the physical world, (2) Changes in calibration of visual perception, and/or (3)
Selective changes in the contribution of specific aspects of visual information
to action. To test these hypotheses, an integrated set of behavioral experiments
will be conducted, in tandem with the development of computational models to
mechanistically explain the closely intertwined roles of perception and
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.