* 1827110
* IRES Track I:  International Research in The Bahamas: Conservation Biology of the Critically Endangered Bahama Oriole
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jane Lincove, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,952.00

The fundamental goals of this proposal are increasing the diversity of students
studying environmental science and training the next generation of global
scientists. US students will work in collaborative teams with scientists from
UMBC and the Bahamas to study the critically endangered Bahama Oriole. Six
students per year will work with mentors doing international research in the
Bahamas, followed by data analysis and presentation back at UMBC. These projects
will enable students to develop deep understanding of a range of topics in
environmental science related to island ecosystems, extinction and climate
dynamics. Island ecosystems have always been vulnerable to human impacts, and
many island species are endangered or have become extinct. The islands of the
Caribbean represent a biodiversity hotspot that is acutely threatened by climate
variations. The Caribbean is home to fifteen endangered songbird species,
including the critically endangered Bahama Oriole (Icterus northropi). The
proposed student research experience is a collaboration between the University
of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) and The Bahamas National Trust (BNT) to
determine the status of the Bahama Oriole and to understand how habitat and
climate change may affect it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current global
extinction crisis, islands are especially vulnerable, and most endangered and
extinct avian species are (or were) island species. The Bahama Oriole is now
restricted to Andros, having been extirpated from Abaco in the 1990s. The likely
threats facing the Bahama Oriole are typical for island species, ranging from
introduced predators to anthropogenic habitat change. The impacts of climate
change on endemic species in the Caribbean may be especially intense drying and
warming are altering fire regimes while rising sea levels and increased
hurricane intensity are causing forest mortality. The proposed student research
projects address the full scope of these issues facing this critically
endangered songbird. Teams of Bahamian and US mentors will together advise
undergraduate students on a series of independent research projects. One UMBC
PhD student will be continually on-site in the Bahamas to help mentor the
students. Student projects will teach the students skills that can be applied in
a range of STEM careers. Project topics include 1) population ecology (e.g.,
estimating population size), 2) remote sensing (e.g., effects of climate change
on pine habitat), and 3) predation (e.g., radio tracking to study annual
survival). Recently, the research team conducted two pilot trips with diverse
teams of students from UMBC and The Bahamas. These student-led efforts confirmed
the feasibility of these projects and demonstrated how little is known about the
Bahama Oriole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.