* 1827122
* IRES Track 1: Infrastructure Design for Sustainable Urban Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Fouad Fouad, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Economic globalization is transforming the nature of the engineering profession.
The assignment of U.S. engineers overseas has become common business practice,
as global enterprises establish corporate as well as research and development
centers worldwide. To remain at the forefront of science and technology and to
sustain our nation's global leadership in engineering, we must train our
engineering graduates to be productive professionals in tomorrow's global
business world and provide them the skills they will need to collaborate with
international partners. This three-year IRES program will teach some of those
critical skills to U.S. engineering students by providing hands-on research
training and cultural experiences in one of the fastest growing regions in the
world. The students will conduct research in Egypt with U.S. and Egyptian
investigators in the increasingly important field of sustainable urban design.
The need for sustainable housing and infrastructure is particularly acute in
Egypt, a nation where 95% of the population lives on just 6% of the land area.
Students will leverage the many national research initiatives currently underway
in Egypt to investigate and test sustainable infrastructure designs.
Participants will receive extensive mentoring before, during, and after their
international experience from the U.S. and Egyptian researchers, with the
ultimate goal of conducting high-level research and preparing research papers
for publication in peer-reviewed journals. By working closely with their
international mentors, the students will enhance their cross-cultural skills,
foreign language abilities, and professional experience, preparing them to excel
in a multinational environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year IRES
project will provide approximately 30 undergraduate and graduate engineering
students research training and cultural experiences in Egypt. The students will
work with U.S. mentors and Egyptian researchers at one of the leading national
research centers in Egypt, the National Housing and Building Research Center.
The program will focus on the multidisciplinary theme of Infrastructure Design
for Sustainable Urban Communities. The Egyptian government is currently pressing
major research initiatives and demonstration projects related to sustainable
urban design, including entire new cities built around sustainability
principles. Our students will leverage these ongoing programs to explore and
evaluate new designs for urban infrastructure that consider building materials,
construction methods, energy efficiency, and water conservation. Working with
our Egyptian partners, the researchers have identified eight research projects
for the first year of the program that address the topics of sustainable
affordable housing, the assessment of sustainable building codes, infrastructure
health monitoring, sustainable building materials, water and stormwater
management, and intelligent building designs. Additional research topics will be
developed in subsequent years. Students will work side-by-side with Egyptian
researchers with the goal of performing high-level research and producing
student-led, peer-reviewed publications. The program will ultimately produce
students who have the skills and international perspective necessary to pursue
careers in collaborative international research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.