* 1827126
* CC* Integration: SENSELET: Sensory Network Infrastructure for Scientific Laboratory Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Roy Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Scientific instruments (e.g., scanning electron microscopes) are extensively
used to&lt;br/&gt;discover new materials, develop novel semiconductor device
fabrication recipes, and perform new biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;One way to
speed up scientific discoveries is to provide scientists with advanced cyber-
infrastructures to capture, transmit,&lt;br/&gt;store, share, analyze, and
correlate as much environmental metadata (e.g., humidity,
temperature)&lt;br/&gt;from scientific lab environments as possible. Current
network infrastructure does not capture&lt;br/&gt;any external wireless sensory
data around the instruments.&lt;br/&gt;The recent advent of low-cost, cloud-
based sensors and the introduction of diverse wireless
network&lt;br/&gt;technologies, low-cost mobile and personal devices, and
Internet of Things (IoT) solutions provide a&lt;br/&gt;novel and viable path for
automating sensory data collection in diverse science laboratory
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SENSELET, a SEnsory Network infrastructure
for SciEntific Lab EnvironmenTs, has the goals of (a)&lt;br/&gt;deploying a
diverse wireless and scalable sensory infrastructure close to scientific
instruments, and (b)&lt;br/&gt;correlating and synchronizing sensory data with
cloud-based instrument data and metadata in real-time&lt;br/&gt;and on-demand.
The SENSELET infrastructure will provide additional measurements that will
increase&lt;br/&gt;accuracy of scientific results, and enable better
environmental monitoring and control of labs for lab&lt;br/&gt;managers. The
SENSELET infrastructure will include (a) wireless sensors such as humidity,
temperature,&lt;br/&gt;and vibration sensors; (b) an edge computing device with
multiple wireless communication interfaces&lt;br/&gt;residing in the lab; and
(c) private cloud computing service to store&lt;br/&gt;and correlate sensory
data with instrument data in real-time or on-demand. SENSELET
will&lt;br/&gt;provide trusted and real-time instrument data uploading,
curation, search, and coordination services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.