* 1827536
* PFI-TT: Development of a novel infrared light source for the identification and study of the chemical constituents of materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mumtaz Qazilbash, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2022
* USD 220,812.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is the significant
increase in the capability and viability of high sensitivity chemical
identification without the need for large and expensive infrared light sources.
The aim of this project is to develop a commercially viable, compact, table-top
light source that provides suitable intensities and wavelengths to characterize
materials and chemicals with increased sensitivity. This will complement the
capabilities of the semiconductor and bio-medical industries to innovate in
nanotechnology and biotechnology by allowing them to obtain a thorough
understanding of their materials and systems in a cost-effective manner. This
project will also enable the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students who are inclined towards the applied and commercial
aspects of physics research. Contacts with suppliers of components for the
infrared light source and with potential customers are further broad impacts of
this project. This project has the potential to contribute to the economy of
Virginia and the USA via the expected establishment of a start-up company that
will create jobs, revenue, and intellectual property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will tackle the lack of commercially available light sources
that are ultra-broadband and highly brilliant in the far- to near-infrared
spectral range. The objective is to optimize the argon plasma light source
prototype by increasing its lifetime of stable light output to hundreds of
hours. The optimized product will improve data acquisition efficiency in
spectroscopy applications especially in industry. The plan is to redesign this
device improving on what has been learned from the previous iteration by
optimizing the thermal properties, inner chamber design, and component
replacement process allowing routine operation and maintenance to be simple,
efficient, and reproducible. The characteristics of infrared radiation from a
high temperature plasma in the frequency range between 100 cm-1 and 2500 cm-1
have not been studied in the past. This is because the quartz bulb in commercial
xenon plasma lamps is opaque to infrared radiation in the above frequency range.
The infrared emission characteristics of the proposed light source between 100
cm-1 and 2500 cm-1 and even higher frequencies will be measured using
spectrometers and microscopes similar to the ones used extensively in industry,
thus demonstrating the source's compatibility with existing spectroscopy
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.