* 1827011
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Preparing a Network to Develop Molecular Case Studies at the Interface of Biology and Chemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* David Marcey, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Understanding structure-function relationships is foundational to learning
biology. In lower-division courses, students study the shapes and functions of
selected proteins and nucleic acids. However, deep understanding of structure-
function relationships requires visualizing the structure, mapping information
from various biological data resources (e.g., polymer sequence, interactions,
mutations, variations) onto the structure, and applying biology and/or chemistry
knowledge to synthesize explanations of function. Unfortunately, these
activities are not common in undergraduate biology curricula. Collaboration
between biology, chemistry, and biochemistry educators to adapt molecular
visualization approaches currently being used in chemistry can benefit biology
education. To that end, the aim of this project is to establish a network of
interested faculty that will create case studies, an effective active-learning
technique, to teach the relationship between molecular structure and function.
The cases will enable students to visualize and analyze challenging real-world
problems in atomic detail and apply their biology and/or chemistry knowledge to
develop solutions. These molecular visualizations will provide a platform for
integrating knowledge from different sub-disciplines of biology, such as
biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology to form the foundation for practicing
interdisciplinary, team science across STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN-UBE project will establish a new
network, Molecular CaseNet, to develop case studies at the interface of biology
and chemistry. Objectives of the incubator phase of this project are to 1) bring
together an interdisciplinary team of seven scientists and researchers to
develop an exemplar for case-study design and determine format requirements for
future case studies; 2) create two model case studies focused on specific
biological processes/events and discussed at a molecular level; and 3) present
the cases in community workshops and professional society meetings to recruit
new members to the network and gather feedback on usability, clarity, and
relevance of the case studies. Piloting the newly developed case studies with
selected student groups will shed light on the relevance of these case studies
in learning biology, chemistry, and biochemistry. By using the planned case
studies, students with varied levels of expertise and disciplinary training will
have the opportunity to understand molecular structure-function relationships
and practice the scientific process to address real-world problems. In turn,
this practice will help prepare the next generation of workers in STEM fields to
creatively apply interdisciplinary approaches to problem-
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.