* 1827472
* SCH: INT: Mining Drug-Drug Interaction Induced Adverse Effects from Health Record Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Li Shen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 914,354.00

Recent advances in large-scale electronic health record database techniques
provide exciting new opportunities to the study of drug safety. Drug-drug
interactions (DDIs), a major cause of adverse drug events (ADEs), are a serious
global health concern, and a severe detriment to public health. The scale of
DDIs involving three or more drugs (also called high-order DDIs) has posed a
prohibitory challenge for its molecular pharmacology and clinical research,
which motivates alternative strategies such as mining health record data. This
project aims to develop large-scale computational strategies and effective
software tools for mining high-order DDI effects from health record databases,
in order to yield novel discoveries in drug safety, and ultimately to benefit
national health and well being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
above goal, this project is designed to complete four specific tasks. Task 1
aims to develop a novel statistical framework to discover high-order DDI signals
associated with ADEs from health record databases. Task 2 aims to study a novel
drug safety problem for mining directional DDI signals. Task 3 aims to develop
an innovative approach for mining directional DDI patterns at the drug-group
level. Task 4 is devoted to software development, evaluation and validation. The
project applies these methods to analyze three independent databases, packages
method implementations into a user-friendly software toolkit, and releases the
toolkit to the public. This project not only facilitates the development of
novel computational techniques in drug safety research, but also addresses
emerging scientific questions in modeling, mining, and visual exploration of
complex data such as the health record data. The project's educational
activities include course development, student mentoring and advising, and
involvement of minority and underrepresented students in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.