* 1827134
* MRI: Acquisition of FTIR Spectroscopic Imaging System towards material characterization with contributions to health, clean energy generation, and efficient processing techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Jinsong Zhang, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,305.00

The project will acquire a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic
imaging system. The FTIR spectroscopic imaging system will enable faculty and
students at California State University, Chico (CSUC) to contribute to the
knowledge base required to improve the health of humans, animals, and plants,
contribute to the development of clean green energy generation, increase the
lifespan and efficiency of materials in harsh environments, and develop more
efficient processing techniques to fabricate various chemicals and materials.
The acquired spectroscopic imaging system will support the development of
interdisciplinary collaborations between faculty in the College of Agriculture,
College of Natural Sciences, and College of Engineering, Computer Science, and
Construction Management. Approximately 650 students from Chemistry,
Biochemistry, Biology, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and
Mechanical Engineering will use the FTIR spectroscopic imaging system or analyze
data collected by this system. CSUC has significant student populations from
underrepresented and underserved groups, including those who are first-in-family
to enter college, veterans, and Hispanics. CSUC students will gain exposure to
this state-of-the-art system and enhance their skills for both theoretical and
experimental work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed FTIR spectroscopic imaging
system will enable many research projects. The FTIR system with its ability to
perform fast FTIR hyperspectral imaging makes it a powerful tool for the
identification of key compounds in highly variable heterogeneous biomaterials as
well as identification of unknown materials in a homogeneous matrix. An added
benefit of FTIR spectroscopic imaging systems is that it is a non-invasive
characterization tool, which makes it an emerging technology used in the
structural analysis of biological samples. The research projects that will
benefit from this system include: (a) the characterization of the plants
containing terpene, a chemical that provide protections from herbivores and may
have reduce healing inflammation and bacterial infections; (b) the study of
bifunctional organic linker molecules as they bind to nanomaterials for
photovoltaic and biochemical sensing applications; (c) the elucidation of
reaction mechanisms including those involved in the synthesis of natural
products such as antioxidants and the catalysis/generation of reactive oxygen
species by wide bandgap nanoparticles; (d) the analysis of the surface
configuration of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g., tin, which is an
anode material for Li-ion batteries); and (e) the study of oxidation and
reduction of particles in air and other environments coupled with the evaluation
of techniques to improve the particles' stability or their reactivity. This
system will be used to support several active research projects, to develop an
undergraduate and graduate teaching laboratory, and to initiate new areas of
research within the CSUC Electrical and Computer Engineering Department in
collaboration with several other departments, schools, and colleges across the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.