* 1827464
* Standard Grant: Societal Aspects of Energy Infrastructure Expansion
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kelly Joyce, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 345,270.00

This award supports a research project that studies social aspects of efforts to
expand the use of fracking for gas extraction, as well as corresponding efforts
to expand gas processing and exportation, in the tri-state area constituted by
Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey. The specific goal of this project is to
better understand the role labor unions and their members play in the co-
production of energy infrastructures. It will provide findings that will shed
light on the social forces that shape energy infrastructures, and on how
sociotechnical systems are developed, maintained, and how they can be changed.
The PIs plan to publish peer reviewed articles in journals such as Science as
Culture and Environmental Sociology, and to publish a book with MIT Press. To
increase public understanding of energy expansions, the PIs will produce a white
paper with the assistance of a design professional to create infographics for
the white paper. They will also share key findings with labor unions and with
key government offices including that of the Governor for each of the three
states, and the Mayor and City Council of Philadelphia, New York City, and
Trenton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project will examine efforts
to expand gas infrastructure. It will combine STS literatures on energy systems
with sociological research on organized labor, and it will multiple methods
including content analysis, in-depth interviews, and fieldwork. It will
investigate the technical and scientific expertise of key members of the
different labor unions involved in the infrastructure development, and it will
explore the extent to which that expertise impacts technology design and use,
and the extent to which it is used in political debate and policy formation. The
proposed research has the potential to bridge and to integrate the literatures
in STS and sociology that is relevant to a fuller understanding of the role of
labor and technology in environmental injustice; although there is some overlap
between these literatures, they often are disconnected. Most researchers
examining natural gas as an environmental justice issue focus on the extraction
point of the energy supply chain, examining rural communities impacted by
fracking. This project shifts the focus from communities near gas wells to the
views and positions of groups at the transportation and refining points in the
energy supply chain that are influential in either supporting or curtailing the
conditions that bring about environmental injustice from fossil fuel energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.