* 1827622
* NSF-PREM: Center for Interfacial Electrochemistry of Energy Materials (CiE2M)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Joel Brock, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,934,009.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras
Campus (UPRRP), Universidad Metropolitana (UMET) and Universidad del Turabo
(UT), all located in Puerto Rico and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI), and
the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) have teamed up in this
educational and innovative collaborative materials research effort to bring
together and develop a diverse and talented scientific interdisciplinary
community with expertise in operando synchrotron X-ray techniques to enhance
energy storage and conversion devices. In this collaborative effort, graduate
and undergraduate students will perform research at their home institutions and
at CHESS, to study the electrochemical processes associated with energy
conversion and storage technologies. This Partnership in Research and Education
for Materials (PREM) project will impact participating students' education by
offering new tailored courses in their curriculum, and by developing workshops
and making training opportunities available to them in strong collaboration with
CHESS. The results of this research and educational partnership among UPR-UMET-
UT-CHESS will be disseminated in publications in peer-reviewed journals and
conference presentations. Workshops and synchrotron hands-on activities will
also be developed for K-12 students to motivate their interest in energy-based
technologies and as well as the use of high-energy X-ray synchrotron techniques
through close interactions and collaborations with
CHESS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
effort brings the synergistic expertise of a diverse group of scientists to
address fundamental issues related to electrochemical energy storage and
conversion devices. The project is led by Dr. Carlos R. Cabrera, from the
Department of Chemistry at UPRRP, and Dr. Joel D. Brock, Director of CHESS at
Cornell University. The collaborative efforts among UPRRP, UMET, UT and CHESS
are spread over three interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs). Each IRG will
embrace the use of unique, yet complementary, strategies related to energy
conversion and storage and synchrotron based
techniques:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRG 1. Nanostructured electrocatalytic
materials: To develop a fundamental understanding of the processes that govern
reactivity at the interface of alkaline fuel cells by combining efforts in
materials chemistry and fundamental electrochemistry along with operando X-ray
techniques;&lt;br/&gt;IRG 2. Nanostructured materials for dye-sensitized solar
cells (DSSCs): Establish a fundamental understanding of structural changes of
DSSCs under operando conditions, by X-ray absorption studies; and&lt;br/&gt;IRG
3. Porous nanostructured materials for energy storage: Develop a state-of-the-
art protocol for electrolyte nano-confinement effects, electrode structural
changes upon intercalation, and for the interfacial electrochemical energy
transfer mechanism in composite electrode materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative team will organize conference meetings at UPR and at CHESS to
enable participants to present their research findings and to establish new
innovative ideas to increase our understanding of interfacial electrochemical
processes associated with energy conversion and storage technologies. Regular
meetings will enable participating students to develop as a workforce on energy
materials using synchrotron-based techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.