* 1827682
* PFI-TT: A Low-Cost Cortisol Sensor for Real-Time Stress Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Jean Andrian, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 369,783.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to develop a low-
cost cortisol sensing technology for early detection of stress-related diseases.
Cortisol is a biomarker used for stress evaluation in human subjects. Increased
cortisol levels have been linked to stress-related diseases, including chronic
fatigue syndrome, post-traumatic stress disorder, and neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer's disease, and multiple sclerosis. Therefore accurate
measurement of cortisol in saliva, and sweat, is gaining increasing clinical
significance to predict multiple physical and mental diseases. While existing
laboratory techniques, such as ELISA and FIA, can provide precise cortisol
measurements, they are generally too slow, where a rapid response or
intervention is needed. The proposed technology overcomes significant
limitations such as the necessity of having specified sample volume to perform a
test, total testing time, and expensive optical detection unit. The substantial
advantage of the proposed technology is to produce cortisol results within few
minutes and can replace tedious laboratory-based techniques. This technology
will create personalized behavioral intervention to regulate cortisol levels and
prevent stress-related health problems for at-risk clinical populations. The
proposed cortisol sensing technology will provide solutions to hospitals,
diagnostic laboratories, and pharmaceutical industries, which increasingly rely
on fast, sensitive, reproducible and fully automated
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to
translate a sensor technology, developed under a previously funded NSF grant,
into a low-cost, handheld sensing device to monitor the salivary cortisol levels
in point-of-care (POC) monitoring. The FIU team has engineered recognition site
of cortisol sensor using antibody- mimic, robust and easily industrially
scalable electroactive imprinted polymers that allow to miniaturize device in
easily deployable and portable format. In order to translate the sensor into the
market, the project will be consolidated into two goals: (i) sensor stability
and measurement repeatability, and (ii) reducing cost and size. To accomplish
these goals FIU team will 1) develop of high-affinity and reagent-less MIP
sensor for Cortisol using novel electroactive monomers and 2) Constructing a
low-cost handheld/portable prototype for field use. The proposed cortisol sensor
will be capable of sending real-time data from the sensor to the virtual server
via a smartphone app. The real-time data will be populated and processed on the
virtual machines and will be archived by the user on their personal computer or
smartphone app. The project will fortify a cross-university collaboration
between the areas of health science and engineering; resulting in
interdisciplinary biomedical research training for students, postdoctoral
researchers, and faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.