* 1827225
* CC* Network Design: Network Upgrades to Improve Engagement in Science Discovery and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jon Beck, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Truman State University, with the support of the Missouri Research and Education
Network (MOREnet) and the University of Missouri, is upgrading the campus
network and infrastructure to better enable access to, and use of, scientific
data through improved data transfer capabilities for large datasets. The
enhanced infrastructure supports faculty and undergraduate research in
understanding star spots, quantifying light pollution in geographical areas,
understanding the inhibition mechanisms of drugs to treat global health issues,
natural language processing to improve approaches in artificial intelligence,
and building low-cost, real-time, soil sensors. An expanded curriculum that
includes hands-on training in cybersecurity and IPv6 technologies is also
enabled by utilizing these network resources.

The improvements include upgrades to the network switch and distribution
technologies that result in a ten-fold increase in data transfer and access
rates for faculty in STEM-related disciplines, as well as increases in the data
transfer bandwidth to the campus observatory, deployment of IPv6 in support of
the computer science curriculum, establishment of network performance metrics to
inform continued growth, and robust and secure access (through federated
identity management) to off-campus research tools and intra-institutional
collaboration opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.