* 1827514
* MRI:  Acquisition of a fluorescence microscope to grow research and training at St. Catherine University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Kathleen Tweeten, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 118,176.00

An award is made to St. Catherine University, a primarily undergraduate
institution, to acquire a Leica DM6B fluorescence microscope. This microscope
will expand the research capacity of biology faculty at the university and will
engage students from the university's College for Women in research training in
the biological sciences. St. Catherine has among the most ethnically and
economically diverse population of students enrolled in Minnesota's four-year
public and private colleges. The fluorescence microscope will help prepare women
undergraduates of all backgrounds to succeed in graduate school and scientific
careers by providing access to and training in modern microscopy, imaging
techniques and image analysis. The expanded research capacity made possible by
the microscope will also contribute to efforts to recruit excellent and diverse
faculty while aiding current faculty to conduct research. Access to this
instrumentation will stimulate new collaborations among faculty within the
university's Biology Department, between biology faculty and those in broader
STEM disciplines, and with existing research collaborators at other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deconvolution DIC fluorescence microscope
will expand research programs spanning the areas of ecology, developmental
biology, genetics, cell and molecular biology, and phylogenetics for four
biology faculty. A project investigating how nitrogen and phosphorus shape and
control the structure and function of cyanobacterial and algal assemblages will
contribute to the ability to better predict changes to freshwater ecosystems in
response to environmental stressors. The exploration of the development of
dimorphic traits in Caenorhabditis elegans will provide insights on the role Hox
genes in neuronal development. The characterization of the temporal or spatial
subfunctionalization of ammonium transporters in the model liverwort Marchantia
polymorpha will elucidate the evolutionary consequences of gene transfer between
domains of living organisms. Selective staining of heterochromatin with
fluorescent probes will allow detection of differences in chromatin structure
that might impact the physiology, gene expression, and ecobiology of diploid
compared to polyploid populations of the non-model invertebrate, Lumbriculus.
Not only will this microscope meet the current needs of the biology department,
it will also allow for programmatic expansion in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.