* 1827745
* PREM Center for Energy and Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ram Seshadri, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,174,296.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at El Paso
(UTEP) is a major research university located in the Southwest region of United
States and is composed of nearly 83% Hispanic-American student population. The
proposed Partnership in Research and Educations for Materials (PREM) project
between UTEP and University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) will have a
significant impact on students and local communities. The UTEP PREM center will
promote and enhance the participation and advanced degree attainment of
underrepresented minority (URM) students in materials science and engineering.
The PREM projects will have broader impact on the production of doctorates that
come from URM groups and will enhance major advancements in two important
disciplines of materials science - energy and biomaterials. The UTEP PREM center
will provide excellent education, training and research opportunities to
students from historically URM groups by providing a number of new opportunities
for hands-on laboratory experience, research mentoring, professional
development, research seminars, joint UTEP/UCSB workshops, and student
exchanges. In addition to accelerating scientific excellence, the PREM Center
will also foster mentoring of junior and mid-career faculty. Expanding into a
PREM Center and forming strong UTEP-UCSB connections, the UTEP PREM will not
only impact within the region but will strengthen education in the study and
research of advanced materials and contribute to the workforce development in
materials science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A synergistic, multidisciplinary research approach
is proposed to advance the basic understanding of the interfacial structure,
physics, and chemistry and to study defects and dopants in order to improve the
materials' performance in energy and biomaterials. The PREM center is comprised
of two primary Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs) and topics in order to
foster a diverse, innovative, and multifaceted research center that addresses a
range of outstanding challenges in materials science. The PREM center will focus
on two main areas: a) IRG1-Energy, and b) IRG2-Biomaterials. Prof. Ramana from
UTEP and Prof. Seshadri from UCSB will lead this institutional partnership in
which nine UTEP and eight UCSB scientists and engineers (chemistry, materials,
physics, and electrical and mechanical engineering) form collaborative IRGs. The
specific research topics in IRG1-Energy include: i) Multilayered, Transparent
Electrodes, ii) Uranium-Based Compounds, and (iii) Multifunctional Oxides.
Within IRG1, the overarching objectives include investigating the science and
engineering of high quality multifunctional oxides, oxide/metal/oxide
multilayered films, and actinide oxide semiconductors. In the context of
IRG2-Biomaterials, the focus will be on: i) Development of Biomimetic Scaffolds
for 3D Tissue, and ii) Photothermal Nanomaterials for High-Efficiency Biomass
Conversion. The objectives of IRG2 include understanding the interplay between
synthesis, surface/interface chemistry, and photothermal effects of nano- and
biomaterials. Housing these IRGs under a PREM center umbrella unifies the
cutting-edge material science research programs at UTEP and nurtures true
interdisciplinary interactions. The formation of a PREM center also streamlines
input and collaborative contributions from UCSB, thus adjoining two productive
materials science research centers. Also, the world-class instrument facilities
at UCSB will enable and catalyze the exploration of the basic science of
functional inorganic and biomaterials and provide unique opportunities for
cross-fertilization of ideas, mentoring, and multidisciplinary
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.