* 1827135
* IRES: US-Estonia Research Partnership in Reconstructing Past Climate Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Nathan Stansell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,317.00

Records of past climate variability from northern Europe will improve our
ability to predict future environmental changes in the North Atlantic region.
This IRES project will partner with premier universities in Estonia to train
students in interdisciplinary field-based environmental science methods in order
to develop archives of past temperature and precipitation changes from the
Baltic region. Each year the project will involve initial orientations, 5 weeks
of international summer field and lab-based instruction, follow-up laboratory
work at home institutions during the academic year, and conference presentations
in the spring. A total of 4 students (undergraduate and graduate) and 1 in-
service public science teacher (RET) each year will be recruited, and all the
undergraduate participants will be from 2 year colleges in northern Illinois.
Students from underrepresented groups will be targeted, and at least one
undergraduate student per year will be from a non-STEM
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a multi-proxy approach
to explore the timing and causes of historic climate variability in northern
Europe. Student projects will be interrelated to develop a better understanding
of how shifting Northern Hemisphere temperatures and mean-state conditions of
the North Atlantic Ocean have influenced the climate dynamics of the eastern
Baltic region. These datasets will serve as predictive tools for future
variation across the Northern Hemisphere. Student projects will focus on lake
sediment geochemistry (stable isotopes - ?18O and ?13C), paleoecology, and
biology as tools to reconstruct past climate conditions. The educational goals
are to: 1) Engage students in societally-relevant scientific topics to promote
interest in STEM fields; 2) Mentor participants in state-of-the-art scientific
research methods to better prepare them for STEM majors, careers, and advanced
degrees; 3) Develop participants written and oral communication skills through
mentoring and public presentations; and 4) Recruit underrepresented minority
students and in-service public science teachers to promote diversity and
sustainable impacts in public schools. The program components, project team, and
participant experience will be rigorously evaluated by a geoscience education
research specialist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.