* 1827050
* CC* Network Design: Transforming Arcadia's Networking Capability, Enhancing for Innovation to Grow Research Leaders in a Technology-driven World
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Vitaly Ford, Arcadia University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 352,500.00

As a small private university, Arcadia's existing computing infrastructure
constrains the productivity of faculty in Bioinformatics, Computer Science,
Chemistry, and Physics who are conducting data-intensive research. Specifically,
the current infrastructure impedes researchers' ability to efficiently and
securely access, share, or analyze large-data sets with collaborators at other
institutions. To address these research and education needs, a collaborative
team representing key university faculty and technologists at Arcadia is
creating a Science DMZ with a data transmission network capable of 10Gbps
connectivity (more than 10 times faster than current speeds) to the Keystone
Initiative for Network Based Education and Research's (KINBER) PennREN network.

Project's objectives are to: (1) provide high performance, secure Science DMZ
network capabilities for sharing of large datasets and cloud-based education;
(2) eliminate technical barriers for faculty engaged in data-intensive projects
through a dedicated, friction-free path to Internet2, PennREN, and other high
performance computing and data resources; (3) leverage authentication and
authorization mechanisms to support our faculty through the InCommon Federation;
and (4) enable future scientific possibilities and unleash innovation for
students and faculty researchers.

Arcadia is currently considering to incorporate a data analytics requirement
into its general curriculum and leverage the newly developed cyberinfrastructure
to enable cloud-based opportunities, distance learning and researching on a
global scale. This opportunity is supporting greater faculty and student
analytical scholarship by forming a frictionless environment built to innovate
and thrive in our technology-drive world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.