* 1827715
* Collaborative Research: Calibrating the end-Ediacaran Extinction with U-Pb Geochronology &amp; Chemostratigraphy at a New Precambrian-Cambrian Boundary Site in Namibia &amp; South
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jahandar Ramezani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,612.00

The first appearance and rapid diversification of complex, multicellular animals
at the dawn of the Cambrian (~540 million years ago) is conceivably the single
most significant episode in the evolution of life on Earth, as it laid out the
initial blueprints for the vast majority of life forms that exist today.
Understanding the driving mechanisms of the Cambrian 'explosion' have been
challenging because life forms that dominated the preceding period, the
Ediacaran, have a sparse fossil record. In addition, the marine sedimentary
rocks that preserve the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition are now scattered across
the continents, hampering an unequivocal reconstruction of life and the
environment at this crucial junction of the geologic history. This study focuses
on key outcrops of the Ediacaran-Cambrian marine deposits with spectacular
fossils and high potential for precise isotopic dating in a previously
unexplored region near the Namibia-South Africa border. The results will provide
new insights into the rates of paleoenvironmental and ocean chemical change
during this critical time interval. In addition to public presentations and
scholarly publications, a comprehensive program of educational, training, and
outreach activities are planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs an
integrated program of field mapping, sedimentology, chemo- and bio-stratigraphy
on newly discovered marine carbonate-rich and fossiliferous Ediacaran-Cambrian
sections on either side of the Orange River in Namibia and South Africa with
abundant intercalated ash beds suitable to U-Pb geochronology. It will provide a
high-resolution record that will help to unravel the mode and rates of biotic
and coeval environmental changes at the close of the Proterozoic. The results
will be a major step forward in testing the hypothesis that there were globally
synchronous environmental perturbations that were genetically associated with
biotic turnover across the Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary, and will lead to a
better understanding of the driving mechanisms of the Cambrian
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.