* 1827774
* PFI-TT: Performance-Based Risk Assessment and Mitigation Tool for Buildings under Extreme Wind Events
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2021
* USD 342,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to minimize human
and monetary losses incurred every year due to wind-related damage to buildings
and other similar structures. In the recent years, wind hazards have caused
significant building repair costs, placing tremendous burden on their owners and
insurance companies. To reduce the vulnerability of buildings to extreme wind
events, such as hurricanes and tornadoes, a holistic platform is required to (1)
estimate the risk of failure of a building under the expected intensity and
frequency of occurrence of windstorms in a given region; and (2) inform the
involved entities, including design consultants, contractors, stakeholders, and
insurance companies, on how to avoid the risk of failure through innovative
design and mitigation strategies. While the former aspect has been studied to
some extent by the involved agencies and companies, the latter aspect has
remained largely unexplored, due to technical complexities, budget constraints,
and the absence of supporting guides and tools. This has motivated the
development of the very first wind performance-based risk assessment and
mitigation tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
result in a multi-purpose tool to transform the analysis and design of buildings
subjected to wind hazards. This is a unique innovation, as it employs, for the
first time, the concepts of risk assessment and mitigation together to maximize
the safety and performance of buildings in high-wind areas. For assessment
purposes, this tool relies on a performance-based philosophy, which offers
versatile capabilities to optimize the design in such a way that the cost is
minimized, while the target performance objectives are achieved. On the other
hand, for mitigation purposes, a decision-making algorithm is implemented to
consider multiple strategies and identify the best solution based on a range of
performance, cost, and risk metrics. This will be an important step forward to
address the challenges that have prevented the building sector from ensuring the
safety and comfort of buildings against wind loads. The innovation of the
proposed tool, however, will not be limited to its simulation capabilities,
data-driven algorithms, and predictive models, as it will deliver a platform
that greatly facilitates the communication and collaboration among various
entities involved in the finance, design, maintenance, and insurance of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.