* 1827546
* PFI-TT: Smart Climate Control in Shared Workspaces for More Personalization and Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 235,648.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is in attaining
significant energy savings in building operations, and in creating more
comfortable and personalized work environments for its occupants. Energy
efficiency measures in the buildings not only provides a means to reduce energy
related costs, it also provides tremendous opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Further, the technology that this project aims to develop and
evaluate can also create a more personalized workspace for human occupants in a
shared space, leading to better wellness and increased productivity of employees
in indoor shared workplaces. The education and outreach goals of the project
will be enhanced through cross-disciplinary training of a graduate student
researcher, and involvement of undergraduate students in the experimental
evaluation of the BEES system in a Smart Conference Room facility at RPI. The
project team will actively engage with industrial partners and potential clients
towards maximizing its commercialization potential. We believe that the proposed
technology has considerable future potential for creating new jobs in emerging
areas such as Smart Buildings, Internet-of-Things, and Artificial
Intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a data-
driven learning and integrated control solution for heterogeneous HVAC elements
in shared office spaces, with the aim of providing more personalized thermal
environments to occupants and minimizing overall energy usage. Even with the
high cost of operating the current HVAC systems, occupant dissatisfaction with
thermal environments in workplaces have been highlighted by several recent
studies. This project seeks to address this issue through the integrated
application of i) data-driven learning of the indoor environment, and ii)
integrated control of heterogeneous HVAC elements that typically exist in such
shared office spaces. Firstly, it will utilize data driven modeling of complex
spatiotemporal dynamics of the physical environment, and the dependency between
the controls available and the environmental variables. Secondly, it will
utilize the data-driven model towards integrated control of the heterogeneous
HVAC elements associated with the space to attain differentiated temperatures
across the space as desired by the occupants. The product of this project will
be a software prototype that will operate in conjunction of sensor and IoT
devices, and networked HVAC elements. This integrated HVAC control technology
will be evaluated for technical performance and commercial viability in a smart
conference room.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.