* 1827964
* Collaborative Research: MRI: Development of Apparatus for the Cold Molecule Nuclear Time-Reversal EXperiment (CeNTREX)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tanya Zelevinsky, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 514,906.00

This project will support the purchase of equipment and parts needed to
construct the apparatus for a new experiment known as CeNTREX, the Cold molecule
Nuclear Time-Reversal experiment. CeNTREX is a collaborative effort to detect
evidence for new types of fundamental forces and particles, through precise
measurements of magnetic resonance signals from nuclei embedded in the polar
molecule thallium fluoride. The goal of the CeNTREX experiment is to detect a
particular deformation in the shape of an atomic nucleus, known as a nuclear
Schiff Moment. This will advance the progress of science because a Schiff Moment
along the spin axis of a nucleus can arise only in the presence of fundamental
interactions that are not symmetric under reversal of the direction of time.
Interactions of this type can be mediated by new, as-yet undetected, particles
that are predicted to occur in some theoretical models that extend the current
Standard Model of particle physics. A Schiff Moment of size large enough to be
detected with the projected sensitivity CeNTREX could indicate the existence of
new particles with mass well above that of the heaviest known particles - and
even beyond the reach of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Hence, CeNTREX will
provide one of the few known ways to search for physics beyond the Standard
Model associated with particles too massive to be created at the LHC. An
experiment with the fundamental discovery potential of CeNTREX can also capture
the interest of the general public and raise the level of excitement about
science. In addition, design and construction of the CeNTREX apparatus will
provide opportunities for training several young scientists in instrumentation
development. This type of precision measurement science exposes students to a
wide range of intellectual and technical subfields, and provides unusually broad
training in experimental physics that benefits development of the scientific
workforce of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of an asymmetric
charge distribution such as an electric dipole moment (EDM) or a Schiff moment
(SM) along a particle's angular momentum axis requires violation of time
reversal (T) symmetry, which is equivalent to the more widely-discussed
phenomenon of CP violation. Observation of an EDM or SM within a few orders of
magnitude of current limits would be evidence for phenomena outside the Standard
Model of particle physics theory. Furthermore, there are strong motivations from
particle theory and cosmology to expect an EDM or SM in this experimentally-
accessible range. Discovery of an EDM or SM could illuminate the mechanism
responsible for the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe, which
remains one of the grand challenges of cosmology and particle physics. Moreover,
new physics at the TeV scale (the range of energy not being explored at the
LHC), carrying new CP-violating phases, naturally give rise to EDM and SM near
the current experimental limits. Hence any advance in sensitivity to SMs pushes
the frontier of particle physics in a manner complementary to current efforts at
the Large Hadron Collider. The CeNTREX apparatus will be developed by
integrating a wide array of subsystems - many custom designed and built -
including vacuum systems, a molecular beam source, lasers, optical control and
detection systems, microwave control and transmission systems, precise magnetic
field measurement and control systems, and high voltage systems. The conceptual
design of CeNTREX builds from recent advances using the properties of diatomic
molecules to amplify signals due to new fundamental forces, and in precisely
detecting and manipulating molecules. This novel apparatus will use a cryogenic
beam of diatomic molecules to make the world's most sensitive measurement of a
SM. Detailed estimates of the first-generation measurement using CeNTREX are
projected to yield a 30-fold increase in sensitivity, relative to the current
state of the art, to certain types of time-reversal symmetry violating
interactions that could be responsible for the cosmological matter-antimatter
asymmetry in the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.