* 1827383
* Ship Operations - R/V ROBERT GORDON SPROUL
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,342,817.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) proposes to
continue operating the research vessel Robert&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Sproul to support
NSF-funded scientific research for the five-year period 2018 -2022.
Robert&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Sproul is a capable, well-equipped general-purpose
Coastal Class research vessel that is owned&lt;br/&gt;by the University of
California and has been operated by SIO since the ship's introduction into the
US&lt;br/&gt;Academic Research Fleet in 1985. As a large shared-use facility
scheduled within the collaborative&lt;br/&gt;framework of the University-
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), Robert Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Sproul
will host scientists from across the United States to undertake research in a
variety of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;The ship will be operated in a manner that
promotes safety, capability and efficiency in order to&lt;br/&gt;maximize NSF's
investment in the ship and in programs that are conducted on board. SIO employs
a&lt;br/&gt;disciplined approach to vessel maintenance, regulatory compliance,
foreign clearance, crewing and&lt;br/&gt;logistics so that scientific missions
can be completed successfully and on
schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The observation, measurement, and collection of samples and
data are accomplished on the US West&lt;br/&gt;Coast by scientific missions
aboard Robert Gordon Sproul. SIO-operated ships have played a critical
role&lt;br/&gt;in the exploration of our planet since 1907, and continue to
contribute significantly to the U.S. ocean&lt;br/&gt;research effort. SIO's ship
operations department supports NSF core values of scientific
excellence,&lt;br/&gt;organizational excellence, learning, inclusiveness and
accountability. The vessel management and&lt;br/&gt;operations proposed here
enable transformative scientific research in physical and biological processes
in&lt;br/&gt;the natural environment upon which human well-being depends. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is&lt;br/&gt;amplified by the combined merit
of research projects undertaken by scientists on board. Robert
Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Sproul is currently scheduled to conduct three different NSF-
sponsored programs in 2018 in benthic&lt;br/&gt;ecology, ocean chemistry,
paleoceanography, marine ecology, and ocean instrument research
and&lt;br/&gt;development. Each scientific program contributes its own
distinctive intellectual merit. NSF-sponsored&lt;br/&gt;projects as currently
scheduled will account for 20% (10 days) of Robert Gordon Sproul's work this
year.&lt;br/&gt;The remainder of the work will be supported by the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography (28 days, 54%),&lt;br/&gt;the Navy (12 days, 24 %),
and NOAA (1 day, 2%).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIO's management of Robert Gordon
Sproul enables research, education and training that advance&lt;br/&gt;discovery
and understanding while achieving far-reaching broader impacts. The proposed
management&lt;br/&gt;supports strongly collaborative, multi-disciplinary and
multi-institutional use of the vessel. Through&lt;br/&gt;UNOLS, SIO coordinates
the shared use of Robert Gordon Sproul with scientists and funding agencies
so&lt;br/&gt;shipboard capabilities meet the current and anticipated needs of
the community. SIO is committed to&lt;br/&gt;promoting a climate of fairness,
cooperation, and professionalism on board that embraces
diversity,&lt;br/&gt;equity, and inclusion as essential ingredients of
discovery, technical development, and learning. SIO's&lt;br/&gt;operation of
Robert Gordon Sproul leverages institutional programs that complement NSF's
mission to&lt;br/&gt;promote achievement and progress in science, engineering
and education for the benefit of the nation. For&lt;br/&gt;example, SIO's UC
Ship Funds Program enables graduate and undergraduate students,
postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;researchers and early career faculty to pursue
independent research and instruction aboard Robert Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Sproul via
an internal peer-reviewed competitive process for ship time. The vessel is
integral to SIO's K-&lt;br/&gt;12 education program. In the Footsteps of Robert
Gordon Sproul, which uses oceanography to teach&lt;br/&gt;physical science to
economically disadvantaged seventh- and eighth-grade students. As a broadly
subscribed&lt;br/&gt;shared-use facility, Robert Gordon Sproul similarly
contributes to the education, training and&lt;br/&gt;outreach missions of
scientists from institutions across America who conduct their research
and&lt;br/&gt;educational programs on board. As proposed here, Robert Gordon
Sproul will continue to serve NSF by&lt;br/&gt;safely, capably and efficiently
facilitating multi-disciplinary scientific research to advance
our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of our oceans and
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Statement of Merit
Review&lt;br/&gt; This proposal supports peer-reviewed science through NSF
evaluation process. The renewal of this cooperative agreement included an
external review panel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.