* 1827826
* Collaborative Research: Participatory Technology Assessment and Cultures of Expertise
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* David Tomblin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 96,096.00

This award supports a research project that studies efforts to democratize
expertise in the context of federal agency decision-making. It investigates
whether and how participatory technology assessments have change expert cultures
at NASA, NOAA, and DOE. Very little is known about how participatory technology
assessments, which are public engagement exercises where different stakeholder
groups (including citizen organizations, state systems, and non-government
agencies) interact with technical scientist and technical expert groups, impact
agency decision-making processes and the ways that technical experts think about
lay citizens. The case studies of federal government agencies and their
participatory technology assessment practices that are to be developed in this
project have the potential to inform how numerous types of technical experts
plan and implement such assessments in practice; it will result in practical
lessons learned for improving future collaborations. Beyond academic
publications and conference presentations, the results of this study will be
used to develop a best practices handbook for effective collaboration between
boundary organizations that specialize in public engagement and government
agencies. Results will be presented at the Arizona State Consortium for Science
Policy Outcomes seminar series in Washington, DC, which has a long history of
engaging local and federal agencies, NGOs, and academics interested in the
practical application of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will use a combination of in-depth interviews and document analysis to assess
whether and how participatory technology assessments lead to reflexive changes
in expert views on public input and knowledge, including how experts perceive
and implement public engagement practices in decision making. The research team
has access to technical expert decision-makers in the U.S. federal government
context. As a result, the study will be able to address fundamental knowledge
gaps in the public engagement and expertise literature. It will provide a
comparative, applied account of federal agency expert reflections on their
participation in the adoption, framing, and implementation of participatory
technology assessment and the integration of assessment results into decision-
making processes. It will bring to light how particular federal agency experts
and expert groups are influenced by and challenge the assessment process, and it
will explore the extent to which such assessments serve the role of a reflexive
learning device for technical expert decision-makers. It may also serve to
substantiate existing theories in the public engagement and expertise literature
that merely postulates improvements in decision making processes and techno-
scientific cultural change through public engagement
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.