* 1827788
* PFI-TT: Advanced Prepreg Materials for Robust, Low-Cost Manufacture of Composite Structures
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Timotei Centea, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 03/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project includes lowering
production costs and cost-related entry barriers for the manufacturing of
composite structures in aerospace, wind energy, defense, and other fields. The
proposed technology will allow customers to effectively and reliably control
process-induced defects during production, reducing rates of part rejection or
rework, production costs, and cycle times, while increasing manufacturing
efficiency and robustness. Moreover, the materials manufactured with the
proposed technology will provide a viable solution for in-field repair of
composites, replacing problematic legacy methods and disrupting an area poised
for growth. Educationally, the project will provide opportunities to train
participants in technology advancement and commercialization, and will foster
cooperation between academic and industry participants. Scientifically, the
project will contribute to a deeper and broader understanding of engineering
science and technology associated with composite materials and production
processes. Societally, the project will increase U.S. technical competitiveness
in composites, advanced materials, and advanced manufacturing across multiple
sectors of national interest, create jobs, and contribute to economic growth and
long-term prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
material and process technologies that address long-standing efficiency and
robustness challenges associated with manufacturing of composite structures.
Many sectors, including aerospace, seek to utilize low-pressure out-of-autoclave
(OoA) processing to improve production rates and reduce costs. However,
commercial OoA prepreg materials (fibers impregnated with liquid resin) possess
a sub-optimal design that results in unacceptable defects in non-ideal
manufacturing conditions. This project will develop methods for producing
advanced prepregs with an optimized format by combining partial impregnation and
a discontinuous resin distribution. The project team will (1) develop
industrially-scalable production methods, (2) create prototype materials for two
applications with strong market needs (aerospace structure fabrication, and in-
field repair), and (3) perform scale-up trials in realistic conditions for
validation and demonstration. These activities require knowledge, use, and
control of complex physical processes, including deformation of multi-scale
fiber beds, multi-phase fluid flow, and microstructural defect formation.
Technical work will advance knowledge in advanced manufacturing, materials
science, and composites processing, and lead to viable methods for producing
innovative prepregs. Overall, the project will derive intellectual merit from
leveraging and applying fundamental insights, developing new science-based
materials and systems, and providing a technical basis for further
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.