* 1827373
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Computing Equipment for Research and Teaching at an Undergraduate Liberal Arts College
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Amy Yuen, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 151,164.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Grant award supports the acquisition of a
high-performance computing (HPC) system, the first large-scale,
interdisciplinary research cluster at Middlebury College, a research intensive
undergraduate institution. Cutting-edge research in the natural and social
sciences utilizes digital technology to model and evaluate important social,
environmental and scientific problems. Sophisticated modeling techniques and
expanding datasets require the processing capabilities of a multi-processor
server with the capability to read and analyze datasets sized as large as
several hundred gigabytes or low terabytes. High-performance computing systems
offer computing power that is useable across any discipline with computer
modeling or data analysis applications. The research to be supported by this
equipment is varied and impactful, ranging from studies of the impact of trade
and agricultural technology on food markets to genomic studies of variation in
pain sensitivity. This proposal includes nine separate research projects slated
to use the HPC system with many more in queue. Overall, this substantial
increase in processing capability enhances the scope of existing research at
Middlebury and makes possible new projects that would have otherwise been
impossible with existing computing infrastructure. HPC also supports faculty-
mentored research-training programs in the social and natural sciences,
fulfilling a critical part of the college's teaching mission. Middlebury College
takes special effort to recruit and support underrepresented minorities in the
STEM and STEM-related social sciences. HPC increases student access to faculty-
guided research in these fields. The research to be conducted focuses primarily
on human behaviors with the potential to refine best practices in neurological
and genomic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects will
leverage the HPC resource across political science, economics, neuroscience,
computer science and biology. One project examines heterogeneous causes for
unemployment and their impact on labor market recovery rates, suggesting more
targeted corrective measures for unemployment. A neuroscience study explores
pain perception and stress responses, focusing on how animals learn in response
to noxious stimuli and tying particular genes to variation in responses. Two
other projects involve DNA sequencing. One offers new modeling techniques to
improve genotype prediction from observed data; another examines toxic algae
blooms and investigates viruses as bloom-mitigation mechanisms using genome
sequencing techniques. The flexibility of HPC makes it a multi-disciplinary tool
to enhance research across STEM-related social sciences and more traditional
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.