* 1827525
* PFI-TT: Molecular Identification of Chemical Substances with a Multi-stage Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Gary Eiceman, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 247,822.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project arises with enhanced
capability for humans to know the chemical composition of airborne vapors and
other materials which may contain substances of some toxicity or danger.
Enhancements are made on principles and practices of a method for chemical
measurements known as ion mobility spectrometry which already provides security
in commercial aviation with explosives detection and in military preparedness
for monitoring chemical warfare agents. Innovations in this project will advance
measurement technology by increasing confidence in detecting chemicals by
extracting additional knowledge from the substances. Such improvements will
benefit specialists needing high speed, portable chemical analyzers and society
broadly when such analyzers are employed in security, medical, and consumer
applications. The innovations in technology necessitate discovery and
development on the behavior of substances as gas ions in strong electric fields.
Understandings of these behaviors should have impacts in chemical measurements
science and other physical sciences beyond this particular
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project solves a key
limitation in existing chemical analyzers based on ion mobility spectrometry
which are capable only of highly selective detection and are unable to provide
accurate chemical identification of substances. The objective in this project is
to enable chemical identification of substances using sequential multi stage
processing of gas ions derived from a substance in small planar embodiments of
ion mobility spectrometry. In these structures, chemical class specific
fragments are generated in strong electric fields in air at ambient pressure, a
topic which is largely unexplored. This project will explore and mature this
topic with technology refinement and descriptions of fundamental processes. The
maturation of this technology should lead to a demonstrator analyzer which
permits evaluations of performance for some specific applications and the
assessment of a pathway to commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.