* 1827343
* NSF-BSF: DYNAMICS OF MATERIALS FAILURE
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Alain Karma, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2023
* USD 298,987.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and the United
States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this
collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The
NSF Division of Materials Research (DMR) funds this award, which supports
research and educational activities focused on the dynamics of materials
failure. Designing safe and robust materials for transportation, energy storage,
or biomedical implants requires a basic understanding of crack propagation that
is the most common mode of materials failure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is aimed at understanding how cracks propagate in brittle materials such as
glass, ceramics, and some polymeric materials and metals, which typically
fracture abruptly. While traditional fracture mechanics predicts that brittle
cracks should rapidly accelerate along a straight path to reach the speed at
which sound travels over a flat surface, cracks are experimentally observed to
reach less than half of that speed. For reasons that are not fundamentally
understood, crack propagation becomes dynamically unstable, thereby causing
cracks to strongly deviate from a straight path and preventing them from
reaching their sonic limiting speed. This research will center on using
computation and models to produce a more complete picture of unstable crack
propagation in brittle materials for various fracture geometries investigated
experimentally and different materials structures and properties. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Basic insights into dynamic fracture instabilities are expected to
improve our fundamental theoretical understanding of materials failure,
contributing to both further developments of computational methods and the
theory of cracks. Advances in understanding may help predict the failure of a
wide range of biological, engineering, and geophysical materials. This project
will contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate students in the US
and Israel, and include school outreach and teaching activities in both
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The National
Science Foundation and the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation
(BSF) jointly support this collaboration between a US-based researcher and an
Israel-based researcher. The NSF Division of Materials Research funds this award
that supports research and education on crack propagation, a topic of both
fundamental and practical interest. While the classical theory of linear elastic
fracture mechanics predicts that cracks in brittle materials should smoothly
accelerate to their sonic limiting velocity, cracks are widely observed to
develop dynamic instabilities before reaching this velocity. Depending on the
onset velocity of instability and dimensionality, instabilities can be varied
and complex. They may manifest as facet formation, micro-branching, crack tip
oscillations or tip splitting. Despite their fundamental importance and apparent
similarities to other interfacial pattern instabilities in condensed-matter
physics and materials science, how dimensionality and material properties, such
as elastic nonlinearity and heterogeneities, individually or jointly contribute
to produce those dynamic fracture instabilities remains poorly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to combine novel theoretical
and computational approaches to understand at a fundamental level the mechanisms
and interrelations of varied dynamic fracture instabilities. Computational
studies will exploit the phase-field approach, which describes the short-scale
physics of failure and macroscopic elasticity within a self-consistent set of
equations that can be used to simulate complex crack paths and to establish
quantitative benchmark comparisons with experiments. Simulations will be guided,
and their results interpreted, by further development of a theory of cracks that
accounts for elastic nonlinearity. Studies will center on investigating the role
of dimensionality, heterogeneities, and nonlinearity in dynamic instabilities,
helping to address largely unanswered questions such as: Why do cracks
accelerate to nearly their sonic speeds in quasi two-dimensional (2D)
geometries, but become unstable in the form of facet formation or micro-
branching at much lower speed in 3D geometries? Are 3D instabilities due to the
increased dimensionality of the crack front from a point in 2D to a line in 3D,
or does nucleation of a facet or micro-branch require the interaction of the
crack front with a localized heterogeneity? Does elastic nonlinearity and its
associated emergent length scale, recently shown by phase-field simulations to
play a key role in the oscillatory instability of high speed cracks in 2D, play
a role in 3D instabilities? Moreover, how are facet formation and micro-
branching related? Simulation results will be quantitatively compared to
experimental observations in brittle gels, which provide unique capability to
visualize in situ crack front dynamics in 2D and 3D during the fracture process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic insights into dynamic fracture instabilities are
expected to improve our fundamental theoretical understanding of materials
failure, contributing to both further developments of the phase-field method and
the theory of cracks that may help predict the failure of a wide range of
natural, technological, and geophysical brittle materials. In addition, this
project offers unique opportunities for engaging and training the next
generation of scientists through K-12 school outreach activities and graduate-
level teaching material developed and shared by the PIs in the US and Israel,
which use simple experiments, teaching modules, and projects to convey the
excitement of understanding how things break.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.