* 1827024
* IRES Track I: Collaborative Research: U.S.-Indonesian Research Experience for Students on Sustainable Adaptation of Coastal Areas to Environmental Change
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Magaly Koch, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,304.00

This is a collaborative three year IRES project for 18 US students to gain
international research experience in earth, life and data sciences as applied to
the coastal region of Northern Central Java, Indonesia. The collaborative
activities will be performed in partnership between Boston University (BU),
Tufts University (TU) and the University of Diponegoro (UNDIP), Semarang,
Indonesia. A cohort of six students per year will gain hands-on laboratory and
field experience in coastal zone research during a six-week stay at the foreign
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal cities worldwide are facing the
enormous task to become resilient against physical, social and economic
challenges, in addition to challenges due to climate variations. Semarang
(Indonesia) is one of the cities that exemplifies the multiple threats affecting
society, economy, environment, and infrastructure. Assessing the impacts of
present and future coastal hazards requires an understanding of the complex
interactions between geological, hydrological, biophysical and socioeconomic
systems. This can be best achieved by an integrated approach that includes
research on both land and sea dynamics to identify natural and anthropogenic
factors, their relative influences and related consequences. This project seeks
to undertake effective, innovative, and transformative research to understand
how coastal environments respond to natural and anthropogenic factors.
Geospatial technology combined with big data analytics will be applied to
assessing and monitoring the effects of coastal hazards with the goal to enable
the sustainable adaptation of coastal areas to global environmental change.
Students will learn data acquisition techniques and the ability to analyze and
interpret scientific information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will combine field experience with cutting edge geospatial technology and data
analytics to investigate the following research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Is land
subsidence in Semarang coastal area mainly caused by natural or anthropogenic
processes? Or both? How can we determine the prevailing factors; whether it is
due to groundwater abstraction, tectonic movement, volcanic activities or a
combination of factors? &lt;br/&gt;2. To what extent is the marine productivity
of coastal waters near Semarang city affected by changing climatologic
conditions of oceanic and atmospheric parameters in Java Sea? How is climate
variations impacting fisheries resources and the economic productivity of
coastal communities? How can we build models that show the linkages?
&lt;br/&gt;3. How can we effectively monitor and assess coastal marine
ecosystems health and productivity? Are artificial patch reefs and mangrove
reforestation efforts in Semarang coastal region effective solutions for
protecting and rehabilitating coastal ecosystems? &lt;br/&gt;4. How can
geospatial technology and big data analytics help in revealing crucial
interactions between ecological, economic and policy aspects to assess and
manage the environmental risks? How can we measure and assess the changes in
food intake pattern and food safety in relation to extreme weather and coastal
hazards?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a long term
collaborative research and training program between US and Indonesian faculty
and students. US students majoring in STEM fields will have an opportunity to
conduct research and field work in an international and multi-disciplinary
setting by engaging in problem solving research activities. They will be
mentored by foreign collaborators and US PIs through web video conferencing and
workshops jointly taught at the collaborating institution. The IRES experience
is expected to a) broaden and leverage partnerships with overseas institutions,
b) enhance US-student global awareness and perspectives, and c) develop multi-
disciplinary themes that improve understanding of global change such as coral
bleaching, habitat diversity, and coastal hazards. Research findings will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and presentations at
conferences. In partnership with UNDIP and relevant agencies in Northern Central
Java region, decision support products resulting from this project will be
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.