* 1827338
* Creation, Maintenance, and Mobility of Neolithic Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Clark Larsen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,846.00

The Neolithic marks the shift from a mobile hunting and gathering lifestyle to
one centered on production and consumption of domesticated plants and animals
and life in sedentary villages. Central Anatolia is a key location in the
development and spread of the domestication of plants and animals. However,
little is known about the genetic and social structure of this region during the
Neolithic. The goal of the project is to fill this gap through bioarchaeological
and genetic studies of these Neolithic communities. This study marks a new
approach to exploring archaeological questions through a robust integration of
genetics, archaeology, and osteology. The project will support student training,
international research collaborations, and public science
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate human skeletal
remains to explore the creation, maintenance, and mobility of Neolithic
communities in central Anatolia. Specifically, data on ancient DNA (aDNA) and
dental morphology and metrics will be integrated from multiple archaeological
sites that span the Epipaleolithic (~12,500 to 11,500 cal BCE) to the late
Neolithic (5550 cal BCE). These localities cover a large span of time within a
defined geographic area, contain excellent contextual information, and have
produced a large set of human remains that are amenable to dental and genetic
analyses. These biological data will then be used to test regional questions and
hypotheses about population development and movement as well as social structure
to understand this process of "Neolithization." This study moves the emphasis
from grand-scale analyses to regional questions about the Neolithic, to include
population interaction, social structure, and regional development. Finally,
this work will provide state-of-the art results on the use of aDNA in studying
kinship and local social structures in conjunction with skeletal data to augment
sample sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.