* 1827195
* IRES Track I: International Research and Professional Development Experience for Students in Ecology and Conservation of Endangered Wildlife of Nosy Be, Madagascar
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Heithaus, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,438.00

International Research and Professional Development Experience for Students on
the Ecology and Conservation of Wildlife in Nosy Be,
Madagascar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and professional
development program will take place in Madagascar, one of the highest priority
biodiversity hotspots in the world, with levels of endemism unmatched by any
other country. The research goal of this program is to characterize the status
of Nosy Be Island's endangered and charismatic terrestrial and marine species
and identify the threats driving their declines. The research team of local and
international researchers will train undergraduate students from the US and
Madagascar to use a variety of wildlife research methods and social science
surveys. Using these acquired skills, students will generate critical data on
the conservation status of endangered marine and terrestrial species, including
primates (lemurs), sea turtles, and dolphins. During this 3-year project
students will, along with mentor, develop an understanding of the drivers of
wildlife declines and design sustainable programs to protect them. Science-based
management is particularly important in Madagascar because terrestrial and
marine ecosystems are experiencing alarming rates of biodiversity loss and
habitat destruction in the face of food security challenges to local human
populations. This project will create opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students from both countries to adapt field methods to research
questions in the context of generating cost-effective data to achieve
sustainable conservation goals. Most importantly, this program will produce
cohorts of highly trained scientists in the field of conservation biology with a
deep understanding of real-world challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generating
baseline ecological data on rare and charismatic endangered species is critical
for conservation and wildlife management, particularly in data-poor areas where
conflicts between human activities and biodiversity are acute. All research
projects will address at least one of three objectives: (1) assess the critical
habitats and density trends of six endangered flagship species, including three
lemurs, one species of cetacean and one species of sea turtle, (2) investigate
the environmental drivers of their abundance and their decline, and (3) assess
the impact of potential mitigation measures. Each cohort of students (6 students
per year) will base their research questions on the findings of previous
cohorts, enabling us to develop a comprehensive understanding of the causes of
decline and measures to preserve Nosy Be's wildlife. This research and
professional development program has four stages: 1) pre-field training at
Florida International University, 2) data collection in Madagascar, 3) data-
analysis and reporting at FIU and 4) future-cohort input and supervision where
students will share their experiences and support new cohorts. During field
activities, students will be trained to 1) use standard methods to rapidly
assess the conservation status of endangered species in the field and 2) use a
combination of field and social science survey methods to conduct animal
assessments. During class activities students will be trained to 1) write
research proposals and field protocols, 2) use advanced statistical methods to
analyze field data, 3) write technical and non-technical publications, 4) do
oral presentations of their research, and 5) collaborate and mentor other
students. Ultimately, this research program will provide critical data on the
conservation status of endangered marine and terrestrial wildlife in Nosy Be,
Madagascar, and will provide students with key research and conservation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.