* 1827322
* Collaborative Research: The Curriculum Mapping Tool for Sociology: Development, Implementation, Assessment, and Dissemination
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Susan Ferguson, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2023
* USD 92,635.00

In an increasingly technological society, the improvement of undergraduate
preparedness for STEM fields is of vital interest to the advancement of science,
health, prosperity, and national defense. Evidence indicates that students in
many undergraduate STEM programs progress through their majors without
sufficient engagement with scientific content, especially with respect to data
analysis and rigorous scientific inquiry. Clear learning objectives coupled with
meaningful assessment have great promise to address this concern. The proposed
study seeks to refine and disseminate a curriculum development tool and
facilitate its use in 150 undergraduate sociology programs. The tool will assist
faculty members in their efforts to evaluate programmatic strengths and
weaknesses with respect to seventy objectives contained within twelve
overarching recommendations advanced by the American Sociological Association's
report "The Sociology Major in the Changing Landscape of Higher Education:
Curriculum, Careers, and Online Learning." The tool will facilitate curriculum
review, guide faculty members through the process of curriculum revision, and
provide benchmarking data. The project is designed to help departments
understand how they compare to peer institutions. If successful, the curriculum
mapping tool can be modified for use in other STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has four distinct goals. Goal 1 is to develop a
curriculum mapping tool for sociology, which draws upon an already tested tool
developed by the researchers. The tool will integrate spreadsheets, videos, and
other supplemental components within a survey platform. Goal 2 is to engage 150
sociology departments in curriculum mapping activities, which involves teaching
faculty the process of curriculum mapping and gauging their response to insights
identified. Goal 3 is to benchmark conformance to recommended curricular
standards, which requires analyzing the curriculum maps developed in individual
departments. Goal 4 is to assess the impact that curriculum mapping has on
program quality, which involves identifying the extent that curriculum mapping
produced meaningful changes to course offerings and program structures.
Department chairs will be surveyed at three points over the course of three
years, providing detailed information on faculty receptivity to curriculum
mapping and impacts on program design at their institutions. Impact of exposure
to benchmarking data will be examined with a randomized experimental design.
Curriculum maps generated will document the extent to which departments conform
to disciplinary standards. In addition to publication of results, leading
scholars of teaching and learning in other STEM fields will be shown how
curriculum mapping operates within sociology programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.