* 1827567
* EDGE:  Functional genomics in Polistes wasps, a model system in integrative organismal biology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Reed, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 815,610.00

Recent technological advances in DNA sequencing have fueled important new
discoveries in many fields of biology. The "genomic revolution" has provided a
wealth of data to unravel the mysteries of how diverse organisms evolve,
interact, and respond to their environments. However, a major hurdle has been
that the vast majority of studies are correlative. Tools allowing researchers to
pinpoint causal associations between genes and traits are limited. This research
will apply the latest technology to study gene function in an emerging model for
organismal biology, Polistes wasps. These insects, commonly known as paper
wasps, are well-studied, cosmopolitan, social insects. Because of their
abundance in human environments, ease of experimental manipulation, and rapidly
developing genomic resources, they are poised to address many integrative
organismal biology questions (including speciation, behavior, development, and
neuroscience). The project will employ two cutting edge technologies for gene
manipulation along with focused efforts to breed and maintain colonies in the
laboratory, in order to test causality for several genes associated with traits
such as coloration, learning, aggression, and development. This work can have a
catalytic impact on a growing community of researchers interested in using
social insects to address a wide variety of questions in organismal biology,
applied entomology and agriculture. Training and mentoring in the latest
methodologies will be provided to one postdoctoral researcher, one graduate
student, one research technician, and numerous undergraduates. Results,
resources and methods will be disseminated widely to the research community
through symposia, lab exchanges, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop resources for functional genomics in Polistes fuscatus
wasps using a three-pronged approach. First, the researchers will use RNA-
interference (RNAi) for ecologically relevant tests of candidate gene function.
Functional genomic tests can be performed in the wild, allowing for assessment
of gene function in an ecologically relevant context. The project will improve
RNAi efficiency through experimenting with technical parameters and biological
conditions and test candidate genes for roles in phenotypes such as caste
development and cognition. Second, the researchers will establish methods for
controlled mating in the laboratory, and continuous rearing, aiming to contract
the colony cycle, induce nest founding, and induce egg laying to provide
continuous availability of insects for research. These developments will
establish Polistes as a tractable model for rearing stable lines for functional
genomics. Third, using gene editing with CRISPR/Cas9, the team will produce
first generation (G0) wasps by injecting embryos and targeting the pigmentation
gene yellow, with the goal of producing transgenic mosaics with non-lethal but
readily observable phenotypic effects. Successful mutant G0s will be used to
produce stable transgenic lines in the lab for yellow and then move on to other
target genes of interest. This work may transform Polistes wasps into a
functional genomic model system for numerous areas of organismal biology. The
work is also unique in that it will allow for tests of gene function under
controlled conditions in the laboratory as well as in the field, providing the
major advantage of addressing how gene function depends on environmental
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.