* 1827009
* IRES Track I: International Research Experience for Students on Non-Volatile Processor Based Self-Powered Embedded Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jingtong Hu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The objective of this project is to provide U.S. students with valuable research
experience related to battery-less embedded systems in future Internet of Things
(IoT) in China, which has one of the world's largest electronic industry and
market. The project will select five (5) graduate students and two (2)
undergraduate students nation-wide each year and support them to visit Tsinghua
University (THU) over a period of eight (8) weeks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vision of IoT is to embed small computers into objects around our daily life to
improve our economy and societal well-being. It is estimated that the Internet
of Things (IoT) will consist of almost 50 billion objects by 2020. However, one
of the biggest challenges is how to power these billions of embedded devices
since batteries need frequent recharging and impose health and environmental
concerns. In this project, the students will work with renowned research groups
at THU to develop future IoT sensors that can reply on energy harvested from
ambient environment sources, such as solar energy, radio frequency energy,
kinetic energy, and thermal energy. Since ambient energy is intrinsically
intermittent, the students will conduct research on nano-scale device, circuits,
system, and software to realize computer systems that can work with intermittent
energy supply. Such systems will dramatically improve our capability of
collecting data while reducing the maintenance costs. Potential applications
include smart healthcare, smart building and infrastructure monitoring, smart
environmental monitoring, etc. This IRES project will not only offer U.S.
students an opportunity to work in one of the best engineering research
universities in China, but also fully immerse them in a foreign environment and
improve their talents in working with a global team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project contains well-planned recruitment, preparation, mentoring and post-trip
activities. The proposed research targets at nano-scale device, circuits,
system, and software issues in battery-less embedded systems that need to be
addressed urgently. The first project aims to develop fast, energy efficient,
and uniform write operations for nano-scale memory device, which is critical to
tolerate intermittency of harvested energy. The project addresses a fundamental
inconsistency issue when the NVP is interacting with external volatile
peripheral devices, which is one of the most imminent roadblocks towards wide
application of NVPs. &lt;br/&gt;The second project addresses a fundamental
inconsistency issue when the battery-less device is collecting data and
communicating with external devices. The project aims to develop efficient and
accurate binarized neural network for individual ultraviolet (UV) exposure
pattern recognition system running on nonvolatile IoT platform, which could be
generalized to many other applications. &lt;br/&gt; The third project aims to
develop efficient and accurate artificial intelligence for individual
ultraviolet (UV) exposure pattern recognition system running on battery-less IoT
platform, which could be generalized to many other applications. It can be
anticipated that with the close interaction with THU and the Beijing Innovation
Center for Future Chips, the breakthroughs made from these projects can have a
direct impact on future IoT market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable
U.S. students to conduct high-quality research on realizing battery-less
embedded systems, in collaboration with their faculty mentors in THU. Such
experiences expose U.S. students to the international research community at a
critical early stage in their careers. It is expected that through participating
in this program, U.S. students will gain extensive experience on
the&lt;br/&gt;research of embedded computer systems, on the culture of China,
and on performing and collaborating in an international environment in general.
The experience will also be shared to the broader community through the personal
social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube, Web2.0 based forum,
carefully integrated activities such as research for undergraduate students,
minorities and underrepresented groups, as well as outreach events for local
K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.