* 1827087
* IRES Track 1: Self-assembled liquids and thin films for efficient photon upconversion with triplet excitons in air
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ming Tang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The scientific goal of this IRES is to gain better understanding for the
fabrication of air-stable, photon upconversion thin films or liquids that can
operate efficiently with diffuse sunlight, without the need of volatile organic
solvents that currently limit practical use in applications. Complete immersion
in Japanese society by spending four to eight weeks in Kyushu University will
provide an opportunity to experience and understand the people, traditions and
culture. The cultural and scientific exposure that the U.S. students will obtain
from this international collaboration will be invaluable. Kyushu University is
one of the top-ranked universities in Japan, and the cosmopolitan metropolis of
Fukuoka is welcoming to foreigners. This opportunity is expected to enhance the
global competitiveness of the participating students in the STEM workforce, and
will be made available to qualified U.S. students, especially those
underrepresented in science and engineering, by broadly reaching out to the
California State university system, the Univ. of California system, and students
attending professional conferences organized for example, by the American
Chemical Society and Materials Research Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
international collaboration, four U.S. undergraduate and/ or graduate
participants per year will perform fundamental research on triplet-fusion based
photon upconversion both in California and Japan. The fusion of molecular
excited states with triplet character is the only method for directly
upconverting photons from the sun. While these high photon upconversion quantum
yields have been demonstrated in volatile organic solvents, they are generally
lower in thin film due to poor triplet exciton diffusion. The U.S. students will
be synthesizing and fabricating liquid or thin-films of semiconductor
nanocrystals and molecular emitters organized in various hosts, including
proteins, organogels and surfactants, to understand and control the diffusion of
photogenerated triplet excitons. This project aims to use semiconductor
nanocrystals to absorb light strongly in the near-infrared wavelengths to
address one of the major limitations in molecular triplet photosensitizers. The
hybrid nanomaterials will be designed to halt the spontaneous crystallization of
the molecular emitter with nitrene crosslinking chemistry; increase triplet
diffusion lengths in liquids or thin films with long-range order in covalent
organic frameworks and establish a barrier to oxygen to prevent the quenching of
spin-triplet excitons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.