* 1827717
* PFI-RP: Sensors, Computational Modeling, and Bioanalytical Technologies for Closed-Loop Lyophilization
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Dimitrios Peroulis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is in providing
real-time sensor technologies, computational modeling and bioanalytical tools
for accelerated manufacturing of lyophilized pharmaceuticals that will enable
more cost-efficient manufacturing of life-saving medicines. Over 40% of the
biopharmaceuticals approved by FDA since 2008 are marketed in lyophilized dosage
forms, and many pharmaceutical products could not be commercially viable without
lyophilization. However, lyophilization is among the most expensive and time-
consuming unit operations in pharmaceutical manufacturing, with batch-mode
operation, open-loop processing, and lack of real-time product quality
monitoring. A typical production lyophilization cycle usually takes from a few
days to two weeks with typical operating costs of over $50,000 per day. As much
as 30% of this time is wasted because of overly conservative cycles due to lack
of in-process product monitoring and closed-loop control. This project will
translate to manufacturing readiness several technologies that are currently in
development and will accelerate the transition to automated lyophilization and
enable "self-driving" lyophilizers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project addresses three interconnected technical challenges by co-
development of: (i) Noninvasive product temperature monitoring using wireless
probes that are compatible with aseptic processing requirements; (ii)
Accelerated biomolecule stability analytics by solid-state hydrogen-deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry; and (iii) Real-time lyophilization rate measurement
and closed-loop process control based on distributed wireless probes and
computational modeling of the heat and mass transfer in the product, container
and the lyophilizer equipment. The project activities are expected to advance
knowledge in several fields, namely a) fluid/thermal transport in low-pressure
conditions; b) flexible hybrid electronics for RF systems in extreme
environments; c) biomolecule degradation mechanisms and analytical methods. The
technologies will be implemented in a lyophilizer at Purdue's lyophilization
technology demonstration facility and tested under realistic manufacturing
constraints in collaboration with industry partners. The research and technology
development activities will be complemented by dissemination of results to the
lyophilization user community. Educational modules related to technologies
developed in this program will be included in training courses organized by
LyoHUB, an industry-university consortium based at Purdue University.
Additionally, by cooperating with Purdue Foundry, the team will educate students
in commercialization for engineering and pharmaceutical technology
inventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.