* 1827545
* PFI-TT: Multi-Channel Probe System for Multi-Functional Atomic Force Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Hanna Cho, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to bring a
paradigm change in the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) probe market from a single-
channel to multi-channel probe. AFM is one of the most powerful tools to image
and characterize materials with nanometer scale resolution, leading to the
extensive development of nano-/bio- science and technology. While there has been
a significant improvement in all other aspects of AFM components, the AFM probe
design has not changed from a simple rectangular or triangular beam over the
past 30+ years. The proposed AFM probe can extend its functionality from a
single-channel to multi-channel probe such that it can be easily employed in
various AFM schemes to characterize multi-physical properties beyond topography.
Thus, AFM users can effortlessly implement the advanced multi-functional AFM
schemes with minimal ambiguity, complications, and artifacts, by simply
employing this new AFM probe. The proposed innovation will forward the market
position of the US AFM industry and the industries that rely on AFM utilization.
As an unmatched and versatile tool to uncover important fundamentals in many
areas of science and technology, the advancement of AFM will lead to further
scientific discoveries and new technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to overcome the technical barriers related to
manufacturability, reliability, and repeatability in order to accelerate
commercialization. The prototype device used for performance demonstration was
individually fabricated by modifying a commercially available AFM cantilever
with a focused ion beam (FIB) based milling process and transfer-printing
assembly technique. In order to transform the new AFM probe technology into a
promising commercial reality, we need to address the important technical and
commercial hurdles. Therefore, the main objectives of this proposal are (i)
development of a batch manufacturing process for the new probe design, (ii)
topology optimization of the probe design to guarantee the reliability and
performance robustness over the wide range of operating parameters, (iii)
demonstration of the functionality of the new probe design in customer settings
beyond the PI's laboratory, and (iv) development of commercialization strategy
and execution plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.