* 1827437
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* S. Bradley Moran, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2024
* USD 42,747,906.00

R/V Sikuliaq is owned by the National Science Foundation and operated by the
University of Alaska Fairbanks College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, as part
of the U.S. Academic Research Fleet. Sikuliaq is used by scientists in the U.S.
and by the international oceanographic community through the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). This Ship Operations proposal requests
funding necessary to support NSF-funded R/V Sikuliaq operations in CY2018, which
currently amount to 153 days out of a total of 190 operational days at sea.
These NSF-funded ship days are in support of 10 research projects for
CY2018.community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching intellectual and technical
merit of R/V Sikuliaq is in supporting the advancement of NSF peer-reviewed
oceanographic research and education programs. In particular, the twelve cruises
planned for CY2018 supported by this Ship Operations proposal provide an
excellent opportunity to display Sikuliaq's capability in oceanographic
observation, collection, and measurement of samples and data accomplished on a
global scale through operation of this state-of-the-art vessel. The intellectual
and technical merit of this proposal is further amplified by the combined
intellectual and technical merit of research projects undertaken by scientists
onboard. During 2018, Sikuliaq will support ten NSF-sponsored research cruises
in the eastern Pacific and Arctic Oceans to conduct research in physical
oceanography, marine ecology, marine chemistry, and ocean observing. NSF
sponsored research (including Ocean Observing Initiative research) will account
for 71% (176 days) of Sikuliaq's work this year. The remainder of the work will
be supported by the Navy (41 days, 17%), and the North Pacific Research Board
(28 days, 11%). Each program contributes its own unique intellectual and
technical merit, which are supported by Sikuliaq
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work constitutes strongly
collaborative, multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional use of the shared-use
research and education infrastructure. CY2018 will be Sikuliaq's first season
working in Arctic waters under the Polar Code regulations, which will provide a
good test of the vessel's capabilities to support missions in the Arctic while
adhering to the strict Polar Code rules. As a charter member of UNOLS, UAF is
actively involved in coordinating research vessel operations with scientists and
funding agencies so shipboard capabilities can best meet the current and
anticipated research needs of the entire community. The spectrum of research
projects enabled by UAF's operation of Sikuliaq achieves far-reaching broader
impacts through the operation and maintenance of infrastructure. This effort is
critical to the advancement of training and learning, scientific and
technological understanding, and informing policy makers. UAF's proposed
operation of Sikuliaq enables institutional programs from across the nation and
internationally to directly implement NSF's mission to promote advancement of
science, engineering and education for the benefit of the nation. As a shared-
use resource for ocean scientists, Sikuliaq similarly contributes to the
education, training and outreach missions of those scientists and their home
institutions. Finally, as part of the broader impacts in operating Sikuliaq, we
regularly engage with Alaska Native communities and subsistence hunters (e.g.,
the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission) to ensure the productive coordination
between these groups, the scientific community, and R/V
Sikuliaq.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.