* 1827565
* PFI-TT: Software for Automated Real-time Electroencephalogram Seizure Detection in Intensive Care Units
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Joseph Picone, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2021
* USD 215,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is that it will lead
to improved clinical outcomes for neurological patients in intensive care units
(ICUs). Although the data acquired using continuous electroencephalography (EEG)
in the ICU is inexpensive to record and a rich source of information for guiding
clinical decision making, it is often not used because it takes too long to be
analyzed manually. The proposed technology will be capable of evaluating EEGs in
real-time in order to alert doctors when clinically relevant events such as
seizures occur. This will improve patient outcomes by allowing doctors to
intervene with medications in a timelier and more precise fashion. This work
will also have the broader impact of improving science's understanding of the
fundamentals of how machine learning can be applied specifically to neural
signal processing, which is currently a poorly understood area.

The proposed project will enable and accelerate the commercialization of
software technology that detects seizures and abnormal brain activity in
Intensive Care Unit patients. This will be accomplished with three main tasks.
In the first task, the existing seizure detection software, which currently
works offline, will be converted to work in real-time with a target latency of
20 seconds to detect a seizure. This will be accomplished through intelligent
memory handling and by developing a low-latency, highly optimized post-
processing algorithm. The second task will strengthen the existing seizure
detection code to operate at clinically acceptable levels of sensitivity and
false alarm rates. This will be achieved by retraining our algorithms on a
significantly more diverse and complex EEG database in order to expose the
software to as many variations of seizure presentation as possible. In the third
and final task, extensive software testing will be conducted in order to
optimize the machine learning configuration that maximizes the gains achieved in
Tasks 1 and 2.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.