* 1827184
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Integrating Big Data Instrumentation into Campus Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 323,327.00

Rapid advancements in data-intensive scientific instrumentation have greatly
outpaced the capability of campus networking infrastructures to effectively
connect big data-producing facilities to powerful computing and storage systems.
This delays the analysis, use and dissemination of a huge amount of valuable
scientific data for discovery and innovation in multiple science and engineering
domains. Purdue's project bridges this gap by improving the campus high-speed
network infrastructure between five big data instrument facilities and the
centrally supported cyberinfrastructure (CI) consisting of supercomputers, large
storage systems and network connections to outside the campus. The facilities
support accelerated research in new materials, understanding brain functions and
viruses, monitoring lower atmospheric weather, employing geospatial data in
teaching and public engagement, and secure computing. The project builds upon a
strong partnership between campus information technology experts and domain
scientists. It also helps prepare the next generation of CI professionals by
pairing student workers with the campus CI experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project adds high-speed Science DMZ connections to the five selected big data
facilities enabling high-volume, high-velocity, or interactive science data
flows to both the campus research cyberinfrastructure and off campus facilities.
Existing Cisco Nexus 7710 network switches at the distribution layer are
augmented with new 40-Gigabit networking modules, increasing bandwidth to 20-80
Gigabits per second. This should yield a significant increase in research
productivity, and more timely publication and dissemination of research data and
results, through faster data transfer, easier access to the central computing
infrastructure, and more effectively utilizing Purdue's 100-Gigabit WAN
connections and research network peerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.