* 1827925
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Computational Design of Topological Superconductors and Weyl - Dirac Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/05/2017,10/31/2019
* Ashvin Vishwanath, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2019
* USD 81,964.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award. It
supports a close interaction of theoretical and computational research to
develop novel theoretical and computational methods and tools for calculating
and predicting materials properties, and to use them to discover new materials
with novel functionalities. The PIs will develop methods that combine a
predictive computational method based on density functional theory with methods
from the quantum mechanical theories of many interacting particles and methods
from computer science. The PIs will focus on the discovery of new states of
electrons that are predicted to exist in materials and involve new ways for
electrons organize themselves. The organization obeys rules governed by
topology, a mathematical theory that focuses on properties of objects that
remain unchanged by deformation. While subtle, topological phases are robust
being able to survive materials deformations and imperfections. These new
topological states include new kinds of insulators, metals and superconductors.
The new tools will enable the PIs and the community to predict specific
materials with new electronic topological states that may arise in materials
such as topological semimetals and superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;This research
effort includes developing and disseminating a new software tool, TOP STUDIO,
which will enhance and simplify research on material specific studies of new
states of matter. Experimentalists, materials scientists and engineers in the US
and in other countries will be able to use the user friendly interface of TOP
STUDIO to calculate properties of compounds. The software will enable education
on topological properties of electrons in solids at advanced undergraduate and
graduate levels. The project will involve and train graduate students and
postdocs who will receive a unique interdisciplinary training in computational
and theoretical condensed matter physics and materials. Providing well-written
objected oriented modern software, using a standardized interface will allow for
broader participation of the community in this research area and for educating
the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
contribute funds to this award. It supports development of new computational
methods combining robust electronic structure methods with an advanced many-body
theory and machine learning algorithms. The main objective of this project is to
develop and implement new methods for the search and discovery of advanced
quantum materials with novel magnetic, superconducting and transport
characteristics that rely on topologically protected states. The search includes
materials that are Weyl-Dirac semimetals and topological superconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;The research nurtures the close interaction between theory and
computation. The computational approach is based on density functional theory,
which is able to predict some properties of many materials including metals and
semiconductors, combined with dynamical mean field theory, which includes some
effects of strong correlation. To tackle the variety of interactions needed to
discover various topological phases in real materials new theoretical methods,
powerful algorithms, and computer programs will be developed. Linear response
theory will be utilized in order to predict full wave vector and frequency
dependent interactions controlling topological superconductivity phenomena.
Floquet theory will be used to study topological phases induced by time-
dependent fields. The resulting software will contribute to the tools used to
search, predict, and discover new materials with topologically protected states
of electrons.&lt;br/&gt;The new TOP STUDIO software will be created with a user-
friendly interface designed to allow materials exploration by non-experts, by
materials scientists and engineers and by theoretical solid-state physicists.
TOP STUDIO will promote teaching, training and learning with an educational
mode, which can be used to teach students about topological states of quantum
matter to students using visualization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.