* 1827013
* PAC-ISLEs: Present-day and Ancient Connections between Island Societies and Local Ecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Luke Tornabene, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,973.00

The islands of Oceania are home to diverse fish communities and a vibrant myriad
of human cultures, all of which have histories are inseparably tied to
characteristics of the ocean and the islands themselves (e.g. resource
availability and habitat space), and extent of connectivity among distant
islands (e.g. currents, migration, etc.). These unifying concepts between
culture and marine ecology make the holistic study of Pacific Island life ideal
for a cross-disciplinary research experience. The PAC-ISLEs program is a year-
long research experience punctuated by a six-week trip to Oceania, where
students will conduct independent research projects in marine biology and
anthropology, and connect the shared themes uniting the two disciplines. Each
year new cohorts will visit a different island in Oceania (American Samoa,
Tonga, Pohnpei), where they will immerse themselves in local communities and
collaborate with key foreign mentors that possess expertise in community-based
conservation, marine ecology, and public education. Upon returning to the US,
students will take advantage of the extensive natural history and ethnology
collections at the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture to support their
research projects, and help them share their findings with the public, including
a highly-engaged community of Pacific Islanders in the Seattle metropolitan area
and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The islands of Oceania support fish
communities and human cultures whose histories are inseparably tied to their
physical and geographic characteristics (e.g. resource availability and habitat
space), and the extent of connectivity among distant islands (e.g. dispersal
potential, gene flow, history of human migrations and trade). Students in the
PAC-ISLEs program will travel to a unique island each of three years to explore
these ties between culture and marine ecology, and characterize historic changes
by measuring similarities in cultural objects or traditional activities among
islands, and (for fishes) population genetics, taxonomic composition, and
phylogeography. Students working with fish communities will focus mainly on the
evolution and community structure of cryptobenthic reef fishes, a poorly studied
group that can serve as an ideal indicator for evolutionary and contemporary
change across Pacific Islands. Students working on Pacific Island anthropology
will focus on aspects of culture that are directly linked to the ocean either
through their material origins, or role in passing on knowledge about the ocean
to future generations. Much like the biological communities of Pacific Islands,
cultural items may be compared across different islands to show the history of
change, local adaptation, and technological progression. When these data are
analyzed and contextualized with existing and extensive biological and
anthropological collections from Oceania at the Burke Museum of Natural History
and Culture, findings from PAC-ISLEs have the potential to greatly advance our
understanding of biological and cultural diversity on and around Pacific
Islands, while promoting an equitable exchange of knowledge between scientists
and Pacific Islander communities. Student activities extend far beyond the
duration of this project, as PAC-ISLEs will help establish a permanent conduit
for students to connect with overseas sites that would otherwise be less
accessible for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.