* 1827686
* PFI-TT: Optimizing Next-Generation Materials for Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jason Azoulay, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,985.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project are in the area of
energy efficient displays and lighting provided by Organic Light Emitting Diode
(OLED) devices. OLEDs are the most energy efficient means of producing light,
provide higher color quality and contrast (a true black) in displays, and the
devices are bendable allowing unique shapes. Despite many years of research this
technology is still limited by short lifetimes of the materials that emit blue
light, which has prevented large scale commercial applications. Stable blue
light emitting compounds will dramatically increase the lifetime of cell phone
and television displays and general lighting employing OLED technologies, which
will revolutionize these industries. The greatest want of consumers for their
mobile phones is longer battery life, and OLEDs provide minimum energy
consumption of display technologies. Stable blues are also the limitation of
applications for white in general lighting applications. Considering that 20% of
the electricity generated in the US is consumed in lighting, employing
technology that is 90-98% more efficient than incandescent lighting will
dramatically reduce greenhouse gas emissions and save billions of dollars. This
project will evaluate recently discovered complexes with superior stability and
color characteristics for application in OLED devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will evaluate the in-
device characteristics of recently discovered CCC-NHC pincer complexes as the
blue emitter component. A modular, efficient synthesis provides access to
complexes that can be altered systematically to evaluate device functionality
and characteristics in a logical manner. These complexes have been demonstrated
to have superior air- and water-stability to currently employed materials. The
protection of the emitters by employ of sophisticated barrier technology
represents a significant cost and engineering challenge for device manufacture.
Devices will be prepared, initially, with spin coating fabrication, the fastest
readily-available processes, and evaluated for key characteristics relevant to
commercialization and industrial manufacturing. The most promising candidates
will be evaluated in devices prepared by thermal evaporative deposition (TED),
which provides device characteristics more relevant to commercial manufacturing
processes. An additional advantage is that through easy alteration in device
fabrication conditions or the structure of the emitter, these materials produce
white light relevant for general lighting applications. Successful completion of
the project will lead to licensing of the technologies or to the formation of a
company to produce the emitting materials for the OLED display and lighting
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.