* 1827210
* CC* Network Design and Implementation for Small Institutions: Rural Campus Connectivity for Research and Teaching on the Prairie
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Nathan Tintle, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 362,589.00

This project provides cyberinfrastructure upgrades at Dordt College for an
Internet2 connection and enhanced network connectivity between campus locations,
data sources, and computing resources. Through the application of data-intensive
multi-omics and biostatistics research (such as high-throughput genotyping and
phenotyping) at agricultural and prairie sites, these upgrades are designed to
equip ongoing research to better understand, first hand, land-use impacts on
local ecology and microbiome, prairie genetics, soil erosion, nutrient uptake
and loss, carbon sequestration, drought susceptibility, and water quality. The
Rural Campus Connectivity for Research and Teaching on the Prairie project also
connects Dordt College to national research and education resources and enhances
its STEM education impact by providing cutting-edge research, teaching, and
outreach opportunities through collaborative, interdisciplinary, and data-driven
science for undergraduate students and STEM teachers-in-training.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this cyberinfrastructure project is the
installation and connection of a fiber optic line from the rurally-situated
Dordt College campus to an Internet2 connection point. Campus network upgrades
also include the development of a Science DMZ and associated services such as
Federated ID Management, data transfer management, performance monitoring
through the implementation of a PerfSONAR measurement node, and wireless
connectivity to a rural satellite campus. A new network switch will be used as
the hub of the 10Gbps DMZ to connect local storage, compute clusters and
instrumentation to the existing campus network and
Internet2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.