* 1827153
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: High Performance Research Data Infrastructure at the American Museum of Natural History
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Rebecca Oppenheimer, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,722.00

Through the National Science Foundation?s Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*)
program, this project provides a major data network upgrade for the American
Museum of Natural History (AMNH) that makes scientific data flows a priority.
AMNH conducts scientific research and education activities spanning
astrophysics, geosciences, and genomics. Scientific collaborations require
increasing network capacity among scientific instruments, collaborators and
researchers. These data networking improvements to AMNH directly support these
research activities. AMNH's ability to move large data sets quickly between its
campus and other sites across the nation and throughout the world is critical to
the success of the Museum's research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
project, AMNH implements a high-speed Science DMZ, a network specifically tuned
for large data transfers. Through the Science DMZ, AMNH connects to the NYSERNet
Research and Education Network, which provides pathways to the higher education
community in New York State, Internet2, and beyond. Using purpose-built Data
Transfer Nodes (DTNs) based on the FIONA concept, AMNH scientists can move
diverse, large-scale data sets between research facilities, supercomputing
centers, and collaborators via a dedicated 10Gb/s connection. The efficiencies
gained enable greater collaboration, more intelligent and timely coordination of
research, and increased research throughput and quality. To further facilitate
collaboration, the project leverages the GLOBUS file transfer system to easily
orchestrate data transfers and for disseminating AMNH's research to the broader
research community. Additionally, AMNH integrates with the InCommon Federation,
utilizing a common framework to provide researchers secure access to online
resources. Using perfSONAR, the Science DMZ is continually monitored to ensure
that throughput, latency, and performance targets are met, and data can flow
unimpeded. This allows Museum researchers to focus on science rather than the
logistical details of moving data. Additionally, the work of AMNH scientists
informs the Museum's educational and curatorial programs, directly benefitting
AMNH students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.