* 1827062
* CREST-PRF: Integrating Economics, Policy, Infrastructure and Climate in the Energy Water Nexus: A Decision Support Tool for Water Management in the Oil and Gas Industry
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Katie Zemlick, Zemlick                 Katie          M
* Fellowship Award
* Luis Cubano
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF research is aligned
with the goals of CREST Center for Water and the Environment (CWE) in the
Department of Civil Engineering at the University of New Mexico. Recent trends
in the oil and gas (O&amp;G) industry show unprecedented growth such that 80% of
new global demand will be met with domestic (US) supplies. This growth is due
largely to technological advances (horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing)
that allow for cost effective recovery of O&amp;G from unconventional reserves.
This production both requires and produces large volumes of water, both of which
must be managed efficiently to insure production stability and minimize negative
impacts on the broader community. The objective of this research is to
understand the circumstances under which water may constrain O&amp;G production
in the future by considering how stakeholders (producers, water rights holders,
regulators) respond to changes in four factors: Economics, Policy,
Infrastructure, and Climate (EPIC). A decision support tool will be designed to
evaluate these dynamics and to identify management strategies that will improve
the resilience of these critical systems in uncertain future conditions. This
work will bridge gaps between site specific analyses, technology assessments,
and human behavior by addressing water management in a holistic and temporally
dynamic manner. As a result, it will generate new knowledge regarding how the
system functions, what mechanisms guide stakeholder-level decisions, and how
water can be optimally managed in the future at a scale that is meaningful to
producers, regulators, and other water users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will employ a novel approach that integrates spatial and big data processing and
analysis, system dynamics (SD) and agent-based modeling (ABM) techniques, and
expert elicitation to investigate the feedbacks between physical and decision-
driven systems. This work will focus on the Permian Basin (NM, TX) which is
estimated to represent one of the largest oil reserves globally but is also
water limited and marked by periods of extended drought. Because of the rapid
growth in O&amp;G development in the region, significant knowledge gaps exist
regarding how water management dynamics in the oil and gas industry will change
over time and what factors will influence these relationships. The linkages
between EPIC factors will be analyzed using well-level production information,
water, climate, and temporal transportation network modeling. Expert knowledge
will provide the basis for understanding interactions with human, stakeholder-
driven systems and incorporated into an ABM. This information will improve the
ability of stakeholders to identify innovative water management strategies that
reduce risk and support long-term water needs in arid, energy producing regions.
In addition to the extensibility of this research to other coupled energy-water
systems, it provides a means to further understand implications of these dynamic
systems on human health and safety in a more efficient, spatially and temporally
relevant manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.