* 1827409
* Behavioral and neurophysiological investigations of individual variation in cue weighting strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Alan Yu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 501,538.00

The perception of speech sounds often requires listeners to pay attention to
multiple cues at once. The weighting of the relative importance of cues can
nonetheless vary across individuals. Little is known regarding the sources of
such variation, however. This project will investigate potential mechanisms
underpinning such variability. The project will broaden the empirical database
on which theories of speech perception and production are grounded as well as
providing insights into first/second language acquisition and pedagogy in terms
of the development of personalized training for individual language learners.
The project will also introduce young women and under-represented minorities to
STEM fields via the study of the language sciences through planned outreach
programs. The findings from this project may inform clinical research on
developmental or acquired perceptual and language impairments, and may also
serve to inform research on speech related
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two potential
explanations for individual variability in cue weighting. Listeners might differ
in early auditory encoding, which affects the reliability, hence weighting, of
certain cues that support phonological contrasts. Listeners might also differ in
cue integration strategy such that some utilize a continuous cue integration
strategy whereby cue information is integrated as they become available, while
others might employ a buffer strategy so that phonemic identification is
postponed until all necessary information becomes available. This project will
investigate individual variability in cue weighting using brainstem and cortical
responses to speech sounds within the same individual, thus providing a
comprehensive neurophysiological profile that underlies individual patterns of
real-time cue weighting process, as measured with eye-
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.