* 1827230
* RAPID: Coping in Families Affected by California Wildfires and Flooding
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Terrance Boult, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 158,604.00

Severe natural disasters carry great economic costs and threaten the health and
well-being of many people. Severe natural disasters during the past decade
include unprecedented flooding, catastrophic hurricanes, and devastating
wildfires. The worst wildfire in California history struck Ventura and Santa
Barbara counties in December 2017. The Thomas Fire in those counties burned
282,000 acres, took two lives, and incinerated or damaged over one thousand
structures. Because of its location to major population centers, over 100,000
residents were evacuated, many more than once. In the aftermath of the fire,
rain produced a massive mudslide cascading through the city of Montecito killing
23 people and destroying 115 homes. These catastrophic events within a
geographically concentrated region offer a unique opportunity to better
understand how individuals and families cope with and recover from profound
stress. The focus of this project is to gain a richer understanding of how
individuals and families manage post-disaster recovery and what predicts both
positive and negative outcomes. By bringing together a multi-disciplinary team
of computer scientists and disaster psychologists, new theories and
computational methods will be evaluated to better understand human response to
extreme events and to inform the development of future
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Smart Phone technology and online
surveys over a six-month period of time, 100 parent/child pairs and 100 non-
parent survivors in Ventura and Santa Barbara counties will be followed. The
surveys and the daily "check-ins" will provide critical data on how people cope
with stress across time. By cultivating a very rich set of data on the same
individuals over time, it will be possible to discern patterns of recovery in
ways that past research has not done. Measuring outcomes on a daily basis will
generate significant data and support the use of "big data" analysis methods
(e.g., machine learning techniques) that can identify unique changes or shifts
in functioning predicted by the guiding theoretical framework (self-regulation
shift theory). This project extends what is currently understood related to
post-disaster recovery by targeting key coping mechanisms of change and
highlighting possible critical targets for supportive
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.