* 1827199
* Nilch Bee Naa Alkaa Go Ohooa Doo Eidii Tii  (Using Air (Technology) to Learn and Understand New Things)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jason Arviso, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 667,909.00

Navajo Technical University (NTU) is one of the nation's largest tribal colleges
and a leader in delivering academic and research programs for Native Americans.
NTU students have access to a plethora of academic programs including strong
programs in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). However, NTU and
the residents of the Navajo Nation are not well connected to the Internet and to
the larger research and education community. Connectivity limitations,
especially at Navajo community centers and at their homes, restrict NTU's
ability to collaborate and contribute in the ever-growing integrated global
research and education environment. There is a fundamental lack of Internet
connectivity with sufficient bandwidth to successfully participate in the ever-
increasing distance or online learning courses/programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will increase Wide Area Network connectivity
by connecting NTU to the Front Range GigaPoP (FRGP) regional network at much
higher network speeds with dedicated bandwidth for NTU research and academic
projects. The proposal addresses distance education challenges by implementing
an advanced wireless test bed to deliver NTU distance education courses to
Chapter Houses, tribal libraries, and other community anchor locations. This
proposal engages the country's largest tribal university and is a collaboration
with New Mexico and Arizona Tribal Colleges and Universities. It leverages a
strong existing regional relationship with the FRGP, and it provides an
organizational model for other tribal colleges to adopt a similar technology and
associated collaborations. The proposal emphasizes needs and requirements-
gathering meetings, followed by design and training workshops, which will
benefit regional Native American community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.