* 1827641
* PFI-TT: Using Science Gateways to Enable Greater Access to High Performance Computing in Support of Advanced Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Marlon Pierce, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 01/31/2022
* USD 199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will be to help
streamline the design, manufacturing, and product lifecycle management processes
in highly regulated industries such as aerospace and medical device
manufacturing by enabling broader use of modeling and simulation tools at all
phases of a product?s lifecycle. Today, product develop and manufacturing in
many highly regulated industries is a long, expensive process that carries
substantial commercial risks to manufacturers if products fail to reach markets
and substantial personal risks to customers if the products fail in operations.
If used properly, modeling and simulation methods can substantially reduce these
risks and provide deeper insight into poorly understood physical processes in a
product?s lifecycle. However, these sophisticated methods are not as deeply
adopted throughout industry supply chains as is needed to realize the benefits.
The work proposed here will use the methods of distributed systems,
cyberinfrastructure, and information technology to broaden and simplify access
to high performance computing resources and advanced modeling and simulation
software, increasing the integration of advanced manufacturing with the
innovations of computer science and cybersecurity in distributed systems,
attracting and training a computer science-grounded workforce that can help
enable a transformation in the manufacturing sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address these challenges by leveraging the investment by
the National Science Foundation in science gateways, which provide end user
environments that simplify and secure access to advanced modeling and simulation
software on high performance computing resources. The proposed project has a
high degree of intellectual merit as it takes science gateways a step forward in
engineering and cybersecurity maturity. This project will develop a general
approach for creating Application Programming Interfaces to science gateway
middleware out of reconfigurable building blocks that can be mapped to the
requirements of different user environments. These methods will be applied to
the development of programming interfaces and data models derived from abstract
models of a trusted digital commons science gateway developed in a private
sector/academic partner collaboration. This gateway will allow the secure
creation/sharing of executable models, support the process of reproducible
verification of modeling and simulation methods, support the validation of a
particular model for a particular physical product or process, and allow
systematic exploration of uncertainty quantification in the models under diverse
external conditions. Together, these capabilities will enable greater
collaboration between manufacturers in a supply chain, manufacturers across
industrial sectors, and between manufacturers and regulatory
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.