* 1827757
* PFI-RP: Data-Driven Services for High Performance and Sustainable Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,10/31/2020
* K. Selcuk Candan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 10/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will lead to the
creation of a truly new breed of building services companies that can provide
guaranteed building performance. The results from this proposal will contribute
to both building energy efficiency research and practices. Beyond energy
conservation, outcomes of the project also have an important societal benefit in
advancing the role of a skilled workforce in conjunction with automation. In
addition, the proposed effort builds an innovation ecosystem which spans the
supply chain for building services and building analytics and automated
intelligence suppliers. The proposed research will fulfill an important role in
sustainable environments and will enable services with significant economic and
human impact. While the building service industry is the focus here, the results
obtained have the potential to lead to a better understanding of other human-
centered services driven by big data, and will influence the development of
novel service platforms applicable to urban operations, such as city-wide
transportation control, power grids, and public health, in which system-wise
fault discovery and recovery have to be achieved through dynamic spatio-temporal
data streams of varying quality and coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project of Building Doctor's Medicine Cabinet (BDMC) service platform, empowered
by novel multi-resolution (temporal and spatial) data analytics, high-
dimensional robust modeling, and human-centered interface design, will help
building doctors, who are engineers and technicians working in the building
service industry, to effectively troubleshoot building problems and to identify
systematic and prognostic solutions. BDMC will integrate building datasets from
in-situ and control system measurements, knowledge from building doctors, and
leverage the patterns and anomalies discovered on this data to (1) diagnose and
prognose whole building problems with greatly reduced engineering labor input,
false alarms and false dismissals, 2) identify building system hierarchy and
develop data-driven energy models; and (3) provide human-centered data
visualization and feedback (fault impact analysis and prioritization). The
proposed effort will transform the current labor-intensive building service
industry into a smart service industry. The main outcomes from this PFI-RP
project are algorithms and codes that can be licensed to the industry to be
integrated with their existing market products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.