* 1827951
* Standard Grant: ToxicDocs Research Infrastructure Project
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2022
* David Rosner, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 457,649.00

This award supports a research infrastructure project called ToxicDoc. It will
enable easy access and use of millions of documents for multi-disciplinary
research. Recent class-action tort litigation has unearthed millions of
previously secret internal records from private firms responsible for wide-scale
introduction of toxic substances, such as asbestos and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs). These documents include memos between executives, unpublished scientific
studies, planning documents for public relations campaigns, letters to
policymakers, and trade association meeting minutes. Although technically part
of the public record, this material is extremely hard to access, even for
scientific researchers. ToxicDocs will provide a critical intellectual resource
for scholars in multiple fields examining health, toxics, and corporate action.
Expected users include scholars in environmental and health history, critical
legal studies, hazards geography, environmental health and environmental justice
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ToxicDocs will use high performance computing
methods that quickly renders millions of documents into a full-text searchable
format and thereby enable researchers to shed new light on interactions among
manufacturers, regulatory agencies, and the scientific community, and to show
how various stakeholders responded to knowledge of potential health risks. It
leverages recent innovations in database management and web development to
create an efficient and fast user experience. The project includes the
development of a host of tools for textual analysis: a ToxicDocs Relationship
Miner that enables researchers to extract frequently occurring names,
organizations, and places from the database and map their network relations; an
automated document classifier that categorizes documents; and a Time-Series
Machine that enables users to trace the frequency of phrases across time.
Without taking any particular side, ToxicDocs will provide an empirical base for
informed policy debates that are grounded in key historical
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.