* 1827815
* Metallization of Hydrogen-Rich Materials: Predicting Novel Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Eva Zurek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education whose ultimate goal is the rational design
via computational modeling of new superconductors, materials through which
electric currents can flow without losing energy. Replacing copper wires with
superconducting power lines would have a tremendously beneficial impact on the
electrical power infrastructure of the USA, but unfortunately all of the
superconductors that are technologically useful must be cooled to very low
temperatures. Research suggests that hydrogen-rich solids could potentially
behave as superconductors at high temperatures and are the focus of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just like diamonds can be synthesized at high
pressures deep within the Earth, researchers can use pressure as a variable to
create new materials with unusual properties. A number of superconductors have
been synthesized in this way. Recent exciting experiments in certain hydrogen-
and lanthanum-containing compounds under pressure bring tantalizing promise of
room-temperature superconductivity, exhibiting superconductivity onset
temperatures of as high as 44 degrees Fahrenheit. These types of experiments are
very difficult to carry out, and accurate computational predictions can
accelerate new materials discovery. The PI will carry out calculations based
upon quantum mechanics to predict promising new targets for synthesis, and will
collaborate with leading experimental groups in high-pressure research that will
attempt to create these materials. To advance this goal the PI will further
develop relevant software that can be used to computationally predict the
structure of a solid without any experimental information. The software is
freely available to the materials science, physics, and chemistry communities,
facilitating the advance of rational materials design as well as of current and
future discoveries in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in computational materials discovery as
part of this project. Aiming to broaden their participation, undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be trained in computational modelling
and materials prediction via personnel exchange, paving the way for future
career opportunities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education that will lead towards rational design of novel
superconductors. The PI will computationally predict the crystal structures of
materials with unique stoichiometries and structures that can be synthesized
under pressure, and study their electronic structure and properties via first-
principles calculations. The phase diagrams under pressure of most binary
hydrides have already been explored computationally, and a number of phases with
very high superconducting critical temperatures have been predicted, in
particular for alkaline and rare-earth polyhydrides. The focus of this project
will be on ternary hydrides, whose structures and properties are still unknown.
The PI will also study novel hydrides containing expanded metal compounds, which
are known to exhibit fascinating quantum behavior. New, perhaps completely
unexpected, chemistry and totally new types of materials will be discovered
theoretically, and the predictions will be confirmed by leading experimental
groups in high-pressure research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XtalOpt evolutionary
algorithm that can be used to predict the structure of an extended system given
only its stoichiometry, will be further developed. Key developments will
increase the size and complexity of the unit cells that can be predicted without
any experimental information, and accelerate the progress of a priori structure
prediction for extended systems. The crystallography suite within the highly
popular chemical builder, editor, and visualizer Avogadro, will be further
advanced. XtalOpt and Avogadro are open-source software, which contributes to
the creation of cyberinfrastructure as well as to facilitating current and
future discoveries in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in rational computational materials
design and programming, thereby preparing them for future careers where synergy
between theory, computation, and experiment leads to innovation. Collaboration
with primarily undergraduate, minority-serving institutions that involves
student and faculty exchange will expose students from underrepresented groups
to research and future career opportunities in STEM fields and train them in
first-principles modelling techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.