* 1827249
* RCN-UBE: VISABLI, an RCN-UBE for Visualizations, Interactive Simulations, and Animations for Biology Learning &amp; Instruction
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jodie Jenkinson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,380.00

Biological processes now underpin all aspects of society, from the use of DNA in
the criminal justice system, to the role of personalized medicine designed to
accommodate biochemical variation among individuals. Citizens, with and without
higher educational backgrounds, are increasingly required to make impactful
choices based on their understanding of biology. multimedia learning resources
(illustrations, animations, interactive media) play an essential role in biology
education and are a common feature not only in today's undergraduate science
classrooms, but also in various informal learning settings (online/print news
media and science museums for example). Instructors rely upon these visual
learning resources for teaching and students seek them out in support of their
studies. Despite the popularity of these resources, little is known about their
efficacy in supporting learning in undergraduate biology. Indeed, the scientific
accuracy, clarity, and quality of these resources can be highly variable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the VISABLI network is to address an
acknowledged gap between the communities responsible for the design and
evaluation of scientific visualizations and the teachers who use these materials
in the classroom. We seek to connect these distinct disciplines into a network
fostering the co-creation of new knowledge and sparking innovative research;
these three largely independent communities share a common goal of improving the
design efficacy of instructional visualizations. The network activities will
focus on an in-depth needs assessment, followed by meetings bringing together
members of these three communities to identify and develop shared resources, and
will conclude with a VISABLI website to disseminate them. We will work with the
biology scientific societies to organize a series of workshops during which
activities like collaborative storyboarding will give instructors a better sense
of the visualization process and an appreciation for the difficult intersection
of visualization design and pedagogy. These activities will also help to
identify areas of instruction that are not well served with existing
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.