* 1827505
* PFI-RP: Smart and Accessible Transportation Hub for Assistive Navigation and Facility Management
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Jie Gong, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 833,442.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project lies in its ultimate
goal to transform a large transportation hub into a smart and accessible hub
(SAT-Hub), with minimal infrastructure change. The market opportunity is
tremendous as there are various large transportation hubs in the United States.
The solution can also be extended to indoor navigation of other public
facilities, such as school buildings, libraries, office buildings, and airports.
The project will lead to three important outcomes: live facility models for
facility management by transportation agencies, free indoor positioning and
navigation apps for end users, and a rich set of multimodal transportation data
and tools for researchers and developers. The societal need is significant,
especially impactful for people in great need, such as those with visual
impairments and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and those with challenges in
finding places, particularly persons unfamiliar with metropolitan areas. In the
U.S. alone, 6.6 million people have visual impairments, and 1 in 45 people have
been diagnosed with ASD. The SAT-Hub will be an exemplar case to extend the
reach of their mobility, give them more freedom, allow them to enhance the
richness and quality of their lives, and improve their employment opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project integrates an existing surveillance
camera system, installed Bluetooth beacons, and a building information model of
a transportation or other public facility, with a hybrid solution of a mobile
phone localization app (using beacons, on-board sensors, and cameras along with
3D sensors). These will be incorporated with personalized user interfaces to
provide a seamless service to the end users, while also providing valuable user
information and facility use information to transportation infrastructure
stakeholders. Our solution is a system-engineering approach to a challenging
problem in urban transportation that integrates three major components:
multilayer live facility modeling tools, hybrid mobile navigation algorithms,
and multimodal human-centric interface designs. The technology innovation lies
in the integration of smart infrastructure (civil engineering) with accessible
services (sensing and computing). The key technological challenges come from two
sides: the seamless integration of the system with the main operations of a
transportation or other facility base on obtaining information and data (such as
surveillance data and 3D model data), and the optimization and personalization
of user interfaces to address various user needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.