* 1827336
* PFI-RP: Development of a new fertilizer to improve the harvest yields of corn and soybeans
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Erin Irish, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project will be increasing
the economic competitiveness of the U.S. by increasing the output from
commercial farms and increasing the production of related industries that rely
on agricultural crops. This project will result in a new fertilizer that can be
used to increase the harvest yields of soybeans and corn by at least 10% and
possibly up to 25%. An increase in yields per acre will allow over 500,000
farmers to grow and sell more food from their land and to turn unprofitable
years into profitable ones. This will bring more money into rural communities
and increase the economic competitiveness of America?s farmer. Increasing
agricultural production affects more than farmers, it also affects industries
worth $992B that rely on food production. This proposal targets corn and
soybeans because they are grown on approximately 180M acres in the U.S. (this is
larger than the size of Texas) and generate over $92B in revenue each year.
Finally, this project will increase the food safety of the U.S. by increasing
the amount of food grown on land already dedicated to farming.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is the optimization and demonstration of a new
fertilizer to increase the harvest yields of corn and soybeans. This novel
fertilizer will be fabricated from natural chemicals and biocompatible,
biodegradable polymers already used in agriculture. The formulation of the
proposed novel fertilizer will be optimized and tested each year by growing
crops of soybeans and corn in commercial fields and investigating the effect on
yield of different loadings of fertilizer. The industrial partner will spread
the proposed fertilizer using commercial farming equipment and grow corn and
soybean plants under identical conditions as farmers. These studies are designed
to assess whether the proposed fertilizer will increase the harvest yields and
provide necessary data that will be provided to the Iowa Department of
Agriculture to gain permission to sell the fertilizer commercially. At the
completion of this grant the proposed fertilizer will be optimized for corn and
soybeans and, hopefully, demonstrated to increase their harvest yields by 10 to
25%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.