* 1827756
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer to Advance Regional Collaboration in Chemical Crystallography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* William Tolman, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 227,500.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Nigam Rath from University of
Missouri-Saint Louis (UMSL) and colleague William Tollman have acquired a single
crystal diffractometer equipped with a copper microfocus source and a highly
sensitive detector. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of graduate and undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The new instrument
transforms how users approach chemical research. Regional chemistry
undergraduate and non-PhD grating institutions such as Webster University and
Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville have access to this advanced
instrumentation. Outreach programs advance STEM curricula for high school and
UMSL undergraduate students via participation in hands-on activities,
demonstrations and access to teaching modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts single crystal structure determination of weakly diffracting crystals,
the use of copper complex models of metalloenzyme active sites and catalyst
development for sustainable polymer synthesis, and employment of template-
directed syntheses of electroactive and porous materials. The diffractometer is
also used to create chiral organometallic architectures to be used as chiral
catalysts, the exploration of supramolecular synthesis of metal halide and metal
oxide clusters, and for investigating the glycosylation reaction and the
synthesis of complex oligosaccharides. The instrument is also used for the
characterization of synthesized amphiphiles, for controlling the chemistry of
the organic solid state in studies carried out at Webster University. The
diffractometer also serves researchers carrying out structural and reactivity
studies of organometallic high-valent group 10 transition metal
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.