* 1827603
* Analytical Paleobiology Short Course
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Michal Kowalewski, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2020
* USD 35,478.00

This project is basically a workshop to provide one year of funding for testing
a valuable training initiative for analytical methods in paleobiology. An
organizing committee will organize a 4-week long training program to include
developing topics (e.g., data mining, spatial analyses) and other database
resources in paleobiology (e.g., Neotoma Paleoecology Database). The training
will be open to Ph.D. students. Multiple instructors will participate in the
course. Course materials will be made freely available online. The aim is to
establish a dynamically evolving training initiative that globally engages the
broader paleontological community.

The graduate-level training program in analytical paleobiology should provide
new analytical tools to graduate students and have a lasting intellectual impact
on the discipline and beyond. The session will be taught using the R programming
environment, though other languages may be introduced by instructors as
appropriate. The organizing committee will assess this first effort to decide if
this effort should continue, hoping that in-depth training of PhD students
annually will produce analytically savvy cohorts of future leaders of
quantitative paleobiology equipped to spearhead future developments in the
field. As importantly, the training will produce life-long contributors (and
users) of an earth science cyber-infrastructure that has been rapidly growing in
recent years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.