* 1827551
* PFI-RP: Fostering Agricultural ReMote Sensing (FARMS) - use of unmanned aerial systems to enable precision agriculture.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Richard DeMartino, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 746,844.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project, called the
Fostering Agricultural ReMote Sensing Alliance, or FARMS Alliance, centers
around the technology and data analytics of remote sensing from unmanned
aircraft systems (UAS), with precision agriculture as the targeted application
area. The efforts targets a proxy crop, snap bean, and three proxy applications
prioritized by our industry partners as key to their commercial efforts, namely
disease risk modeling, harvest timing/scheduling, and yield prediction to propel
FARMS into a sustainable innovation ecosystem. This is essential, since although
the UAS agricultural market is pegged at US$34.2B globally, the USA is lagging
due to past restrictions on commercial UAS flights. The FARMS Alliance will find
fertile ground for growth in Upstate NY, where the Finger Lakes Regional
Economic Development Council has identified agriculture as a strategic growth
area. This effort will afford the Finger Lakes region an opportunity to be a hub
in the Eastern USA for agriculture and food production and with coordination,
will lead to leadership and growth in the industry. Finally, at least four
imaging science and six business graduate students will be trained at the nexus
of imaging-precision-agriculture-business, equipped as truly trans-disciplinary
scientists and managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
contribute significantly to the identification of both spectral (color) and
structural (3D) signatures from UAs platforms that are coupled to specific
precision agriculture applications. We will improve on the relatively simple and
generic current approaches, and develop new methods to distill oversampled UAS
remote sensing data to the essence of metrics required for each application.
This close collaboration between imaging scientists and plant physiologists will
lead to turn-key, specific (optimized) solutions for our industry partners, to
then market to the burgeoning precision agriculture economy. In short, expensive
UAS systems will be used to derive commercial, affordable, and practical UAS
solutions that can transition to the precision agriculture sector. Finally, this
approach will hedge consistent, reliable image processing via proper spectral
calibration of the target scene and the instruments themselves - this sets the
FARMS Alliance apart from similar, simple spectral metric solutions that
currently are being offered by precision agriculture service
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.