* 1827864
* Enabling decision-relevant debates about human genome editing
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Michael Xenos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 449,977.00

Recent breakthroughs in gene editing using CRISPR/Cas-9 and other tools allow
scientists to edit the human genome in safer, faster, and more effective ways
than ever before. This new technology also has the potential to cure as many as
6,000 genetically-inherited diseases and to transform healthcare in the U.S. At
the same time, other potential applications have raised serious moral and
ethical concerns. Given the wide variety of possible applications in fields
ranging from medicine to national security, innovations in human gene editing
(HGE) will increasingly necessitate public debate and societal decision making.
However, as popular awareness of HGE grows, public discussions of the technology
have the potential to become divisive in ways that could compromise meaningful
and responsible development. The potential for this outcome is visible in
controversies currently surrounding genetically modified organisms (GMOs), an
issue that raises similar technical and ethical questions, and which has led to
consumer behavior that is often at odds with the best available scientific
evidence. Thus, to encourage responsible innovation, this project develops and
evaluates public engagement modalities that facilitate the productive exchange
of ideas about HGE between groups with different values. The findings from this
project help guide broader, emerging debates about HGE and will help ensure that
policy and consumer choices are shaped both by the best available science and
citizens' values and concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish its goals,
this project integrates and advances diverse strands of theory and research on
biased information processing concerning science and value-laden policy issues.
In particular, it tests the potential for different informational and social
environments to minimize polarization in public debate. The first phase uses
laboratory and survey experiments to examine how values and information together
shape opinions about HGE, and to test approaches for alleviating the negative
effects of information processing that is biased toward predetermined
conclusions. The findings from the first phase guide implementation and
evaluation of a public workshop that will bring together diverse members of the
public, including researchers in HGE, to interact with each other and discuss
the technology. Insights from the workshop inform concrete strategies and best-
practices that other organizations can adapt, scale, and apply to facilitate
effective public engagement and healthy decision making across diverse
publics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.