* 1827377
* The In/authentic Experiences of Black Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Elliot Douglas, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2023
* USD 478,839.00

In recent years there has been increasing scrutiny on diversity in the computer
and information technology industry. Data on demographics portray an industry
that lacks diversity. Even when engineers from underrepresented groups are hired
by these companies, they tend to leave. Among people of color 40% of the men and
36% of the women leave due to unfair treatment. The economic cost of this issue
is enormous. The cost to replace these workers is over $16 billion annually.
Lack of diversity also results in lost productivity and innovation. Improving
the diversity of the technology industry workforce requires a welcoming and
inclusive workplace. In this project we are seeking to understand the
experiences of Black engineers. The narratives developed from interviews with
these workers are being used to illustrate the unique problems faced by Black
engineers. Through conversations with industry leaders we are identifying
approaches to make the workplace more welcoming to
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study involves interviews with 40 engineers in
the technology industry. The goal of these interviews is to understand workplace
climate. Interviews focus on the experiences they have had with their co-
workers, supervisors, and customers. The data are being analyzed using narrative
analysis, through the lens of three frameworks: Faulkner's in/authenticity,
Helms and Piper's pairing of racial identity theory and vocational psychology,
and Kendi's history of racist ideas. The result is individual narrative case
studies for each person. Cross-case comparison identifies commonalities and
differences in workplace culture, impact of social identity, and perceptions of
inclusivity. Through conference sessions, we are creating a community of
researchers focused on diversity and inclusion in the engineering workplace.
Additionally, we are sharing findings and implications directly with industry
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.