* 1827753
* PFI-RP: Design and Fabrication of Hardware-based Security Platform using Fabrication Variability of Ultra low Power Memories
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Michael Kozicki, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2021
* USD 803,347.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this PFI project is to pave the
road for commercialization of a new generation of security solutions through
leveraging recent advances in low power non-silicon based memories, advanced
error recovery techniques and artificial intelligence. This new methodology
offers a radical shift in the field of cybersecurity through departing from
pure-software based cryptographic methods toward a hybrid solution of using
fabrication variability of electronic devices and advanced error correction
methods. This project is a collaboration between academia and industry to
enhance current security solutions used in e-commerce, banking, smart cities,
supply chains, smart health, machine to machine communications and the emerging
Internet of Things. In addition to the scientific impact of opening up new
research opportunities for scholars (faculty, graduate and undergraduate
students), R&amp;D, and production line workforce in semiconductor and security
industry, this project has a great socioeconomic impact by restoring people's
trust on using advanced technology and internet based service. Making the system
robust to security attacks will save the country millions of dollars noting that
more than $11 million dollars is spent directly to combat cybercrime in the US
with an annual raise of 22%. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project offers a
proof-of-concept security module that uses fabrication variability of embedded
memories in electronic devices to secure web-based communication protocols
against hacking attacks. In contrast to the current cryptographic methods, where
the keys are store in conventional memories, no security keys will be stored in
the proposed security module; therefore it will be highly protected against
cloning attempts to provide full security in the case of physical hijacking.
Further, recently developed ultra-low power memories will be used to make the
developed module secure to side channel attacks, as an additional key feature of
this device. Using a novel error correction mechanism by integrating ternary
state logic, artificial intelligence and recent advances in modern coding
theory, a long-lasting problem of key generation mismatch is resolved by making
the key generation failure rate infinitesimal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.