* 1827251
* IRES Track I: US-Brazil Integrating Engineering and Anthropology Research to Expand Perspectives on Water and Sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Natalie Mladenov, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will enable cohorts of students from engineering, anthropology, and
other sustainability-related disciplines to collaborate and study the efficacy
of sanitation and wastewater treatment technologies as well as the role of
culture and local perceptions on the safe recovery of energy, nutrients, and
clean water from human excreta and wastewater. Over the course of three years, a
total of 18 US students will be supported to study the performance of different
technologies at the Center for Research and Training in Sanitation (CePTS) in
Belo Horizonte, Brazil. This facility, which is co-managed by the Federal
University of Minas Gerais and the State Wastewater Company of Minas Gerais,
contains pilot-scale reactors that treat real wastewater from the city of Belo
Horizonte. Considered one of the most important research and professional
training centers of its kind in the Americas, it is used as a test site to
evaluate the effectiveness of new technologies and train wastewater system
operators. In addition to broadening students' perspectives about sanitation,
resource recovery, and risk within an interdisciplinary team setting, this
project will also allow students to improve their intercultural abilities. The
researchers will seek to recruit students that reflect our demographics as Title
V Hispanic Serving Institutions, with a particular focus on underrepresented
groups in the sciences and engineering. Students will participate in a five-day
intensive crash course on Brazilian culture and Portuguese language, led by the
San Diego State University Program on Brazil, where they will learn to
articulate the opinions and perspectives of people from different cultures and
backgrounds. They will gain an awareness of international, interdisciplinary,
and community perspectives on the role of engineering and technology in the
management of water, energy, and food systems. After participating in the
research experience, students will share their experiences by engaging in local
outreach activities at K-12 schools in Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of water reuse and resource
recovery into wastewater treatment and sanitation systems provides opportunities
to simultaneously meet several of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals. However, the challenges of choosing appropriate and sustainable
technologies are just as much social as they are technical. Inadequate
assumptions about local attitudes and the role of technology in development can
lead to the failure of systems. Thus, there is a need to integrate studies of
the efficacy of sanitation and resource recovery technologies with assessments
of social and cultural factors that influence perceptions about these
technologies, as well as the perceived value and risk of recovering resources
from wastewater and excreta. This three-year International Research Experience
for Students (IRES) project will send interdisciplinary cohorts of six students
each year (from Engineering, Anthropology and an interdisciplinary
Sustainability Program) to Belo Horizonte, Brazil, to participate in a research
experience with foreign mentorship at the Federal University of Minas Gerais
(UFMG). Students will study the removal of emerging contaminants and
characterize the risks associated with resource recovery from pilot-scale
established and emerging wastewater treatment technologies at the Center for
Research and Training in Sanitation (CePTS), which is co-managed by UFMG and the
State Wastewater Company of Minas Gerais. Students will also investigate
perceived values and risks through ethnographic research with community members
and local stakeholders in the water and wastewater sector. The results of this
research will support a new and growing field of interdisciplinary scientific
literature on the topic of water, culture, and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.