* 1827170
* IRES Track 1: U.S. Rwanda Collaborative Research on Data Flows in IoT Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Carleen Maitland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,870.00

Fulfilling the promise of "Big Data" for fields, such as migration studies,
climate science, and food security systems, requires accurate and timely data
from countries across the globe. Data collected through Internet-of-Things (IoT)
technologies, such as remote sensors and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), have
the potential to contribute to global data hubs. However, most IoT applications
and their data structures are designed to solve local problems, such as crop
protection and local food shortage predictions. This IRES SITTE project will
train 18 U.S. master's students in multicriteria design of and policies for IoT
systems with the aim of making local IoT data available to global data
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves collaborations with
professors/mentors at University of Rwanda and Carnegie Mellon Africa, both in
Kigali, Rwanda, the former of which serves as the Center of Excellence for IoT
under the World Bank's Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centers of
Excellence program. Through the collaboration, students will receive
interdisciplinary research training in wireless networks, software engineering,
policy studies and sociotechnical systems. This interdisciplinary training will
enable designs of low cost IoT systems, usable in a range of contexts, including
the U.S., while increasing access to data by biology/agriculture and forced
migration scientists. The training will also enhance students' as well as the
project's advisory board, consisting of academic scientists and an industry
innovation professional, on information and communication technology (ICT)
innovations systems in East Africa, expanding global perspectives within the
U.S. IT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fulfilling the promise of the Internet
of Things (IoT) requires ongoing systems innovation to incorporate advances in
foundational technologies, lower costs, and fulfill the needs of global data
scientists. Designing systems for integration of sensor-derived local data into
global scientific data platforms, such as the Global Open Data for Agriculture
and Nutrition (GODAN) hub and the International Organization for Migration's
(IOM) Migration Data Portal, can simultaneously inform local, regional and
global challenges of socioeconomic and environmental development.
&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Site Program pursues novel IoT research. The
interdisciplinary research combines complementary wireless network, software
engineering, policy studies, and sociotechnical systems expertise of the three
mentors and the PI. The program consists of three projects, two technical and
one focused on policy analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first technical
project involves unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, a.k.a. drones) designed for
collecting data from refugee gardens. Using cameras, the UAVs collect image data
processed through a Normalized Difference Vegetative Index (NDVI), a standard
approach for vegetation monitoring. The UAV will also be controlled by software
to optimize its path-planning, enhancing both coverage i.e. canvassing the
target area, and network connectivity. The second technical project targets
device-to-device communications (D2D) for systems without access to a power
grid, through innovations in hardware, software and data management systems,
designed to improve crop information on tea estates. A third project focuses on
IoT policy analyses at national and organizational levels. The analyses will
highlight current trends in Rwandan IoT use, system vulnerabilities, as well as
national and organizational policies that may affect data sharing practices and
hinder access by Big Data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Site
Program develops interdisciplinary and creative information technology
professionals capable of solving multi-criteria design problems. Through
intellectually challenging yet appropriately scoped projects, master's students
are exposed to international innovation systems and gain insights into the
culture of East Africa. The program's design includes both pre-departure and
follow-on courses, insuring effective student preparation and widespread
dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.