* 1827997
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Fluorescence Stereomicroscope to Enhance Research and Teaching at Eastern Mennonite University.
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Douglas Graber Neufeld, Eastern Mennonite University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 10/31/2022
* USD 103,210.00

An award is made to Eastern Mennonite University (EMU) to support the
acquisition of a high-resolution fluorescence stereomicroscope. The requested
stereomicroscope will support the research and teaching needs of faculty and
student researchers at EMU and other regional institutions. Undergraduate
researchers will be heavily involved in research projects using the new system
and they will have opportunities to coauthor papers and present their results at
scientific conferences. Seven biology, biochemistry, and environmental science
courses will also benefit from the use of the microscope in laboratory sections,
thus reaching a large number of students. Extensive scientific outreach
activities with nearby high schools and community colleges will also benefit
from demonstrations and hands-on research using the fluorescence
stereomicroscope to broaden participation in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The fluorescence stereomicroscope will advance multiple research
programs on topics that include: identification of novel regulators of cell
migration; monitoring water quality; examining of neuronal viability and
function; investigating the physiology of aging processes; understanding insect
olfaction; and endosymbioses. Additional users will investigate signal
transduction in plants responding to stress and the integration of sensory
feedback into robot design. Data and analyses from these studies will be
published in peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented at scientific
meetings, and used in both educational and public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.