* 1827690
* Partnership for Research and Education in Multiferroic Polymer Nanocomposites  Between Tuskegee University and University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,900,000.00

This Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) involves a
collaboration between Tuskegee University (TU) and the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln's Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (UNL-MRSEC) to
establish a world-class collaborative research program in multiferroic polymer
nanocomposites. The overarching broad goal is to provide the highest quality
research and education opportunities, and to increase recruitment, retention,
and graduation of students from underrepresented groups in advanced degrees in
emerging field of materials science and engineering. The other objective of the
collaborative research program is to develop fundamental knowledge and a new
class of nanocomposite materials combining polymers with multiferroic
nanomaterials. This work has the potential for significant impact in many fields
including structural nanocomposites and sensing applications. The Tuskegee PREM
is committed to increasing broader participation of underrepresented groups in
materials science through research and educational activities. The partnership
will produce African American graduates in emerging areas of materials science
&amp; engineering through exposure to cutting-edge research in multiferroic
composite materials and their applications. These graduates will help bring
much-needed diversity to the nation's advanced technology workforce. It is also
anticipated that the knowledge gained by the students through their involvement
in new research areas developed through this grant will eventually result in new
design and manufacturing methodologies that may well lead to patentable
processes for large-scale applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
partnership will strengthen TU's expertise in synthesis, manufacturing and
characterization of advanced polymer nanocomposites, along with UNL-MRSEC's
expertise in multiferroic materials. The collaborative research will focus on
developing new class of composite materials comprising polymers and multiferroic
nanoscale particles. These novel materials are expected to have structural,
electronic, energy, and sensing applications. Towards this, the team will carry
out research in three areas: 1) synthesis and characterization of multiferroic
nanoparticles; 2) fabrication of multiferroic polymer composites and
investigation of their applications; and 3) development of multifunctional
polymeric nanocomposites utilizing multiferroic nanoparticles and study of their
mechanical, thermal, magnetic and electrical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.