* 1827578
* PFI-RP: Materials and Methods for Scalable Manufacturing of Flexible Resonant Sensors and their Wireless Readers.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Sang-Hwan Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 805,000.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this PFI project is to enable
commercialization of a platform sensor technology, flexible resonant sensors,
that has many potential applications in consumer, agriculture, and health
markets. In the consumer market, the sensor system can be applied to wearable
technologies to monitor stretch and strain such as in performance athletic wear.
In agriculture, the sensor system can be applied to soil and water quality
monitoring. In health, the sensor system can be applied to monitoring of
biotherapeutics in manufacturing and health status of closed wounds. Advantages
of this sensor platform are its passive unit architecture (no on-board power),
potential low cost, and ability to measure in closed systems. This PFI will
enable the founding of one or more startups in these market spaces, which will
in turn lead to increased employment opportunities and economic development.
Moreover, this project will train two graduate students and 10 undergraduates
with technical skills in materials, electronics, and characterizations tools in
an interdisciplinary environment. They will also receive valuable innovation
skills in product design, reliability, robustness, and commercialization due to
the project scope and inclusion of active industrial partners. These students
with special attention to those underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses
attributes needed to commercialize resonant sensors that are common to all
market sectors, namely 1) the methods and materials to enable scalable
fabrication of the sensors, 2) the materials and methods to encapsulate
(package) the sensors, and 3) custom reader hardware and analysis software to
lower the cost and improve read range of the resonant sensor. For the first,
screen-printable inks that are optimized for inductive resonance will be
developed and large-batch (&gt;1000 unit) methods of printing and roll to roll
fabrication will be demonstrated. For the second, elastomeric encapsulants and
flexible, polymeric substrates will be evaluated for their performance with
resonant sensors. In the third, a low-cost (&lt;$100) custom reader will be
developed to supplant the more expensive portable vector network analyzers
currently in use and to improve sensor read range. In each of these specific
areas, performance will be assessed in actual end-use scenarios through existing
research programs we have on resonant sensors for consumer, agriculture, and
health applications. The anticipated technical results include optimal material
formulations for flexible resonant sensor fabrication and packaging, hardware
specifications for low-cost readers, and methods to produce the sensors and
readers at large scale, thus enabling commercialization
entry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.