* 1827975
* Integrating Archaeological and Indigenous Data Sources to Explore the Peopling of the North American Continent Along the Ice-Free Corridor
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Francois Lanoe, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,194,357.00

The colonization of North America tens of thousands of years ago is a milestone
in the story of human dispersal and migration. As it occurred during a time of
dramatic climate change, it also represents an unparalleled laboratory to study
the impact of environmental change on human groups, as well as the ecological
role of people on species extinctions and ecosystem sustainability. In addition
to its value for scientists, the peopling of North America figures prominently
in the worldview of Native Americans and holds important implications for issues
related to identity, cultural heritage, and territory rights. The project will
take place in the Blackfeet Indian Reservation in north-central Montana, at the
southern end of the ice-free corridor between glaciers, from where the first
Americans may have spread out from Alaska to the rest of the continent. Well-
preserved archaeological sites of this period are extremely rare due to
deglaciation processes that either destroyed or deeply buried evidence of early
colonization. Because of this knowledge gap, it is difficult to ascertain the
dispersal and land use dynamics of early settlers. This project will focus on
the excavation of the Billy Big Spring Site that presents a unique, well-
preserved stratigraphy containing archaeological occupations dated to the Late
Glacial period ~13,000 years ago to shed light on some of these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates archaeological research
with Native American genetic data and oral history to explore the settlement of
North America during the end of the last Ice Age. The Billy Big Spring Site
constitutes a strong analytical case for addressing the timing and modes of
inland colonization of the continent through the exploration of connections
between early northern occupations from Alaska to Montana, and early human
occupations in the region and beyond. Large-scale archaeological investigations
at Billy Big Springs will provide a detailed view of landscape preferences of
early North American peoples that likely informed land and resource use through
time. The project will (1) survey and excavate an early archaeological located
just south of the ice-free corridor to develop a predictive model of early
colonization of the region; (2) integrate Native American oral history into
archaeological research related to the peopling of North America; (3) train
tribal members in the study and management of their cultural heritage; (4)
translate scientific findings for Native American groups; and (5) develop school
curricula for the benefit of Blackfoot, Alaskan, and other Native communities.
The project is a collaboration between a public university and a Native American
tribe, which will contribute to standards for ethical and community-based
archaeology related to the early peopling of North America, providing an
excellent opportunity to broaden participation from underrepresented groups in
archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.