* 1827493
* PFI-RP: Innovation of Materials Based on Sustainable Resources to Enhance Performance of Challenging Drugs and Drug Candidates.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Lynne Taylor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2023
* USD 850,651.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to enhance
performance of the drugs that patients currently find on the pharmacist?s shelf,
and to increase the number of effective new drugs that reach patients to treat
critical medical issues. Currently up to 90% of drug candidates don?t fully
dissolve in water, contributing to failure of otherwise effective candidates;
all humans are roughly 70% water. We will design new materials, made from
renewable resources and thus benign and environmentally sound, that solve key
problems in drug delivery to patients. These currently unsolved problems include
the inability to create patient-friendly formulations (pills) from drugs that
require high doses (creating hard to swallow "horse pills"). Another important
unsolved problem is failures of many drug candidates that tend to quickly form
crystals from a water solution. When these drugs fail, cost of drug development
goes up, which is ultimately passed along to patients. Drugs that would
otherwise effectively treat diseases and are sorely needed by patients, never
reach them. Our work will bring more drugs to patients, faster and more cheaply,
and will reduce cost, side effects, dose, and variation in performance from
patient to patient for drugs currently on the pharmacy
shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project targets the design,
preparation, and evaluation of two new families of materials prepared from
natural cellulose, which is incredibly abundant, renewable, benign, and
harvested in large quantities already from trees. These materials will be
carefully designed so as to be easily made by current manufacturers of cellulose
derivatives, and to work exceptionally well at enhancing the performance of
drugs. They will be designed to help create solutions of current drugs, or drug
candidates that are under development, that have far more dissolved drug per
volume than is possible using current technologies. The ability to create these
more concentrated solutions of drug or drug candidates in the human body will
permit patients to get enough drug/drug candidate into their bloodstream to have
the desired therapeutic effect, but at much lower drug dose. We will design,
make, and characterize these materials, show that they work to create more
concentrated solutions of key drugs, and figure out what features enhance their
performance, so we can design even better materials. With our industrial
partners, we will advance the best candidate materials towards commercialization
so that they can benefit patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.