* 1827560
* PFI-TT: Increasing commercial potential of deep skin imaging using OCT.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Adam Wax, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 09/30/2020
* USD 208,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to improve skin
imaging to see deep enough below the tissue surface that they are useful for
dermatologists and surgeons. The technique, called optical coherence tomography
or OCT, can non-invasively image tissues with near cellular resolution and
identify changes in structure due to disease or injury. While OCT has shown
great capabilities for imaging the retina, the approach offers limited depth
penetration which has prevented success in other tissues. We have developed a
new approach for OCT, under NSF support (CBET 1133222), that significantly
extends its depth penetration. Increasing depth penetration will open up new
applications, particular for diagnosing skin disease. We expect this project to
help justify commercialization by our partner company by showing that the
technology can image skin in a format that is compatible with medical practice
of dermatologists and surgeons. This proposal seeks to build and test a
prototype system with enough scanning range to be useful to medicine. The
technology will be tested and validated with skin imaging in animal models. By
increasing access to better biomedical imaging technology, we will advance the
health and welfare of the American public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will advance a new imaging modality, dual axis OCT, towards a practical
implementation for imaging skin. The proposal builds on NSF supported work that
demonstrated the principle of extended depth imaging in OCT. Currently, OCT is
not widely used for skin imaging due to limited penetration depth and an
inability to evaluate large enough tissue areas. The proposed work will address
this shortcoming. First, we will build a new scanning system that will validate
that the approach can be used to examine larger tissue areas yet penetrate
deeply into biological tissues such as animal skin. Second, we will implement a
new dynamic focusing approach that will enable commercial success by making
allowing physicians to image tissues at several millimeters below the tissue
surface without repositioning the device. Finally, this proposal will
demonstrate the medical applicability of the approach by imaging in vivo animal
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.