* 1827534
* MRI: Acquisition of an Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer for Plant Proteomics and Lipidomics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Douglas Allen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 02/28/2022
* USD 953,462.00

An award is made to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center in Saint Louis,
Missouri to purchase a high resolution/accurate mass Orbitrap mass spectrometer
for plant proteomics and lipidomics studies. The investment in mass spectrometry
technology and method development at the Danforth Center benefits integrated
studies of plant development and metabolism and provides guiding protocols for
the greater scientific community. The projects supported by this new
instrumentation aim to increase productivity of food and biofuel crops through a
detailed understanding of how plants turn energy provided by the sun to biomass
and how plants sense and coordinate their physiology in response to seasonal
change using their internal biological timepiece known as the circadian clock.
As part of the development of new technologies, the investigators will perform a
special study with undergraduates from Harris-Stowe State University and other
nearby undergraduate institutions' students to mine the large data stream
anticipated to come from the new instrument for biological treasure. The
students will get firsthand experience with the contemporary proteomics
techniques that may open the door to further bioanalytical studies in their
careers. This will add to the educational outreach taking place at the Danforth
Center. Currently, the training of tomorrow's scientists occurs through an
active NSF-REU program, recruitment of high school students that work in
Danforth Center laboratories for classroom credit, participation in a regional
program for high school students - STARS (Students and Teachers As Research
Scientists), workshops for teachers and an interactive middle- and high school
mentoring program that connects our scientists with nearby schools. These
programs are essential to core Danforth Center mission goals to strengthen the
plant science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to improve
plant productivity that: i) proficiently feeds a growing world population, ii)
provides sustainable feed-stock alternatives to petroleum and iii) supplies
useful bioactive compounds; all designed to improve quality of life. Advanced
mass spectrometry instrumentation is needed perform complex stable isotope
labeling experiments (an alternative to radioactive isotope labeling) and for
characterizing post-translational modifications on proteins that are present a
very low level in cells. A major impediment to understanding biochemical
function in plants is our incomplete characterization of metabolism and
proteins, the cellular machines that it. The dynamism of metabolite and protein
levels, including their post-translational modifications (PTMs), are the result
of linked networks that establish plant phenotype. Measurement of these
biomolecules is critical to assessing plant health and response to changing
environments; however, there are hundreds of thousands of metabolites found in
the plant kingdom and organisms have more than a million of proteoforms that
vary in abundance by many orders of magnitude and that change dynamically with
time. Research efforts on NSF-funded and other projects at the Donald Danforth
Plant Science Center and surrounding community are advancing science through
methods development on scantly low abundance and highly dynamic proteins and
metabolites and will be greatly extended by this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.