* 1827729
* PFI-TT: Carbon Nanotube-Based Distributed Sensors for Structural Health Monitoring of Transportation and Oil/Gas Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Erik Thostenson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to develop and
commercialize a scalable and customizable sensing approach for structural health
monitoring (SHM) of critical structures, such as bridges and pipelines, to
maintain their safety and reliability. The distributed carbon nanotube-based
sensor can be attached to structural members to monitor deformations and cracks.
Because the sensor is continuous, the deformations and cracks can be measured on
all the surfaces where the sensor is applied and ultimately trigger an alarm if
the sensor response exceeds a certain critical level. Knowledge gained in this
project will increase the sustainability and robustness of critical
infrastructure to benefit society and the environment. Long-term impacts will
result in cost-effective monitoring protocols, extended life of structures, and
reduced overall lifecycle costs. Ultimately, the economic competitiveness of
United States is strengthened based on robust, resilient, and durable civil
infrastructure. This project has promising commercial potentials in the
approximate $630-million target market of SHM in North America for monitoring
civil structures, including bridges and pipelines. The participation of students
in research and entrepreneurship/innovation will build the pipeline of students
entering the workforce to translate discoveries to new commercial products which
will increase US global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will establish the scalability and applicability for the use of
distributed carbon nanotube-based composite sensors for in situ and real-time
quantitative SHM. The use of SHM to monitor critical infrastructure is
increasingly important, and structural failures can cause loss of human life as
well as damage to the local economy. Through the use of carbon nanotube-based
distributed sensors it will be possible to overcome the limitations of
conventional sensors, which are based on a network of point or quasi-point
sensors mounted on a structure that may miss the localized formation of damage.
The distributed sensor offers tremendous flexibility in different applications
by allowing the sensor to conform to a variety of complex surfaces, and new
analysis techniques will be developed to rapidly interpret the data from the
sensors - especially for structures with complex geometries ? utilizing direct
current electrical measurements and impedance tomography. Key research
objectives include the development of new data analysis techniques to rapidly
localize damage, validation of the sensor for complex geometries and
environmental exposure, and development of a prototype for field testing in
real-world conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.