* 1828101
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Modern Capillary Genetic Analyzer for Multi-investigator Research in Population, Phylogeographic, Phylogenetic, and Behavioral Genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Natalia Belfiore, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 71,004.00

An award is made to the University of Tampa (UT) for acquisition of a capillary
electrophoresis instrument, the SeqStudioTM, for separation and study of nucleic
acids (DNA). It will greatly facilitate a variety of behavioral, ecological,
population genetic, environmental, and evolution research projects and research-
training of undergraduate students. This instrument will replace an earlier
generation labor-intensive single capillary instrument, and permit quick
adoption by numerous faculty at UT. UT is primarily an undergraduate institution
and currently engaged in a campus-wide initiative which provides funding
assistance to faculty to convert courses to include student inquiry. The biology
department has long been dedicated to maintaining high levels of involvement by
undergraduates in faculty research. Graduating senior exit surveys indicate that
60% to 95% of graduating students have been involved in research outside the
classroom. Thus it is not surprising that 40-50% of graduating seniors indicate
that they wish to continue in graduate or professional programs in STEM fields.
Undergraduates majoring in biology are nearly 75% female; 22% are members of
underrepresented ethnic or racial minorities; and 14% are first generation
college students. These ratios are reflected in the investigators' research
laboratories, and funding assistance exists to further encourage
underrepresented students to participate in research. Further, all of the
investigators carry out research that emphasizes environmental science and that
informs conservation decision-making. Therefore, acquisition of the SeqStudioTM
will expose the next the generation of scientists to cutting-edge research and
instrumentation and increase STEM as well as environmental competencies and our
global competiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SeqStudioTM Genetic Analyzer is a
four capillary electrophoresis instrument for separating and visualizing DNA
bases and fragments. Each of the six investigators carry out research on wild
organisms, the focus of which spans questions that can be answered using DNA
techniques from the behavioral level, to the population level, to the
phylogeographic, to the species delineation and identification level, and even
to the deep phylogenetic level. Studies include conservation, ecological and
evolutionary genetic studies on a variety of wild animal species, characterizing
the retinal opsin genes and expressed proteins from marine vertebrate, the
evolution and diversification of male parental care in fishes, the reproductive
behavior of fish, and the ecology and distribution of seahorses and pipefishes
in Tampa Bay, the Florida Keys and the Bahamas. The SeqStudioTM has the
capability of running DNA sequences, fragment analysis (genotyping), and SNP
genotyping, and will permit expanded capabilities for research labs on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.