* 1828123
* MRI Collaborative: Development of ESPRIT - Emerging systems' performance and energy evaluation instruments and testbench
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Chase Wu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Future computing nodes will most likely rely on heterogeneous processing and
memory systems as well as networking technologies. Identifying the most suitable
computing system for a given application requires the cumbersome task of
evaluating the application's performance on as many alternatives as possible.
This project develops ESPRIT (Emerging Systems PeRformance and Energy Evaluation
Instrument and Testbench), a computing system capable of evaluating the most
suitable system for specific classes of applications. If applications can be
classified into groups based on their similarities along a wide range of
performance characteristics, it may be possible to determine the system best
suited for a specific class of applications. This work will help large-scale
computing systems be configured for more efficient operation and lower energy
use.

The ESPRIT project consist of state of the art computing nodes; system, memory,
and power and energy simulators; benchmarks from different applications; a suite
of measuring instruments; models for investigating application behaviors;
statistical clustering and other machine learning techniques.The merit of this
project resides in the development of instruments to evaluate applications along
a number of performance characteristics of behaviors and classifying them into
clusters in order to identify the most suitable design for energy efficiencies
by varying capacities as well as technology scales. ESPRIT could be used to
investigate new design choices, or tune applications for specific designs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.