* 1828671
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Energy-Loss Spectrometer for In Situ Time-Resolved Chemical Mapping of Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Jian-Min Zuo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 561,254.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Renske van der Veen from University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and colleagues Jian-Min Zuo, Prashant K Jain, Qian
Chen and Pinshane Huang have acquired an electron energy-loss spectrometer
(EELS) to be added to a dynamic environmental transmission electron microscope
(DETEM). An electron energy loss spectrometer measures the changes in energy
distribution of an electron beam of known energy that is transmitted through a
thin sample being analyzed. Each interaction between the electron beam and the
sample produces a change in energy that is characteristic of the material since
energy is lost. This is resembles a ball bouncing on a surface such as a
basketball court. With each bounce, a bit of energy from the ball is transferred
to the surface and consecutive bounces are shorter and shorter. This loss of
energy is referred to as an inelastic event. This type of measurements allow the
researchers to investigate the elemental components of a material. With some
care, and looking at a broad range of energy loss, the researchers determine the
types of atoms, number of atoms of each type, being hit by the electron beam.
Because this spectrometer is installed on a dynamic environmental transmission
electron microscope, additional information is obtained that can map where
various components are in a given sample. In essence this is a chemiscope
capable of capturing element-specific snapshots of evolving nanostructures and
soft materials undergoing temperature-, gas-, voltage-, or light-induced
chemical transformations on very short time scales ranging from femtoseconds-
milliseconds. These capabilities enable discoveries in heterogeneous catalysis,
polymer physics, electrochemical charge transport, biofunctional interfaces, and
ultrafast materials switching, which are critical for example in clean energy
generation, biomedical imaging, flexible electronics, and information storage.
Moreover, the tool is a vital regional and national resource for in situ
chemical mapping. Large demand for these capabilities are met by housing the
EELS system at the UIUC Materials Research Laboratory (MRL), a nationally
recognized user facility, where it provides opportunities for research and for
training the next generation of scientists and engineers in cutting-edge
environmental electron microscopy. The spectrometer is used in various courses
and in outreach through a workshop and a program reaching to high school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. The spectrometer especially impacts studies of field-
induced formation and restructuring of nanoparticle surfaces and interfaces. The
instrument is also used for imaging of soft materials and soft-hard interfaces
under dose-controlled conditions and for investigations of ionic diffusion and
electrode/electrolyte interactions. In addition, it is employed to control
matter far from equilibrium such as that in photoinduced phase transitions and
ultrafast exciton dynamics in photoactive materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.