* 1828172
* Collaborative Research: An Intersectional Perspective to Studying Microagressions in Engineering Programs
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Gloria Jones-Johnson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2022
* USD 248,744.00

The research is motivated by the persistently low representation of gender and
racial minorities in engineering education and seeks to study the subtle
behaviors, or microaggressions, that students experience in engineering
programs. While microaggressions are especially frequent among minority
students, their influence on student success and persistence in engineering
programs has been understudied. This research investigates the effect of
microaggressions on the experiences of engineering students and compares them in
the context of a predominantly white institutions (Iowa State University) and a
historically black college (North Carolina A&amp;T). The project will contribute
to diversifying engineering programs through increased awareness of the subtle
behaviors that engineering students experience in college. Creating an
environment where minority students feel safe and included allow educating a
competitive workforce which will ultimately positively impact our society by
incorporating the needs and perspectives of all student
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an intersectional perspective that considers
race and gender identities as unique identities, this research asks "How do
gender and race microaggressions affect students' success and persistence in
engineering programs?" To answer this question, this research proposes to
address four primary goals: (1) identify gender and race microaggressions
experienced by engineering students who identify as White men, White women,
African-American men, African-American women, Latino men, Latina women, Asian
men and Asian women; (2) build a gender and race microaggressions psychometric
scale based on two institutional contexts; (3) test the relationship between
gender and race microaggressions and success and persistence indicators (self-
efficacy, institutional affiliation, psychological well-being and academic
performance) in the context of a PWI and a HBCU; and (4) contrast and compare
student experiences with gender and race microaggressions within and across the
two institutional contexts. The research advances the body of knowledge on
microaggressions by identifying the real stories of students who experience them
and by building measures of gender and race microaggressions. Importantly, this
project clarifies that microaggressions need to be studied from an
intersectional perspective and consider students' unique identity based on both
race and gender. Additionally, the study advances knowledge regarding
institutional contexts (PWI vs. HBCU) for students' experiences with
microaggressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.