* 1828420
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magnetic Property Measurements System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Kai Liu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 366,633.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award will provide support for the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art magnetometer that combines extreme sensitivity
with multiple measurement modes. The instrument will meet a critical need for
cutting-edge magnetic characterization, particularly for a wide variety of
functional magnetic and superconducting nanostructures, on the Georgetown campus
and in the greater District of Columbia area. The research projects that will be
enabled by this instrument have potentially major technological impacts in low
power nanoelectronics, quantum computation, magnetic recording, magnetic
semiconductors, nanophotonics, catalysis and bioinorganic chemistry, magnetic
resonance imaging, and hyperthermia therapeutics. The instrument will have a
strong impact on broadening participation of underrepresented groups in STEM
fields from a broad user base at Georgetown and nearby institutions. It will
also be utilized to provide research experience for undergraduate students
through several partner REU programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Major Research Instrumentation award support the acquisition of a Magnetic
Property Measurement System (MPMS3), with unique technical features that are
critical to support many current and future research efforts at Georgetown
University. The extreme sensitivity, wide magnetic field range and temperature
span, versatile operation modes, and cryogen-free capability are essential for
studying a wide variety of technologically important magnetic and
superconducting materials. The interdisciplinary research projects that will be
enabled by this instrument include topological spin textures, chiral Majorana
fermions, next generation heat-assisted magnetic recording media, single-
molecule magnets, magnetic semiconductors, biomedical applications of magnetic
nanoparticles, structure-property relationships in f-element materials,
paramagnetic molecular complexes in catalysis and bioinorganic chemistry, and
molecular spintronics based computational and memory devices. The instrument
will be integrated with graduate and undergraduate curriculum to provide
students with hands-on learning experiences, and promote teaching, learning and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.