* 1828096
* RCN: A Research Coordination Network for the SZ4D Initiative
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Harold Tobin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 599,879.00

The plate tectonic features known as "subduction zones" produce the most
devastating seismic, volcanic, and landslide hazards on the planet. They are
placed where two tectonic plates collide and form most of the major volcanoes of
the world such as the Cascades of the U.S. and Canada or Mt. Fuji of Japan, and
subduction zones also host most of the truly giant earthquakes and tsunami that
occur on Earth. Unlike other hazards such as hurricanes, nearly all damaging
earthquakes and many volcanic eruptions occur without advance warning. The
scientific community has identified research into the underlying processes that
cause these events as a critical, high-priority future need. Emerging
technologies are now providing new ways to make continuous observations in real
time of the subtle changes in activity at volcanoes and earthquake faults that
reveal what is going on before the disaster strikes. For example, it is now
possible to monitor tiny displacements of the sea bed over the offshore faults,
or measure gases emitted by volcanoes as magma moves underground. These new
technologies need to be deployed in a systematic and comprehensive way that will
allow researchers to transform understanding of quakes, tsunamis, eruptions, and
landslides. The principal goal of this Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to
organize and coordinate activity of the geologists and geophysicists who study
subduction zones in order to develop the next generation of observatories and
measurements. It is called SZ4D, or "subduction zones in four dimensions"
because the objective is comprehensive study of the tectonic processes over
three-dimensions of space in the earth and also over time (ranging from seconds
during earthquakes to decades - and beyond in the geologic record). Over its
three year duration, the SZ4D RCN will bring many dozens of specialists together
to talk across discipline boundaries assessing the leading edge of research,
devise the best next generation of studies, and develop practical plans for the
implementation of a new national research infrastructure. This project is
fundamentally organizational - it will not conduct new research itself, but will
serve as the central coordination backbone and communication channel for
hundreds of U.S. university-based researchers and their international
collaborators. The work will be organized thematically into teams addressing
three questions: What controls earthquake and tsunami processes along the
subduction fault and other related hazardous faults? What processes govern when
and how volcanoes erupt? and How are landslides and other surface hazards linked
to seismic and/or longer term plate tectonic activity? The RCN's main mission is
to develop, by consensus of the researchers active in studying subduction zones,
an inclusive and comprehensive plan for coordinated future research. It will
integrate both established scientists and early-career investigators, including
advanced graduate students, and will be broadly inclusive of the scientific
community. The main product, besides the positive impact of the network itself
in linking scientists, will be a blueprint for a decade or more of US national
effort: an SZ4D Implementation Plan. This will be provided to NSF, NASA and
other agencies, as well as the research community, to guide plans for potential
major new initiatives to serve science and society in coming decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones produce the most devastating seismic,
volcanic, and landslide hazards on the planet, yet critical understanding of the
basic physical and chemical processes controlling the occurrence, timing, and
magnitude of earthquakes, eruptions, and landslides in these dynamic geographic
settings remains sorely lacking. In recognition of the critical research need
for science and society, the National Science Foundation sponsored the
Subduction Zone Observatory workshop in 2016, where a vision for a new
Subduction Zones Through Space and Time (SZ4D) Initiative was developed. This
SZ4D Research Coordination Network (RCN) is proposed to provide that integration
and turn the vision into a concrete and viable plan over a three-year, highly
inclusive planning process that will engage the U.S. subduction zone research
community as well as many international partners. It has two major goals: (1) To
sharpen and prioritize the scientific and technical challenges for research into
how earthquake &amp; tsunami generating faults and volcanic eruptions work, with
the ultimate goal of producing an SZ4D Implementation Plan. (2) To act as a
central communication channel for the growing activities by multidisciplinary
research teams, federal agencies, and others. We seek to define new strategies
to attack problems, developing for example new seafloor and volcano
observational capabilities, conducting community experiments, and planning for
rapid event response. The science of subduction zone hazards is a massive effort
in the geosciences today encompassing a vast array of disparate research
efforts, and the SZ4D Vision Document makes it clear that there is both need and
a community desire to coordinate and integrate research, technological
development, and model frameworks to increase our predictive understanding of
eruptions, tsunamis, earthquakes and landslides. This RCN is a key step in
turning this vision into a unified community plan. P.I. Tobin will lead a 15
member Steering Committee that will in turn oversee four Working Groups that
will build the SZ4D Implementation Plan. The RCN will develop research community
engagement and interaction through a website, e-news mailing list, and open
meetings at scientific conferences. The RCN Working Groups will be organized
around scientific questions including: What controls earthquake and tsunami
processes along the subduction fault and other related hazardous faults? What
processes govern when and how volcanoes erupt? and How are landslides and other
surface hazards linked to seismic and/or longer term plate tectonic activity?
Because subduction hazards occur around the globe, the RCN will engage many
international partners to develop cooperative plans for field research. This RCN
will coordinate the efforts of researchers across many geoscience disciplines.
The network, guided by the blueprint in the SZ4D Vision document, will be open
to all researchers and emphasize collaboration, consensus-building, and the
participation of early-career scientists in the U.S. and internationally. When
fully realized, the SZ4D vision will be the vehicle to develop an new generation
of multidisciplinary geoscientists and public awareness of subduction zone
processes and hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.