* 1828257
* MRI: Acquisition of a GC Hybrid Orbitrap High Resolution Tandem Mass Spectrometer for Environmental Science
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Patrick Ferguson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 531,713.00

This project is to acquire a state-of-the-art mass spectrometer that will help
identify unknown chemicals pollutants and mixtures of chemicals in environmental
samples, such as air, soil and personal exposure monitors. The instrument will
be housed in the Duke Center for Environmental Exposomics. This equipment will
serve as a resource to researchers and students spanning several departments on
campus as well as for researchers within the central North Carolina region.
Researchers will be able to submit samples to the facility manager, who will use
the mass spectrometer to identify unknown chemicals in the samples with greater
accuracy and confidence than has previously been available. The instrument will
also be used to develop a new course to enhance graduate education in
environmental and analytical chemistry. The course will teach students how to
interrogate chemical structure databases using data generated by the mass
spectrometer to make positive identification of chemicals, and to learn more
about their sources, production volumes and fate in the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a high-resolution mass spectrometer will
support structural elucidation of complex mixtures of unknown volatile and semi-
volatile organic chemicals in the environment under study by researchers in
central North Carolina. Access to this instrument will significantly advance
research investigations on the fate, transport, and transformation of chemical
pollutants found in complex mixtures in environmental samples that are the focus
of several research centers on campus, including the Duke Center for
Environmental Exposomics, the Duke Superfund Research Center, and the Center for
Environmental Implications of Nanotechnology. The research projects outlined
within this proposal share a focus on identifying complex mixtures of unknown or
previously unidentified contaminants in environmental samples, which has been an
obstacle to advancing research on chemical contaminants in the ambient
environment. Major users of this instrument will engage in research to
investigate not only exposure of environmentally relevant mixtures, but also
research to improve and design sensors to detect contaminants at low levels and
develop remediation tools and techniques to reduce the ecological risks
associated with these contaminants. Seldom have such high-performance mass
spectrometers been directly available in an academic setting, and acquisition of
this instrument would enable Duke to become the only institution within the U.S.
southeastern region to offer this support for environmental science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.