* 1828227
* Investigating the Career Development and Professional Trajectories of Disadvantaged Students in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Renee Galliher, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2022
* USD 336,343.00

The purpose of this work is to explore the career development and professional
identity trajectories of a marginalized group to pursue a career in engineering.
Degrees in engineering are an established pathway to a stable, well-paying
career, but engineering has historically been predominantly a white,
heterosexual, male dominated field. Thus, in order to develop a diverse and
well-prepared engineering workforce, there is a critical need for additional
research into educational experiences, as well as the professional and academic
outcomes of marginalized students as they strive to become competent
professionals in the workforce of tomorrow. Companies also stand to benefit from
more inclusive environments, as diverse environments contribute significantly to
improved engineering outcomes by promoting
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series of quantitative surveys and
qualitative interviews, this project will first assess the prevalence of
engineering disciplines as a career path for marginalized students (e.g., LGBTQ
students), and investigate their personal and professional development
trajectories across disciplines. In subsequent surveys, the researchers will
explore in greater depth the professional and personal identity development
experiences of the marginalized students, with specific focus on perceptions of
inclusiveness vs. experiences of alienation/marginalization and barriers vs.
supports for career development in engineering. This study will grow the
knowledge in multiple fields, particularly psychology, engineering education,
and various engineering disciplines. The results of this work will be shared
with educators and engineers through professional societies, scholarly
publications, and participation at conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.