* 1828822
* NRT-INFEWS: Landscape-U, Impactful partnerships among graduate students and managers for regenerative landscape design
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jason Kaye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,018,896.00

Landscapes are accumulating stresses across multiple sectors due to
accelerations in the pace and magnitude of natural disturbances, nutrient
pollution, energy transformations, land use, and urbanization. Management of
these landscapes must necessarily address these processes collectively,
recognizing the vast timescales of systems' development, and focus on solutions.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to The
Pennsylvania State University provides interdisciplinary training opportunities
in ecology, human dimensions of natural resource management, and agriculture and
development, while training the next generation of scholar-practitioners to
deftly cross disciplinary boundaries and work in partnership with stakeholders
to co-create solutions to these challenges. Landscape gradients within the
Chesapeake Bay watershed exemplify the challenges facing linked food-energy-
water systems globally and provide opportunities for developing strong science-
management partnerships. The project anticipates training sixty (60) MS and PhD
students, including thirty-five (35) funded doctoral trainees from ecology,
natural resources, agriculture and development, and related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New models of university-society partnerships
are needed to find solutions to pressing food-energy-water problems at landscape
scales. Through an orientation, foundational coursework, science communication
training, internships, lab rotations, and community-building and outreach
events, carefully aligned along existing intercollege graduate degree programs,
trainees will have the confidence, skills, and professional networks necessary
to have an impact on pressing societal challenges at local, regional, and global
scales. Student-research case studies will explore landscape change across time,
and may include: (1) the influence of critical zone processes (including the
geological template) on hydrology patterns and subsequent decisions about food
and energy systems, (2) the deep history of human entanglements in intertidal
systems, based on archaeological evidence, that indicates sustainable oyster
harvesting by Native Americans in the Chesapeake Bay, thus providing important
baselines for sustainable restoration, and (3) energy transformations, many of
which originated in the Chesapeake Bay watershed. The traineeship focuses on
transdisciplinary competencies for graduate education through an emphasis on
regenerative solutions, ecological design and planning, and landscapes as the
unit of analysis for linking food-energy-water systems across scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship models that
are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.