* 1828234
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) System to Enable Elemental Analysis in Research, Training and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ian Sellers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 396,778.00

This award is to purchase an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer (ICP-
MS) with Laser Ablation and Liquid Chromatography capabilities. This ICP-MS
system will measure the concentration of nearly all elements and their isotopes
present in single mammalian cells, as well as complex liquid and solid samples.
Research efforts will address core concerns of the south-central Plains region:
healthcare technology, environment/population interactions, renewable energy,
and water quality. This instrument will enable the collaborations among the
University of Oklahoma (OU), Oklahoma State University (OSU) and the University
of Tulsa (TU). Coordination with Oklahoma Tribal Nations will occur via research
projects related to water quality issues pertinent to the Quapaw Tribal
Environmental Office through the Tar Creek Superfund Site, and the Miami,
Ottawa, Wyandotte, Shawnee, Eastern Shawnee, Modoc, Quapaw, Peoria and Seneca-
Cayuga Nations through the Grand Lake Watershed Council. Oklahoma high school
teachers will be engaged through the NSF-RET program "Rural Educators Engaged in
Bioanalytical Engineering Research and Teaching" which targets rural students
and teachers who are considered an underserved group in Oklahoma.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-MS instrument to be funded is a PerkinElmer
NexION2000 ICP-MS with various analytical capabilities. Single mammalian cells
will be analyzed by being introduced individually into the ICP-MS using an
Asperon Spray Chamber. The ICP-MS will be located at the OU Mass Spectrometry
Core Facility, Stephenson Life Science Research Center, Norman, OK. The specific
research topics to be addressed are: 1) Interactions of nanomaterials and drugs
with individual cells, as well as assessment of cellular-metal metabolic
behavior; 2) Reconstruction of population dynamics, mobility, and connectivity
of organisms in prehistoric and current ecosystems; 3) Enhancement of renewable
energy material performance as well as improvement of hydrocarbon systems; and
4) Characterization of organism-metal interactions within dynamic ecosystems to
protect human health and improve water quality. a&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.