* 1828491
* MRI: Acquisition of a Lifetime Fluorimeter for Columbia University's Precision Biomolecular Characterization Facility
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Arthur Palmer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 209,091.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Ruben Gonzalez from Columbia
University and colleagues Arthur Palmer, Colin Nuckolls and Laura Kaufman have
acquired a lifetime fluorimeter. The instrument measures the light emitted from
a sample as it decays over a period of time. This is the fluorescence (decay)
signal caused by irradiation of the sample by a laser. The light emitted
provides information on various properties of biochemical systems such as
enzymes and proteins. The decay signal from materials such as solar cells helps
to improve their efficiency. It provides data useful to optimize future
optoelectric devices. The instrument is being used by graduate and undergraduate
students in research and in laboratory courses. It prepares the students for
future careers in science, engineering and advanced education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. The instrumentation is being used to study single-molecule
bimolecular machines and protein folding dynamics, recognition, and catalysis.
Structural, thermodynamic, and mechanistic studies of bimolecular processes are
being carried out. The excited state-dynamics of organic chromophores is being
studied, and photo physical studies of conjugated polymers. Another
investigation involves the photo-physics of singlet-fission-capable organic
chromophores. An investigation of the mechanisms of colloidal nanoparticle
nucleation and growth is being pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.