* 1828451
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Illumina MiSeq Sequencing System to enhance environmental research in the Great Lakes region
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Bopaiah Biddanda, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 183,747.00

An award is made to support the acquisition of a next-generation sequencing
System for Grand Valley State University's Annis Water Resources Institute
(AWRI). High-throughput sequencing data is now incorporated into all areas of
biology, from medical research to environmental sciences. AWRI is a research
unit within Grand Valley State University that focuses on improving and
enhancing freshwater resources. Sequencing system at AWRI will provide
opportunity to directly train graduate and undergraduate students in this
critical technology. AWRI's commitment to improving and preserving water
resources also has broad societal benefit because of the basic research, public
health and environmental relevance of understanding essential water resources.
AWRI also engages in regional educational outreach program for K-12 students,
universities, and the general public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key projects that will
be conducted by AWRI faculty and students through the acquisition of the
sequencing system include: assessment of how invasive species alter mycorrhizal
communities of native species in coastal sand dune systems; characterization of
microbial communities associated with harmful algal blooms (HABs) across
freshwater lakes ascribed to different trophic scales; evaluation of the
relationship between invasive species introduction and changes in viral
communities in the Great Lakes; and characterization of microbial communities
associated with plastic pollution in freshwater lakes. Collectively, these
projects will provide vital information regarding how some of the most
significant environmental challenges of our time are driving changes in the
Great Lakes, which comprises nearly 20% of the world's supply of freshwater.
Furthermore, each project contributes to our understanding of how anthropogenic-
related habitat degradation drives community level changes within ecosystems,
which can be applicable not only for the Great Lakes region but for ecosystems
throughout the world. Results from these studies will be published in peer-
reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.