* 1828573
* MRI: Acquisition of Enhanced Mass Spectroscopy Capabilities at Portland State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Strongin, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Dirk Iwata-Reuyl from Portland
State University and colleagues Robert Strongin, Daniel Ballhorn, David Stuart
and Theresa McCormick have acquired a high-performance benchtop quadrupole
orbitrap mass spectrometer with a front-end ion trap that is capable of tandem
mass spectrometry, and equipped with a direct analysis in real time (DART)
source. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods
used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in
complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized and the ion masses are measured. This highly
sensitive technique allows detection and determination of the structure of
molecules in a complex mixture. The DART source is used for rapid analysis of a
wide variety of samples at atmospheric pressure and in the open laboratory
environment. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
University and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. This is a multi-user, multi-departmental (and multi-institutional)
facility that enhances active interdisciplinary activities. Students enrolled in
an advanced instrumentation course at PSU are trained on the instrument and use.
Among the programs designed to broaden participation by women and
underrepresented groups in STEM education and research are the programs Ronald
E. McNair Scholars, Enhancing cross-disciplinary infrastructure training at
Oregon, and the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation. In addition to
the training that this facility provides to undergraduate and graduate students
at PSU, faculty and students from nearby 4-year institutions also have access to
the instrument as do high school science teachers involved in summer
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies on the formation and
function of chemically modified nucleosides in transfer RNA and investigations
on redox and chromophore materials and mechanisms in molecular sensors and
probes. The mass spectrometer is used for studies of interactions between
organisms of different trophic levels and for developing catalysts for solar
fuel generation using hetero-ligated nickel-pyridinethiolate catalysts. The
instrument also aids researchers developing reactions with hipervalent
diaryliodonium reagents, and those developing screening tests and evaluating new
compounds having medical potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.