* 1828647
* MRI:  Acquisition of two photon spatial light modulation microscope for all optical reading and writing into tissues
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Fidel Santamaria, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 03/31/2022
* USD 569,590.00

An award is made to the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) to establish
microscopy infrastructure that will enhance investigator research in
biomedicine, physics, neuroscience, and molecular biology. The instrument will
expand research capacity at UTSA by introducing "closed-loop" experimentation on
live cell/tissue samples. This will allow researchers to simultaneously
optically acquire and manipulate precise spatiotemporal signals in real-time. In
addition to research enhancement, the asset will serve student training with a
program of workshops in technical mastery and cross-discipline science
communication. Students from participating laboratories will develop proficiency
in lay and specialized explanations of the technology, protocols, applications,
and results obtained from their research. A compilation of student produced and
narrated computer presentations and training videos will be made available to
the lay public, and incorporated into student-curated Wikipedia pages as part of
a public-science literacy outreach initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shared
goal among the diverse users of the microscope is to acquire or "read" the
activity of cells that are embedded in a complex network while "writing in"
stimuli in cellular or sub-cellular compartments. The microscope's revolutionary
technology allows delivery of precise three-dimensional spatio-temporal patterns
of light. This unique capability will allow researchers to measure input-output
transfer functions of complex cellular networks and address an expansive range
of scientific questions not previously possible. The equipment design will be
flexible, in order to accommodate preparations from tissues, whole animals, and
plants. The microscopy unit will enhance research rigor and become a nucleus for
multi-disciplinary collaboration, and will transform the research and training
landscape of UTSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.