* 1828181
* MRI: Acquisition of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Deep Learning (AIDL) Training and Research Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Hanqi Zhuang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 652,850.00

Researchers in health, biomedical science, and various engineering fields often
do not receive sufficient training in using the most powerful approach to
machine learning known to date, an approach called "deep learning", for analying
their data. Deep learning is based on simulated artificial neural networks, and
for large real-world problems requires access to specialized computer hardward
and software. Such hardware and software platforms, however, are rarely part of
the information technology resources available for researchers outside of the
field of computer science. This project will overcome this barrier by
procurement and development of a deep learning platform at Florida Atlantic
University for such research. The project provides a training hub for industry
and university to work closely on advanced artificial intelligence applications,
and in turn might benefit economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
infrastructure project supports creation of a deep learning platform for health,
biomedicine, ocean research, and related domains at Florida Atlantic University.
The platform will be shared across campus to service multiple domains. The
project brings about a centralized cross campus interdisciplinary platform and
augmented deep learning and related artificial intelligence tools for
interdisciplinary research. The former, jointly managed by the College of
Engineering and Computer Science, and the FAU office of Information Technology,
enables building upon the experience and frameworks of others that eventually
results in shared infrastructure savings. The latter is likely to contribute in
building/augmenting AI and DL tool kits for interdisciplinary research,
including augmentation of existing common machine learning and deep learning
algorithms for domain experts to carry out analysis on their data without
requiring intensive programming skills. Augmented AI and DL tools should be
particularly useful to ocean engineers and health
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.