* 1828731
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Analytical Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials and Engineering Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Plamen Atanassov, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,750,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
grant supports the acquisition of a transmission electron microscope capable of
high resolution imaging and elemental composition analysis. The instrument is
housed in the new Physics and Astronomy Interdisciplinary Sciences building at
the University of New Mexico (UNM) and is part of a university-wide suite of
instruments devoted to materials research. The instrument benefits faculty
investigators, students and post-doctoral associates from seven different
departments on the campus. It provides opportunities to train graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced methods of materials characterization. The
greatly expanded capabilities for new types of analysis lead to a significant
improvement in the kind of research that can be conducted. This instrument is
the first open access aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron
microscope (S/TEM) in the Rio Grande corridor and is available to researchers at
other academic institutions and industry. UNM is a Hispanic Serving Institution,
hence significant numbers of students from underrepresented groups (Hispanic and
Native American) benefit from this facility. The instrument is integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses and also used for demonstrations aimed at
K-12 students and teachers to enhance their interest in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The
transmission electron microscope is equipped with spherical aberration
correctors to enable a finely focused probe scanning across the specimen,
allowing images obtained in S/TEM mode. In addition, the dual, large-area, x-ray
detectors enable rapid acquisition of spatially resolved elemental composition
maps. Research projects enabled by the instrument include studies of novel
catalysts for exhaust emissions control and for energy storage, fuel cells using
earth abundant metals, inorganic membranes that permit gas separation at
elevated temperatures, nanoparticles for drug delivery, and interface defects in
semiconductor materials used in solar cells and in optical communications. The
microscope is also used to study the environmental impact of toxic metals from
mine wastes. The development of novel alloy compositions for nuclear reactors,
improved cements to fortify deep underground exploration in oil wells, and
ultra-conductive metal nanocarbon composites is also enabled by this
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation grant is
supported using NSF funds allocated to the Division of Materials Research (DMR),
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET), and Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.