* 1828250
* MRI: Acquisition of an ASD FieldSpec 4 Hi-Res Spectroradiometer at NMSU
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Michaela Buenemann, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 82,880.00

This National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award supports
the acquisition of a FieldSpec 4 Hi-Res spectroradiometer (Analytical Spectral
Devices, Inc.) at New Mexico State University (NMSU), a Hispanic-Serving (HSI)
and Minority-Serving (MSI) Institution in the heart of southern New Mexico. The
spectroradiometer measures the spectral response of a diversity of materials in
2,151 visible, near infrared, and shortwave infrared wavelengths of the
electromagnetic spectrum (350 to 2,500 nm). For example, the instrument can
measure how much radiation is reflected from plants, soils, or water in
different wavelengths and this information can then be used to assess the
nature, status, and composition of these materials across space and through
time. The spectroradiometer will support ongoing research and enable new and
innovative research of a diversity of users at NMSU and beyond, including but
not limited to anthropologists, astronomers, biologists, computer scientists,
engineers, geographers, geologists, physicists, and soil scientists. This
research has the potential to transform understanding of interactions between
matter and electromagnetic radiation, which is indispensable for addressing a
range of societal challenges and environmental concerns such as drought and
desertification. In addition to expanding the research infrastructure of NMSU,
the instrument will enhance research training and teaching activities, thereby
promoting the development of a skilled workforce that is diverse in gender,
race, ethnicity, and professional background, a critical mission of NMSU. The
spectroradiometer will also create new opportunities for extension and outreach
as well as collaboration with partners in the private, public, and academic
sectors. Finally, the instrument will facilitate the development of robust and
cost-effective monitoring and assessment tools that are urgently needed to
support the sustainable management of human and natural resources in drylands.

The spectroradiometer will support the diverse research and research training
activities of more than thirty collaborators across more than a dozen academic
departments in four colleges as well as partners in two private companies and
four public agencies. However, leveraging a location in the Chihuahuan Desert,
the planned research will initially focus on characterizing the spectral
properties of common materials in drylands (e.g., soils, plants, and biocrusts)
and on using this information in conjunction with hyperspectral imagery from
unmanned aircraft systems (i.e., drones) to map two important aspects of these
environments: woody plants and biocrusts. Worldwide, drylands cover more than
forty percent of Earth's land surface and are home to more than two billion
people. This research is critical because human well-being and ecosystem
services in these environments are currently in decline due to woody plant
encroachment and biocrust degradation. Access to long-term ecological data
collected across the last thirty years in southern New Mexico will provide
invaluable opportunities for calibrating and evaluating research products.
Questions to be answered by the research include; which wavelengths are optimal
for discriminating between dryland materials, when is the best time to
distinguish between dryland materials, how does map accuracy change in response
to changes in spectral and spatial resolution, which algorithms are best for
mapping woody plants and biocrusts, and what is the spatial and temporal
distribution of these materials? Answers to these questions, along with a
spectral library that will be made publicly and freely available, will help
inform and improve mapping efforts in dryland ecosystems worldwide, ultimately
enabling more sustainable management of these important and vulnerable
environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.