* 1828264
* MRI:   Acquisition of an integrated Confocal and TIRF fluorescence microscope for multidisciplinary research and teaching at Barnard College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Rae Silver, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 12/31/2021
* USD 563,266.00

An award is made to Barnard College to purchase a multi-functional fluorescence
microscope. As a liberal arts college for women, Barnard is committed to
training the next generation of female scientists. Toward this goal, science
majors often spend several years working in a research lab in addition to their
upper-level laboratory coursework. In both of these settings, technologically
advanced instrumentation, like the microscope purchased with this award, provide
important hands-on training for students. Among the undergraduate women who will
use the microscope are students in the Science Pathways Scholars Program at
Barnard. This program is embedded in the college's research mission and provides
financial support and training opportunities to students from groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microscope has specialized capabilities for imaging cells and tissues and for
observing single biological molecules in action. This instrument acquisition
will benefit research in three departments at Barnard. One group in biology will
use the microscope to track specific cells and their offspring during mouse
development. Another biology group will look at honeybee guts to understand how
parasites colonize this environmentally-important insect. Two faculty from
neuroscience will observe brain structures that are related to circadian rhythms
and to fear and anxiety. In the chemistry department, research groups will use
the microscope to study proteins that are associated with hereditary deafness as
well as a protein that has a role in the neurotoxicity of lead exposure.
Cutting-edge microscopy will positively impact research and undergraduate
science education at Barnard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.