* 1828265
* MRI: Acquisition of a Composable Platform as a Service Instrument for Deep Learning &amp; Visualization (COMPaaS DLV)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Johnson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,029,363.00

This project is about acquiring a much-in-demand Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU)-based instrument, to develop a Service Instrument for Deep Learning and
Visualization called "COMPaaS DLV: COMposable Platform". The project aims to
complement available campus computing resources via the campus's research
network. It will be able to access local and remote computing and storage
facilities funded, including XSEDE, Blue Waters, Deep Learning Instrument and
Chameleon. This critical instrumentation will provide a platform to pursue
fundamental science and engineering research training in deep learning (data
mining and data analytics, computer vision, natural language processing,
artificial intelligence), visualization (simulation, rendering, visual
analytics, video steaming, image processing), and a combination of deep learning
and visualization (e.g., when data is so large that it cannot be easily
visualized, then deep learning is used to extract features of interest to be
visualized). The instrumentation also enables investigation and contribution to
societal issues in disciplines such as anthropology, biology, cybersecurity,
data-literacy, fraud detection, healthcare, manufacturing, urban sustainability,
and cyber-physical systems (e.g., autonomous cars). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Its
design utilizes state-of-the-art computer architecture, known as composable
architecture, in which the computer's components (traditional processor, GPU,
storage, and networking) form a fluid pool of resources, such that different
applications with different workflows can be run simultaneously, with each
configuring the resources it requires almost instantaneously, at any time. Given
composable infrastructure scalability and agility, it is more beneficial than
traditional clouds and clusters that are rigid, overprovisioned, and
expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.