* 1828110
* MRI: Acquisition of an electron microprobe at the American Museum of Natural History
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Kennet Flores Reyes, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 980,000.00

This MRI award will fund the replacement of the 21+ year-old electron probe
microanalyzer (EPMA) at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH; New York
City, NY) with a new, state-of-the-art instrument. The EPMA is probably the most
important instrument for geochemical analysis of rock samples and experimental
samples, providing unmatched capabilities for most elements at high precision,
high-spatial resolution, and is nondestructive for most analyses. The current
system serves many faculty, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and undergraduate
students at AMNH, Columbia University (CU), institutions of the City University
of New York (CUNY) and other regional
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron probe analyses provide fundamental
data for a wide spectrum of high-profile scientific research on volcanology;
igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary petrology, including climate science;
ore/resource geology; and material science. Considering the high density of
geoscience researchers in the New York City area who depend on EPMA, a new
state-of- the-art instrument is vital for the success of their ongoing and
future research projects. The new EPMA will impact the multi-faceted research,
education, and public-outreach activities of the primary users at AMNH, CU and
CUNY including: (1) EPMA training and outreach to under-represented
undergraduates in science and technology at the CUNY campuses, (2)
undergraduates participating in REU programs at AMNH and CU, (3)
characterization of AMNH collection materials and experimentally generated
reference materials which are shared with research colleagues and the general
public, (4) the 5 million annual visitors to the Museum's public exhibitions on
Earth and extraterrestrial geoscience, and (5) numerous science education
programs at the Museum that connect the public and K-12 students and teachers
with active scientific research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.