* 1828593
* MRI Acquisition: A Reconfigurable Computing Infrastructure Enabling Interdisciplinary and Collaborative Research in Hampton Roads
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Nikos Chrisochoides, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,504,396.00

This project acquires a reconfigurable computing system that wiil support a
broad spectrum of research projects in an appropriately tailored computer
environment using state-of the-art technologies. It offers substantial
computational power to support a number of critical research initiatives at the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure, named DISCOVER, enables
big data and high-performance computing research. Three key thrusts are
emphasized: Cybersecurity, Resilience, and Data Intensive Science and
Engineering. Each thrust includes multiple applications, as follows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cybersecurity: hardware security for cryptographic circuit
verification; modeling learning with homomorphic encryption; malware and anomaly
detection; and modeling cyber-attack paths and their
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resilience: computational simulations to model
sea level rise; understanding social media for emergency preparedness for
natural disasters; and data-driven understanding of massive geospatial traffic
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data Intensive Science and Engineering: high-
accuracy finite element mesh generation; analysis of brain imaging and image-
guided surgery; and modelling of power-consumption and resource allocation for
high-performance computing clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired computing
system will stimulate multi-disciplinary collaborations with other institutions
in Hampton Roads, including Norfolk State University, Tidewater Community
College, and Thomas Nelson Community College. Training workshops and a summer
institute will be organized to help students in various research fields to gain
high-performance computing skills. The insitution will leverage the National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) framework to address cyber
workforce needs by increasing the pipeline of students pursuing cybersecurity
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.