* 1828315
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computer for Computational Science at UC Santa Cruz
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,547,000.00

This proposal would fund a 500+TeraFLOP supercomputer for the University of
California at Santa Cruz (UCSC). 300+ scientists and students will use it to
study astrophysics, materials science, chemistry, applied math, computer science
and climate science. Astrophysicists will study colliding neutron stars for
follow-up of LIGO events (NSF Big Idea: Multi-messenger Astrophysics) and many
other topics. Materials scientists will use many body perturbation theory to
study 2D materials as quantum emitters (NSF Big Idea: Quantum Leap). Chemists
will study reactions at liquid interfaces which are important in the energy and
pharmaceutical industries. Climate scientists will study feedbacks that may
cause the rapidly warming Arctic (NSF Big Idea: Navigating the New
Arctic).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High performance computing in the physical
sciences has emerged as a critical method for achieving astounding
breakthroughs. State of the art computational resources have been instrumental
in making the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) one of the world's
leading centers for astrophysical research. Through this NSF MRI grant,
University of California, Santa Cruz will expand the intellectual merit of its
astrophysics research programs by acquiring a supercomputer to enable
transformative studies in galaxy formation, astrophysical transients and
gravitational wave sources, exoplanet formation and atmospheres, and
cosmological structure formation. Computational research at UCSC in planetary
science, applied mathematics, chemistry, and materials science will also be
performed on the system. The supercomputer will create broader impacts on UCSC
undergraduate and graduate training as a hands-on platform for teaching high
performance computing and deep learning methodologies, with a focus on
increasing the participation of women and underrepresented minorities in the
field of computational astrophysics. This program will continue the success of
previous NSF MRI-funded computational facilities, which have helped to train
dozens of diverse members of the UCSC community in transferable research skills
and have supported more than 300 users generate hundreds of refereed scientific
publications that have garnered thousands of
citations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.