* 1828490
* MRI: Acquisition of Magnetic Property Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2020
* USD 458,254.00

This award supports the acquisition of a Magnetic Properties Measurement System
(MPMS), a high-magnetic-field, measurement system for measuring the magnetic
properties of various material, geological, and chemical specimens at Johns
Hopkins University. This MPMS is a versatile instrument that can measure a wide
range of material systems with a high sample throughput rate. This instrument
will support a large and active research effort in condensed matter physics,
materials science, geophysics, and magnetism of chemical species at Johns
Hopkins University. Acquisition of the MPMS system will significantly enhance
current research programs and enable new research directions at Johns Hopkins.
The proposed instrument will enhance the research training of the approximately
twelve postdoctoral fellows and twenty graduate students directly involved in
the proposed research. As the instrument will be made available to the broader
Johns Hopkins research community, its impact on research training will grow with
time. The instrument will also benefit undergraduate and graduate laboratory
courses, and the extensive education outreach programs focusing on materials
research that are already in place at Johns Hopkins for high school students,
high school teachers, and undergraduates. The MPMS will also support work going
on in the NSF funded PARADIM program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is for the acquisition of a Magnetic Properties Measurement System (MPMS)
for measuring the magnetic properties of various material, geological, and
chemical specimens at Johns Hopkins University. The instrument is based on a
low-temperature cryostat, an integrated superconducting magnet and a
superconducting quantum interference device (a "SQUID"). The proposed system has
a magnet that can apply magnetic fields up to 7 Tesla to a variable temperature
sample chamber. Temperature capabilities beyond the standard T = 1.8 to 400 K,
necessary for much of the proposed science, will be provided by a sample space
oven, allowing up to T = 800 K, and a helium three insert option, allowing low
temperature measurements down to T = 0.3 K. The work will include experiments
that spans a wide range of scientific areas, including probing correlated
electron systems, nanomagnets and superconducting nanostructures, new
superconductors, magnetism in quasi-two-dimensional organic conductors,
synthesis and assembly of magnetic nanomaterials, and investigations of analogs
of heme- and non-heme metalloenzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.