* 1828974
* NRT-INFEWS: Graduate Student Education: Reducing Energy Barriers For Novel Water Supply Use in Sustainable Agriculture
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Alex Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,020,324.00

Drought, the overuse of water resources, deteriorating water quality, and
climate variability are contributing to increasingly frequent and sometimes
permanent water shortages for agriculture. This is a major concern because
irrigated farms contribute to approximately half of US crop sales, greater crop
yields, reduced poverty, affordable food, and positive health and nutrition
outcomes. Water conservation alone is not enough. Unconventional water resources
must be used, but the overwhelming barrier is energy cost. The energy sector is
undergoing a significant transformation as a result of the incorporation of
renewable wind and solar energy. There is an opportunity of increasingly
available renewable energy to provide inexpensive and plentiful water for water-
stressed agricultural lands. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Texas at Austin will train a new
generation of students to develop transformative and globally relevant solutions
to use unconventional water resources for agriculture by harnessing power from
renewable energy and recovering energy-containing resources from "dirty" water.
Technical skills alone are insufficient to advance these efforts, so trainees
will be taught to think critically, understand technical, financial and societal
challenges to technology implementation, and communicate complex ideas freely,
and at the appropriate level, with stakeholders from all walks of life. The
project anticipates training a diverse cohort of thirty-six (36) MS and PhD
students, including eighteen (18) funded trainees, from engineering,
geosciences, and public affairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are to
develop and institutionalize a new model in STEM education that directly
supports and informs research activities, professional development, and societal
improvement; to develop transformative water solutions for agriculture through
interdisciplinary research; and to enhance graduate student and workforce
diversity. The new educational model consists of five program elements: (1) four
core courses plus a food-energy-water systems (FEWS) seminar, (2) personalized
professional development activities in communication, management,
entrepreneurship, and job preparation, (3) dual-faculty and alumni mentoring of
trainees, (4) FEWS-relevant internships, and (5) local public service. The
courses and seminar will be institutionalized through a new FEWS certificate
program, and the professional development activities will become a permanent
institutional element through a portfolio program. A key novelty of the
traineeship is complementing classroom knowledge with experiential learning
through internship and public service. The research effort will advance
disruptive technology development in new materials, water treatment processes,
and renewable energy sources; decision support modeling for integration of
energy and water treatment processes; and global assessment of policy and
technology diffusion. Diversity will be enhanced by outreach and recruiting at
four minority-serving institutions in Texas, and through direct collaboration
with Prairie View A&amp;M University, where trainees will engage with faculty
and undergraduates to do field work in sustainable
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.