* 1828427
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogenic Scanning Near-field Optical Microscope with Spatially Resolved Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,649.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The resolution of traditional optical
microscopes is limited to approximately half the wavelength of light. This Major
Research Instrumentation project acquires a state-of-the-art, scanning near-
field optical microscope that enables the optical investigation of nanomaterials
cooled to liquid-helium temperature and mapping of chemical composition at more
than ten times this spatial resolution. The microscope operates by focusing a
light source onto a metallized tip and enhancing the local electric field by
plasmonic excitation. The microscope detects the backscattered light as a
function of position to map the optical properties of the sample. The unique
instrument capabilities help to establish the University of Arizona as a
regional and national hub for the optical characterization of materials that is
broadly accessible to users from throughout the United States. The addition of
the microscope provides cutting-edge student training, education, and workforce
development opportunities and leads to advances in physics, materials science,
photonics, life sciences, and planetary sciences. The instrument is also
showcased in an annual workshop in conjunction with the spring Materials
Research Society meeting in Phoenix, and used in an annual summer training
course on scanning probe microscopy for students and other early-career
researchers, many of whom come from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering. The scanning near-field optical microscope complements a suite of
multiuser systems at the University of Arizona for the characterization of
nanomaterials over a large spatial and energy
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The scanning near-
field optical microscope has several unique features such as the ability to
reach temperatures less than 10 K, to perform spatially resolved Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy with sub-wavelength resolution, to perform near-
field mapping using both visible and near-infrared sources, and to perform tip-
enhanced photoluminescence measurements. The microscope supports a broad range
of research projects, including: (1) excitons and defects in atomically thin
materials; (2) plasmonics in carbon nanotubes; (3) degradation processes in
organic semiconductors; (4) magneto-optical polymers for magnetic field imaging;
(5) nanoparticles for drug delivery; and (6) the composition of meteorites. For
all of these projects, the ability to probe the optical response of the
materials at the sub-wavelength scale is essential to advance knowledge for
materials research and development, and to explore new applications that benefit
the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.