* 1828090
* MRI: Acquisition Of an Atomic Layer Deposition System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Peng Xiong, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,986.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Florida
State University (FSU) with the acquisition of an Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD)
system. The system will enhance the materials research and education in the
northern Florida region. ALD is an advanced thin film deposition technique with
a unique operating principle enabling thin film deposition with unprecedented
precision of thickness down to single atomic layers. Applications of ALD, in
both industrial and academic research, have led to remarkable advancements in
materials development for microelectronics, sustainable energy, advanced
batteries, chemical and biological sensing, lighting and display technology,
etc. The ALD system acquired through this award will be installed in the
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics (CMMP) User Facility where the impact of
the instrument will be maximized with broad access available to the entire
research community in the region, including minority-serving institutions, and
women's colleges as well as industrial partners. This facility will also serve
as a basis for student training and education at all level from K-12 to graduate
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) system will
particularly enhance the nanofabrication capabilities at Florida State
University (FSU) by creating thin films with pinhole-free quality, conformal
morphology, and atomic layer precision. With its strong commitments in materials
research, FSU is in pressing need of these unique features and capabilities
especially since materials and devices with three-dimensional surface
microstructures have become increasingly involved in recent research activities.
At least fifteen research groups at FSU and FAMU, in disciplines spanning across
physics, chemistry &amp; biochemistry, chemical &amp; biomedical engineering,
mechanical engineering, and electrical engineering, will benefit immediately
from regular access to an ALD system, covering research subjects from
nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, solar energy harvesting, energy storage,
photocatalysis, and spintronics. Not only will the current research projects
benefit from this instrument acquisition, new collaborative activities are
expected to be inspired by sharing the ALD in an interactive and
multidisciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.