* 1828082
* MRI: Acquisition of a Planar Biaxial Material Testing System for Enhancement of Research and Teaching at Bucknell University
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Kenny Mineart, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 123,790.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art planar biaxial materials system that enables fundamental
research in polymer mechanics and the mechanics of biological tissues. This
project conducts realistic testing that relates the molecular and formulaic
conditions to physical behavior that may enable novel designs for biomimetic
structures that emulate the remarkable properties of natural materials,
including synthetic muscle analogs, medical implants, moisture-sensitive
nanodevices and tunable open-channel microfluidics. This knowledge could
catalyze global medical advances, particularly in the prevention and treatment
of neuromuscular and tissue diseases. This award will provide new research
opportunities for over fifty faculty, staff, and students at multiple
institutions in central Pennsylvania. The research will be integrated into
course work and the project will encourage students to pursue careers in
engineering and health-- particularly females and other underrepresented
students-- through Bucknell's annual Engineering Summer Camp and university
scholarship programs. This project will energize collaborative biomedical,
mechanical, and chemical research endeavors in central Pennsylvania aimed at
understanding and improving advanced soft materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Connecting the internal nanostructure of soft materials-- both
biologically derived and synthetic--may enable comprehensive design of new
polymeric materials that efficiently make use of very small details of their
internal structure. These four projects address how complex stress states induce
mechanisms of response not present under uniaxial conditions-- something
relevant to a wide variety of synthetic and natural polymers. The planar biaxial
test system that will be acquired is equipped to test samples under a range of
experimental protocols, sizes, and load conditions and enables researchers to
investigate the multi-axial mechanical properties of a wide range of soft and/or
fibrous materials at loads from &lt;1 newton to 1 kilonewton. This research will
drive fundamental understanding of how microstructure in biological materials
translates to in vivo function, with an emphasis on the role of the
extracellular matrix in skeletal muscle force transmission--enabling the
development of computational models of muscle and future treatment methods for
neuromuscular diseases. The testing will inform the design of tissue
replacements for soft, fibrous tissues such as muscle, ligament, and cartilage
by gaining better insight into how polymeric materials can mimic tissue
mechanics. This research will also support the development of soft actuators
subject to multiaxial mechanical loads to better engineer complex
electromechanical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.