* 1828589
* MRI: Acquisition of A Meteor Radar for the Andes Lidar Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Michael Hickey, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 847,373.00

This MRI award would acquire a state-of-the-art meteor radar (MR) system that
would replace an aging meteor radar located at the Andes Lidar Observatory
(ALO), located in Cerro Pachon, Chile (30.26 S, 70.74 W, elev. 2530 m). This
clear sky location is ideally situated for making observations of the highly
dynamical environment associated with the mountain waves generated by the
surface winds blowing over the Andes. This location is also well suited for
detecting sodium particles transported to high altitude by the Appleton fountain
effect that operates near the geomagnetic equator. Both of these mechanisms make
the Andes dynamical environment a "hot spot" that is unique in the world with
nothing equivalent available for study in the United States. ALO is an upper
atmosphere observatory that supports optical remote sensing instruments,
including a wind/temperature (W&amp;T) lidar operating at the sodium wavelength
(589 nm) and several airglow instruments. The lidar system measures
simultaneously nighttime atmospheric wave perturbations (associated with gravity
waves) of temperature, wind and airglow intensities in the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (MLT) region (80-105 km) at high vertical spatial (&lt;1 km) and
temporal resolutions (~1 min) during the low moon period of each month. The MR
data provides measurements of the background tidal winds that allow the
determination of the intrinsic phase speeds needed for studying gravity wave
propagation physics. These results taken together are aimed at achieving a
detailed study of atmospheric waves and turbulence structures through modeling
comparisons of data with turbulent structure morphology. This project will
support engineering undergraduate students at ERAU thus helping to extend the
STEM undergraduate education effort at ERAU into the remote sensing area. One
graduate and one undergraduate student would be directly involved in this
project. Moreover, these applications made possible by the enhanced quality of
the MR data would provide new opportunities for graduate student training in the
radar remote sensing technology as well as having these students undertake
studies regarding new questions in upper atmosphere research. Students involved
will learn the principles of the MR remote sensing technique through the use of
formal lectures and informal hands-on interactions. Activities involving the
graduate student are site radar noise survey, the process of radar installation
and subsequent hardware maintenance. The student would also be responsible for
data retrieval, validation and archival processing. The undergraduate student
would help set up the Madrigal server and update the ERAU website concerning the
meteor radar status. These activities will provide training to these students on
how to become an experimental scientist. The MR would also support undergraduate
and graduate education at ERAU as the department offers an undergraduate course
in Space Physics, one MS level course Experimental Methods in Space Science, and
two PhD level courses Upper Atmosphere Physics and Remote Sensing: Active and
Passive. Students will learn advanced techniques involved in MR and use the MR
data for various course projects. Students can design their own software for
meteor identification, wind and temperature retrieval. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
MR measures horizontal wind continuously (day and night) in the same altitude
region as the height range observed by the lidar with ~2 km vertical and 1 hr
resolutions. It complements the optical lidar measurements by providing
background tidal wind information that is critical for deriving gravity wave
(GW) intrinsic parameters and understanding the phenomenology of GW wave
propagation with regard to reflection, ducting, and dissipation processes. The
MR capability for continuous wind measurement is essential for resolving longer
time scale oscillations such as atmospheric tides and planetary waves, and for
the study of their interactions with small-scale waves. The new MR will not only
continue the MR wind measurement series but also provides new capabilities to
infer temperature, turbulence diffusion coefficient, and the diurnal variation
of GW momentum flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.