* 1828531
* MRI: Development of a fully automated dual-frequency two-dimensional, attenuated total refectance (2DIR ATR) instrument for measurements at interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 463,974.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Igor Rubtsov from Tulane
University has developed a dual-frequency two-dimensional infrared, attenuated
total reflectance (2DIR ATR) spectrometer. The spectrum which is obtained
measures structural features of molecules in thin films including monolayers.
The spectrometer uses three infrared beams to probe a sample. The reflectance
mode of operation (ATR) and addition of special nano-antenna provides higher
sensitivity than usually obtained with 2D-IR spectrometers. This enables
measurements of small thin samples such as membranes, surfaces and thin films
which are heretofore inaccessible. One area of research is directed at
understanding how the physical properties of the membranes change with their
composition and structure. Changes in membrane properties are important for a
range of neurodegenerative disorders. Training of graduate students in
instrument development occurs. Undergraduates from Tulane and Xavier University
(LA) are trained in the technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This spectrometer
provides deeper insights in fields such as biophysics and heterogeneous
catalysis. The structure and dynamics of self-assembled monolayers that have
various applications ranging from light-harvesting to sensing is studied as well
as monolayer stability. Breakdown process in composites for energy storage are
probed to understand what causes the breakdown. The mechanism of how a metal
adheres to a polymer surface (double-layer formation) is studied to understand
the process. Carbon dioxide activation using enzymes found in in aerobic soil-
dwelling bacteria is investigated. Research with self-assembled monolayers
(SAMS) is conducted. This is a model system to understand the possible role of
the extracellular matrix (ECM) in cancer metastasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.