* 1828743
* MRI: Development of a Long-range Airborne Snow and Sea Ice Thickness Observing System (LASSITOS)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Denise Thorsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,615,385.00

Accurate knowledge of sea ice thickness over large scales is crucial for
understanding the current and future states of the Arctic ice cover, and for
near- and long-term predictions of Arctic marine environments. With the Arctic
ice pack undergoing a major transition from perennial to seasonal ice, ice
thickness - more so than ice extent - is a key variable describing the state and
evolution of the ice-ocean system. However, methods of observing sea ice
thickness at regional or basin scales with sufficient accuracy and resolution to
capture growth and melt processes, detect hazards, or assess habitat quality are
lacking. This project will develop an Airborne electromagnetic (AEM) snow radar
system capable of being integrated into long-range Unmanned Aerial Systems
(UAS). This will allow acquisition of basin-scale ice thickness and snow depth
data as part of a network for Arctic observations that addresses information
needs of researchers, local communities and industry. This MRI development
project will contribute to NSF's Navigating the New Arctic Big Idea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AEM methods offer a novel means of measuring sea ice
thickness over the full range of thicknesses found in the Polar Regions. By
remotely sensing the positions of the upper and lower surfaces of the ice cover,
AEM measurements typically achieve an accuracy of better than 10% of the total
thickness, with less sensitivity to uncertainties in snow cover or sea surface
topography. Development and commissioning of the Long-range Airborne Snow and
Sea Ice Thickness Observing System (LASSITOS) will also provide opportunities
for education and training, including capstone projects for the University of
Alaska Fairbanks' new minor in aeronautical engineering and student involvement
in comprehensive calibration/validation field activities. LASSITOS is expected
to generate interest among native students from coastal villages in northern
Alaska, who represent another key stakeholder group for sea ice information. The
leader of this project is an early-career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.