* 1828157
* MRI: Acquisition of a Portable Doppler Wind Lidar for Atmospheric Science Research and Education
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Michael Chenoweth, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 274,857.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award is for the acquisition of a compact,
portable Doppler Wind Lidar system. Doppler Wind Lidars use an eye-safe laser to
remotely sense characteristics of the atmospheric boundary layer, such as wind,
turbulence, and aerosols. This system will enhance the research capabilities at
the University of Louisiana-Monroe into important topics for public safety and
human health, such as the initiation of thunderstorms and air quality. The
instrument will also be used as an educational tool for use by a diverse and
under-served student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
acquire a Halo Photonics Stream Line XR, which is a pulsed Doppler Wind Lidar
with an eye-safe laser, high pulse rate, low pulse energy, and coherent
heterodyne detection. The team will incorporate the Lidar into a package with
existing instrumentation such as a microwave radiometer, rawinsonde system, and
surface instrumentation so it can be used in a mobile configuration for field
studies or at a fixed-site location on campus. Topics of study that will be
enhanced by the acquisition include: 1) Convective initiation and onset of
severe weather, 2) Lake and sea breeze circulations and coastal processes, 3)
Precipitation and cloud physics, and 4) Aerosol science and air
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.