* 1828820
* NRT-INFEWS: Agricultural Biotechnology in Our Evolving Food, Energy &amp; Water Systems (AgBioFEWS)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Fred Gould, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,997,865.00

Innovations in agricultural biotechnology may fulfill biotechnology's
longstanding promise to help feed the world's growing population while
preserving ecosystem integrity. Yet past experience suggests that paths from
technological innovation to improved sustainability and productivity entail
considerable complexity and uncertainty. Meeting challenges of improving food,
energy and water (FEW) systems requires the integration of knowledge from a
number of natural sciences as well as from social, political, and ethical
domains. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
North Carolina State University will provide graduate students who are enrolled
in diverse natural and social science masters and PhD programs with the
interdisciplinary knowledge and approaches needed to help forge futures where
agricultural biotechnology applications enhance FEW systems while minimizing
unintended consequences. In all, the AgBioFEWS program will train at least
sixty-two (62) masters and PhD students, including twenty-two (22) funded PhD
students, from biological, agricultural, and social sciences. The traineeship
program will partner with two historically black universities, offering
internships to their students, and will establish a path for these students to
join the NRT program. Continuous interaction with experts from industry,
government, and non-profit agencies will expose students to diverse career
paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a new generation of students to contribute to
development and utilization of agricultural biotechnology in ways that enhance
FEW systems, they must be able to integrate knowledge and uncertainties from
diverse, sophisticated fields of study; understand how facts and values
influence decision-making; and establish their trustworthiness through evidence-
based engagement with diverse communities. Tapping into North Carolina State's
extension network, AgBioFEWS trainees will begin their programs living together
in a small farming community situated in an ecologically fragile landscape. They
will receive hands-on learning from farmers, extension agents, conservationists,
and other public stakeholders in rural North Carolina. This experience is also
designed to build team cohesiveness. Subsequent coursework and activities will
expand student perspectives on agricultural biotechnology and FEW systems to
national and international scales. AgBioFEWS course offerings will be integrated
into an established graduate minor in Genetic Engineering and Society and an
emerging minor in Public Science. The courses will address techniques of genetic
engineering, agriculture, policy analysis, science communication, and other
topics needed to prepare students for careers in government, industry,
international development, and academia. All AgBioFEWS trainees will participate
in an interdisciplinary team project under the direction of 2-3 faculty members,
and doctoral trainees are expected to incorporate interdisciplinary agricultural
biotechnology and FEW systems into their dissertations. Major research efforts
range from investigating the impact of current biotechnology products on FEW
socio-ecological systems to the development of potential future products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship models that
are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.